[12pt,preprint]aastex



SBS0335-052E Super Star Clusters
Thompson et al.

document

Super Star Clusters in SBS0335-052E

Rodger I. Thompson
Steward Observatory, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85721
rthompson@as.arizona.edu

Marc Sauvage
Service d' Astrophysicque, CEA/DAPNIA, Centre d' Etudes de Saclay,
msauvage@cea.fr

Robert C. Kennicutt
Institute of Astronomy, Cambridge University, Madingley Road, Cambridge,
CB3 0HA United Kingdom
robk@ast.cam.ac.uk

Charles Engelbracht
Steward Observatory, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85721
cengelbracht@as.arizona.edu

Leonardo Vanzi
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Department of Electrical
Engineering, Av. Vicu~na Mackenna 4860,Santiago, Chile
lvanzi@ing.puc.cl

Glenn Schneider
Steward Observatory, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85721
gschneider@as.arizona.edu

abstract

As one of the lowest metallicity star forming galaxies, with a nucleus of several
super star clusters, SBS0335-052E is the subject of substantial current study. We
present new insights on this galaxy based on new and archival high spatial
resolution NICMOS and ACS images. We provide new measurements and limits on the
size of several of the SSCs. The images have sufficient resolution to divide
the star formation into compact regions and newly discovered extended regions,
indicating a bi-modal form of star formation. The star formation regions are
dated via the equivalent width of the Pa emission and we find that two of
the extended regions of star formation are less than 10 million years old.
Our previous finding that stellar winds confine the photo-ionizing flux
to small regions around individual stars is consistent with the new observations.
This may allow planet formation in what would traditionally be considered
a harsh environment and has implications for the number of planets
around globular cluster stars. In addition the images pinpoint the regions
of H_2 emission as located in, but not at the center of the two star forming
super star clusters, S1 and S2.

abstract

galaxies:dwarf---galaxies:starburst---galaxies:star clusters---
galaxies:individual (SBS0335-052E)

Introduction

SBS0335-052 is a Blue Compact Dwarf galaxy at a redshift of 0.0136,
, a distance of 54.3 Mpc and with an apparent V magnitude of 16.65
. The close group of super star clusters (SSCs) in
the galaxy's center has been and currently is the subject of intense
scrutiny. , hereinafter TSKEV, provides a recent summary of
previous observations and investigations of the SSCs in SBS0335-052E.
Part of the attention is due to the extremely low metallicity of
the galaxy. The metallicity, as measured by 12 + log(O/H),
in SBS0335-052E ranges between 7.20 and
7.31 . SBS0335-052E has the fourth lowest metallicity of any
star forming galaxy, surpassed only by its western component SBS0335-052W
with the lowest measured metallicity, J0956+2849, and the well known
I Zw 18 . Because of its low metallicity and its now intense star
formation, possibly due to an encounter with the nearby giant
spiral galaxy NGC 1376, it represents star formation and feedback
in an environment very much like star formation in the early universe.
SBS0335-052E is obviously in a very early stage of its star formation
since the observed stellar mass of 8 10^7 M_ is only about
1/25 of the gas mass of 2.1 10^9 M_
which is again small relative to the dynamical mass of 9 10^9
M_ , most of which must be dark matter.
A main conclusion of TSKEV was
that the majority of photo-ionizing radiation from the stars in
the actively star forming SSCs is absorbed within a few
stellar radii thus delaying the onset of negative feedback due
to photo-ionization. This conclusion is validated in the present
study under the assumption that the diffuse Pa flux around
the SSCs S1 and S2 is due to in-situ stars and not from ionizing
flux leaking out of the SSCs.

The TSKEV study relied heavily on Hubble Space Telescope Near Infrared
Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (HST NICMOS) camera 3 observations of
SBS0335-052E which were part of the SINGS large survey
of nearby galaxies. The 0.2 pixel scale of camera 3 is not
sufficient to resolve much of the detail of the feedback mechanism
on star formation operating in the clusters To get a higher spatial
resolution near infrared picture of the SSCs new observations with
the 0.075 pixel scale NICMOS camera 2 were taken in the
Pa and H_2 filters. The primary goal of this work is to
study in detail the feedback effect of the photoionizing flux generated
in the super star clusters on past and current star formation. This study
also utilizes archival NICMOS camera 2 images in Pa and the
broad band filters F160W and F205W from observations taken by K.
Johnson (see ~). Figure~
shows the location of all of the sources discussed
in this paper. Sources S1-S6 are the sources originally designated
from WFPC2 images in thu97. The sources S3-Pa , S7 and
S8 are names ascribed by this work. S3-Pa is considered a
separate source from S3 as it is offset from the continuum source S3
and is most likely a completely separate source. S7 is the
source that was designated by a question mark (?) in TSKEV and
S8 is diffuse source about 2.5 west of S1 and S2. Unfortunately
this source is marked as S7 in pap06 who did not have the
spatial resolution to resolve the source we designate as S7 as a
separate source. Unlike the NICMOS camera 3
images used in TSKEV the new, much higher resolution, NICMOS
camera 2 images clearly resolve S1 and S2 and detect the separation
between S3 and S3-Pa . Sources S3-Pa and S7 only
appear as slight extensions of the continuum emission in Figure~
but are clearly shown in the Pa contours in Figure~.
The Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) image in Figure~ is
an archival ACS solar blind channel (SBC) image in the UV F140LP filter
which is also discussed in TSKEV.

Observations

The new observations presented in this paper were taken with the
HST NICMOS Camera 2 in 4 narrow band
filters (F187N, F190N, F212N and F215N) centered at 1.87 ,
1.90 , 2.12 \ and 2.15 \ (Proposal ID 10856).
These filters are designed to measure Pa and the H_2 S(1)
lines in the F187N and F212N filters respectively. The redshift of
SBS0335-052, however, shifts these lines to the F190N and
F215N filters with the shorter wavelength filters acting as the
continuum filters. The program executed in 8 orbits. Exposures
were taken in all 4 filters in each orbit without moving HST during
an orbit. During each earth occultation the telescope was dithered one step
in a spiral dither pattern with a dither step of 0.5 . The
F190N filter which images the strong Pa emission had an
integration time of 320 seconds (Step32, NSamp=17) and the remaining
filters all had integration times of 768 seconds (Step64, NSamp=20) in
each orbit for a total of 2560 seconds for the F190N filter and 6144
seconds in each of the remaining filters. The field of view of the
NICMOS camera 2 is 19.5 by 19.3 which easily encompasses
all of the known SSCs.

Additional archival images in the F160W, F205W, F187N and F190N filters
(K. Johnson Proposal ID 10894), , were also retrieved. There are
8 images in the F160W and F205W filters. The F160W images use STEP16
with 26 samples and the F205W images use STEP16 with 24 samples for
integration times of 304 and 272 seconds respectively. There are 16
on target images in the F187N and F190N filters, again with STEP16 and
26 samples for F187N and 25 samples for F190N for integration times of
304 and 288 seconds. The total integration times of the archival images
are: F160W, 2432 seconds; F205W, 2176 seconds; F187N, 4864 seconds;
F190N, 4600 seconds.

Archival ACS HRC and WFC1 images of SBS0335-052 from Proposal 10575
(PI Goran \"Ostlin) in F220W, F330W, F550M, F435M filters and the FR656
ramp filter were also retrieved from the STScI MAST archive. The
combined drizzled images are used with no further processing. These
images along with previous F122M and F140LP images from Proposal 9470
(PI Daniel Kunth) have been used by ost08 to make H
and Ly images. Table~ gives a summary of the
observational parameters of the images used in this analysis.


Parallel to the NICMOS observations, images of the spiral galaxy
NGC 1376 in 8 medium band filters were taken with the ACS WFC.
Two images in one of the 8 filters
were taken in each orbit. The ACS observations will be described in a
separate publication. SBS0335-052 is probably engaged in a minor merger
with NGC 1376 and the images were taken to see if there is any evidence
of the interaction. No obvious signs of tidal disruption were seen in
the NGC 1376 images. Given the small mass of SBS0335-052 relative to
NGC 1376 the absence of any disruption is not surprising.

Data Reduction

All of the images were reduced with the NICMOS IDL based pipeline
procedures operating on the raw frames as described in thm05.
The new images and the archival images were aligned separately since
they were at different orientations and had separate dither patterns.
The new images were aligned using offsets determined from the F190N image.
The position of the point-like object
S1, described below, was determined by centroiding with the IDL procedure
IDP3 for each image. The same offsets were used for the
other images in each orbit since HST was not moved during an orbit. The
images in each filter were offset in IDP3 to the position of the images
in the first orbit and then median combined. During processing visual
inspection showed that two images, one line image and one continuum
image, were affected by a cosmic ray persistence
streak. This occurs when there is a strong cosmic ray event before the
integration begins and the image of the event persists in subsequent images.
The pixels involved in the event were identified and then not used in the
formation of the median image. This means that the median is formed from
only 7 images rather than 8 for those pixels.
The archival images were aligned separately, using the image of S1 in each
filter as the fidelity of the pointing between images was not accurately
known.

Subtraction of the associated narrow filter continuum image from the image in
the emission line filter produces an emission line image. The continuum images
are scaled by the known responses of the line and continuum filters and detector
QE and subtracted from the line image to produce a continuum free image. The
spacing between the narrow line and continuum filters is only 0.03 microns
therefore the spectral slope of the SEDs, determined from the ground based
spectra of van00, has a negligible effect on the calculated line power. The
Pa image is the F190N image minus the scaled F187N image and the H_2
image is the F215N image minus the scaled F212N image. The archival line emission
images were reduced in the same manner and then rotated and
shifted to match the new line images. A straight average was taken of the
two images for the final line emission images. The F187N image determines the
continuum level near the Pa emission to measure the Pa
equivalent widths given in Table~.

The archival wide filter continuum images were also rotated and shifted to match the
new images. A median of all of the dithered F205W images was produced with
no shifts to produce a median sky image. The median sky was then subtracted
from the F205W image to remove the thermal sky and instrument background.
Contour plots of the ACS UV F140LP image from the data of kun04 and
contour plots of the new NICMOS continuum and line images are shown in
Figure~. Figure~ shows the images of Pa ,
H_2, and the F160W continuum, along with ACS UV F140LP image. In
these figures north is up in all cases. Source S8 does not appear in
these figures due to the smaller size of the maps and images.

Sizes of the point-like Sources, S1, S5 and S6

One aspect of SBS0335-052E, as pointed out earlier by har06,
is that the majority of the star formation has
occurred in very compact regions rather than being spread diffusely over
the region as occurs in the Orion star forming complex in our own galaxy.
Three of the sources S1, S5 and S6 display Airy rings indicative of a
point-source. We use NICMOS camera 2 observations of known single sources
observed to determine the NICMOS camera 2 PSF to get an estimate of the
true size of these sources. For the size of the Pa emission we
use the PSF star GD-71 observed in the F190N filter and for the continuum we
use the PSF star HD 3670 observed in F160W filter. The PSF image of GD-71
is a median combination of 4 images at separate positions on the camera 2
detector array. The images were shifted to a common position using IDP3.
IDP3 uses bi-cubic interpolation to resample and shift the images. The
HD 3670 PSF
image is the addition of two images again shifted and resampled in IDP3.
Each of these images were then resampled in an 8 times finer pixel scale,
again by bi-cubic interpolation in IDP3. The images of S1, S5 and S6 were
then also resampled in the same way for comparison with the PSF star images.

The two resampled PSF star images were next convolved with 2D Gaussians with
FWHM values of 3/8, 5/8, 3/4, and 15/16 of the original camera 2
0.075 pixel size. The
radial profiles of the original PSF, the convolved PSF and the object images
at the 8 times finer scale were calculated in IDP3 and then plotted
in Figure~. The convolved radial profiles were visually compared
with the source profiles to determine the source size. The comparisons were
only made in the inner 0.15 of the profile to avoid significant
contamination from the diffuse background. We did not attempt to subtract
the background since it is non-uniform with significant structure, particularly
for the Pa background.

The source S1 is resolved in both the continuum and in Pa
and is consistent with the radial profile of a Gaussian source with
a FWHM of 0.12 to 0.14 convolved with the NICMOS
PSF. At the 54.3 Mpc distance of SBS0335-052 the radius of
S1, taken as 1/2 of the FWHM of the Gaussian, is between 16 and 18 pc. This
is 4 to 5 times
larger than the radius of S1 estimated in TSKEV based on the ACS F140LP
image. That estimate was simply done by eye without a similar
analysis using convolved PSFs and was clearly an underestimate. This
does not, however, alter any of the conclusions in TSKEV,
other than the speculation on the formation of intermediate mass black
holes. The S1 continuum source may be slightly more compact than
the Paschen but the difference is less than the error in comparing
the observed profile with the broadened PSF profiles. The known ``breathing''
of the HST secondary mirror produces temporal changes of the PSF that are
approximately plus and minus half the spacing between the PSF profile and the
first broadened profile. The comparison may also be influenced by the
extensive diffuse emission in the area. The faint source S6 is also resolved
with a size similar to S1 determined in the same manner as for S1.

Source S5 is not resolved in this image. It is consistent with a
point source with an upper limit on the radius of 10 pc. It
does not have any Paschen emission and is therefore probably
not undergoing intense star formation. All of these sources have
sizes consistent with current day globular clusters and are most
likely the young predecessors of globular clusters.

The Individual Sources in SBS0335-052E

The sources S1-S7 lie in a roughly north-south alignment with the
northern most source S6 separated from the southern most source
S1 by approximately 1.9 which is 490 pc at 54.3 Mpc. A supernova cavity
lies about 4 (~1kpc) north of source S1. There appears to
be a progression of ages of the clusters along the north-south
axis (Thuan, Izotov \& Lipovetsky 1997, TSKEV) starting with the supernova
cavity in the north to the very young sources S1 and S2 which
has lead to the speculation that the SSCs are the result of triggered
star formation propagating from the north to the south (TSKEV).
In the following discussion we have arbitrarily divided the sources
into sources with Pa emission and those without. We could
have equally well divided the sources into compact (SSCs) and
extended. In fact the compact sources without Pa emission
are most likely older versions of the compact sources with Pa
emission.

Sources With Pa Emission

Five sources, S1, S2, S3-Pa , S7 and S8 along with a diffuse background
have detectable Pa emission and hence measurable star formation
rates. Unlike in TSKEV the high resolution NICMOS camera 2 images accurately
determine the distribution of Pa flux between S1 and S2. In addition
to the Pa flux associated with the continuum emission of S1 and S2,
the images also show diffuse background Pa emission in the region of
S1 and S2 which was not evident in the previous lower spatial resolution
observations. The total diffuse Pa flux is comparable to the sum of
the fluxes from the sources and is due to either in-situ ionizing stars or to
ionizing radiation that has leaked from the sources S1 and S2. The
former is more likely than the latter (See ~). If the
emission is due to ionization by in-situ stars it is not clear whether it
is due to a diffuse distribution of individual stars or a distribution of
smaller clusters that is not resolved in the present observations.

Two types of photometry were carried out on the sources. The first is
aperture photometry with a 5 pixel diameter (0.378 ) that encompasses
all of the flux inside the first Airy ring of a point source. This is
74\
in the F190N filter. Larger apertures begin to infringe on adjacent sources.
To first order adjacent sources add approximately the same flux to the aperture
as falls outside the aperture from the primary sources. We therefore do
not correct the aperture flux for the percentage of primary object flux in
the aperture. The background was measured in annular rings 3 pixels thick
around the sources. The inner and outer diameters of the annular rings were
adjusted to avoid flux from adjacent sources. The measured backgrounds,
adjusted to the area of the photometric aperture were subtracted from the
source flux. The photometric error is taken as 10\
for the bright compact sources and is dominated by the systematics of source
overlap and background subtraction.

The equivalent widths were similarly measured in a 6 pixel (0.454 )
diameter aperture. The continuum measure for the equivalent widths is
provided by the narrow band F187N filter which is adjacent to the F190N
band that measures the Pa flux. This filter accurately measures
the continuum level at the location of the Pa line and is free
of other contaminating emission lines. The larger aperture was used to
increase the signal to noise of the measurements in the F187N filter which
has much lower flux than the Pa filter or the broad band F160W
filter. The smaller aperture photometry agreed
within their signal to noise ratios with the larger aperture measurements.
Table~ gives the line and continuum fluxes for all of the
sources along with the equivalent widths of the Pa line. It is
evident that the equivalent widths of the extended sources S7 and S8 are
significantly higher than for the compact sources S1 and S2. Again note that S7
is the source denoted by a question mark in TSKEV and S8 is the source
marked S7 in pap06. Unlike in TSKEV the new observations are deep enough
to detect the faint continuum associated with the extended sources and are
of high enough resolution to discern the offset between the continuum and
line emission in S3. In the following we discuss the nature of the
sources.

Sources S1 and S2

The Pa emission in S1 and S2 is coincident with the continuum
emission. In the new images it is clear that the Pa emission
in the region of S1 and S2 has at least three components, S1, S2 and diffuse,
therefore, the extinction of A_V = 12.1 derived from the comparison
of Pa and Br flux ratios in TSKEV is an average extinction.
The extinction curves of rie85 were used to compute the extinction.
The extinction for any of
the individual components may be different than the average. If, however,
the extinction is primarily foreground then the extinction effects all
sources equally and the derivation is valid. We note that the 1.6 \
to 2.05 \ color is similar for S1 and S2 indicating that they may have
the same extinction. The color of the diffuse continuum emission is blue
rather than red, however, which supports the idea of less extinction in the
regions of diffuse emission.

To get an estimate of the spatial distribution of the extinction we
produced a H image
from the archive ACS HST images of SBS0335-052 from Proposal 10575
(PI G. \"Ostlin) by subtracting the F550M image from the FR675N ramp
filter image. The F550M image was multiplied by a factor of 0.2 to
account for the differences in throughput. The factor was determined
by the requirement that the sources with no Pa emission, and
therefore presumed to have no H emission, subtract to zero.
This does not guarantee an accurate subtraction in the sources with
hydrogen line emission since they are generally redder than the
non-emission line sources. The H image was then resampled to the
spatial resolution of the NICMOS Pa image. The ratio of the two
images is an indicator of the relative extinction and is
scaled to unity at the location of S1. The differences in wavelength
which changes the diameter of the Airy rings limits the accuracy of
this procedure. The extinctions of S1 and S2 are equal within the
signal to noise of the image. The extinction of the extended sources
S3-Pa , S7 and S8 are also equal to S1 and S2 within the rather
low signal to noise. The extinction in the diffuse region is 1/2 of
that of S1 and S2 in terms of absolute flux. We therefore decrease the
extinction in the diffuse flux by a factor of two in computing the properties
of the diffuse emission. The extinction map shows significant structure
due to the differences in spatial resolution and we estimate the
accuracy of the relative extinctions derived from the map to be 20\

The volume emission measure (N_e^2V) for S1 of 7.9 10^65
cm^-3 is almost exactly the same as the previous measurement in TSKEV of
7.2 10^65, therefore the primary conclusions on the nature
of S1 remain valid. Note that throughout the discussion of the Pa
sources the ionized gas temperature is assumed to be 20,000K as discussed
in TSKEV. S1 has a stellar mass of 1.5 10^7 M_ , see
~, with stars of less than 1 M_ probably not yet on the main
sequence. There are 8650 stars earlier than O9 and the luminosity of
the stellar population is 3.4 10^9 L_ based on the
output of Starburst99 if we only account for the Pa
flux in the point-like object. A further discussion of the Starburst99
calculation is given in ~. The star formation rate
is 1.2 M_ per year based on a recombination Case B recombination
rate for 20,000K and the SFR to Q(H^0) ratio given
by ken98. The specific star formation rate, star formation rate
divided by the mass of the S1, of 1.4 10^-7 yr^-1 is
relatively high. The specific star formation rate for the entire galaxy of
3.7 10^-9 yr^-1, however, is quite low.

We now resolve S2 from S1 and obtain a volume emission measure of
5.9 10^65 cm^-3 for S2, somewhat less than the arbitrary
half of the total S1 plus S2 emission measure that was assigned to S2
in TSKEV. The parameters discussed above for S1 simply
scale for S2 by the ratio of the volume emission measures. The difference
between the values of the emission measure for S1 plus S2 in this work
versus TSKEV is due to the separation of the sources from the diffuse
background, some of which was included in the aperture measurement of
Pa in the previous work. Unlike S1, S2 is clearly not a point
like object. It is irregular in shape and extended in the East-West
direction. Its average spatial extent is 0.05 larger than
S1 which puts its radius at 30 pc averaged over the East-West and
North-South directions.

Diffuse Emission Around S1 and S2

The diffuse emission is the Pa emission that remains after
all of the emission associated with the sources S1-S8 is subtracted. The
associated diffuse continuum emission is defined in the same way. The
majority of the diffuse emission, defined in this manner, is in the region
around S1 and S2. In the commonly used radio emission measure the volume
emission measure of 5.5 10^65 cm^-3 is equivalent to that of
1.2 10^4 O7 stars. The volume emission measure of the diffuse
emission is more than 1/3 of the emission measures of S1 and
S2. This implies that the current star formation is roughly equally
spread between diffuse and compact regions.
We consider two possible interpretations of the diffuse Pa
emission. The first is ionizing radiation from S1 and S2 that escapes the
clusters and ionizes the surrounding gas. The second is an underlying
population of young stars.

The volume emission measure of the diffuse gas is 40\
measure of S1 and S2. The diffuse emission therefore requires some source
of ionizing flux at the level of 40\
assumes that all of the ionizing photons from the source of ionizing flux
for the diffuse emission are absorbed by the diffuse gas and none escape
from the region. If the source of ionizing photons is photons that escape
S1 and S2 but are trapped by the diffuse gas the mass and luminosity of the
two sources must increase by a similar percentage. This would place the mass
of S1 and S2 at 2.1 10^7 M_ and
1.6 10^7 M_ respectively. The luminosities for S1 and S2
become 4.8 10^9 L_ and 3.5 10^9 L_ . These
are still reasonable parameters for the 2 SSCs but they lie at the high
side of known clusters, eg. . A difficulty may
be that this makes the percentage of dust re-emitted luminosity of
1.2 10^8 L_ , only 20\
luminosity of S1 and S2. The discussion of the H_2 emission in
~, however, shows that this is a reasonable number. Another
difficulty could arise if the assumption that all of the ionizing flux
produces observable Pa emission is false. If a large fraction of
the ionizing flux escapes the region then the mass and luminosity requirement
can become unrealistic. Also if the diffuse emission is simply ionized gas
with no stellar continuum its Pa equivalent width should be higher
than that of S1 and S2, instead it is lower. The equivalent width calculations
described in ~ in fact show that the diffuse emission has the
lowest equivalent width of any Pa source. This is very strong evidence
against the concept that the diffuse Pa is due to UV leakage from
the clusters. The discussion in ~ also indicates that the
diffuse emission stellar population is most likely older than the other
Pa sources.

The possibility that the diffuse ionization region is produced by an in-situ
diffuse distribution of stars is a more plausible explanation. Accounting for
the diffuse emission with in-situ stars requires a stellar mass of 40\
of the combined masses of S1 and S2 if the stars are at the same epoch
of evolution as the two SSCs. The net star formation rate of the diffuse
component in this
explanation is 0.85 M_ yr^-1. If this is the correct explanation
for the diffuse emission then star formation in SBS0335-052 is occurring
in a bi-modal fashion. The majority of the stellar mass is in the
form of compact objects, S1-S6, but the current star formation is roughly
divided 2 to 1 between the compact and diffuse regions whereas current star
formation in the Milky Way appears to be predominantly in diffuse regions.

Source S3-Pa

S3-Pa is a source with a Pa equivalent width very close to
those of S1 and S2. To delineate the Pa emitting region from the
continuum source S3 we have designated the emission region S3-Pa .
The separation of S3-Pa is the reason that pap06 found
an offset between the continuum and the line emission near S3.
As with the diffuse emission the question is whether this is a separate star
forming source or is it gas that is ionized by the double source S3 or
possibly the more distant sources S1 and S2. S3-Pa has a volume
emission measure of 2.8 10^64 cm^-3 which is equal to
that of 2.9 10^3 O7 stars. If this volume emission measure is due to sources
other than in-situ stars it would have to be due to intercepted ionizing
flux from one of the other sources.

The lack of detectable Pa flux at the location of S3 argues
against it as the source of the ionizing flux. The only possibility
would be if the the region around and in S3 is largely free of gas.
The observed Pa region subtends 2.2 steradians as seen from
the location of S3 if its radial dimension is the same as its extent
on the sky and therefore receives approximately 17\
emitted flux from S3 if it is emitted isotropically. Note that as in
the discussion of the diffuse emission we assume that the source of
UV flux, the stars, emit radiation isotropically. Sources can be
``beamed'' by large scale distributions of dust but dust structures
simply block ionizing flux, they do not enhance the flux along any
particular line of sight. The volume emission measure for S3 would
then have to be 7.6 10^65 cm^-3, almost as high as S1.
The requirements for ionization by S1 and S2 are even more formidable.
S3-Pa subtends 3.4 10^-2 steradians
as seen from S1. The ionizing flux from S1 and S2 would then have to
be 370 times larger than listed in Table~, increasing
their stellar mass to almost 10^10 M_ . This is clearly
not possible.

The most likely source of ionization of S3-Pa is in-situ young
stars. This is the explanation that requires the minimum amount of
ionizing flux as is the case for the diffuse flux discussed earlier.
The star formation in this source is then in a more
extended region than in the SSCs, again showing the bi-modal nature of
high pressure, low metallicity star formation. Another argument in favor of local
star formation in S3-Pa is that the equivalent width of the
Pa flux is almost exactly the same as in S1 and S2. This
argues that S3-Pa is the location of early star formation
such as in S1 and S2 while the diffuse emission around S1 and S2,
which has a lower equivalent width, is due to an older stage of
star formation as is further discussed in ~.

Sources S7 and S8

Two of the Pa emitting sources are distinguished by significantly
larger equivalent widths than the rest of the sources. They are
S7, the previously known source that was marked with a question mark in
TSKEV and S8, 2.59 (664 pc) from S1 as shown in
Figure~. Note that both S7 and S8 are clearly
visible in the images presented by ost08, eg. their Figure 3,
but were not commented on in the paper. Both of these sources are extended
and far away from any other known ionizing sources, particularly for S8.
It appears clear that these must be sites of new star formation and the
ionization is due to in-situ stars. Their volume emission measures, as
shown in Table~, are about a factor of 10 less than S1 and
S2 and the total mass of stars is less. The star formation rates
are 0.14 and 0.043 M_ yr^-1 respectively. The extinction
map discussed in ~ gives the same average extinction in
S7 and S8 as for S1 and S2, but, the low signal to noise of the continuum
make variations by a factor of 2 quite possible.

Sources S3, S4, S5 and S6

The sources S3, S4, S5 and S6 are distinguished by the absence of any associated
Pa emission indicating a lack of ionized gas and current star
formation in these sources. Their continuum 1.6 to 2.05 \ colors are bluer than
S1 and S2 which is most likely a function of the foreground extinction
rather than their intrinsic color. Source S3 deserves special mention
as it may be the most enigmatic of all of the non-Pa sources.
In the ACS UV F140LP image in Figure~ S3
is clearly double, also seen in Figure 1 right of TSKEV, with a spacing
of 0.08 (23 pc) in the northeast-southwest direction on the sky.
The infrared continuum is centered on the northeast component with no
indication of a southwest source or extension. The continuum fluxes for
S3 are also hard to explain. At UV wavelengths the two components of S3
are roughly equal in brightness (Figure~ ACS UV F140LP) while
at infrared wavelengths (Figure~ 1.6 \ continuum) only
the northeast component is seen but
it is quite bright. A possibility is that the northeast component has an
intrinsic brightness much brighter than the southwest but is much more heavily
obscured so that at UV wavelengths they appear to be a roughly the
same brightness. This explanation is possible but appears to be a
bit contrived. The obscuring dust would have to be a significant distance
in front of the northeast component of S3 otherwise we should see mid and
far infrared emission from that location. On the other hand, it must be
small enough to only obscure the northeast source.

The discussion in ~ indicates that the non-Pa sources
are older than the other sources which is consistent with triggered star
formation starting in the north and propagating southward. Only S3 is
inconsistent with this progression since it is very near the young star
forming region S3-Pa . S5 is somewhat unique in that it is extremely
compact as discussed in ~. S5 could possibly be a young
globular cluster that has undergone core collapse. All of the non-Pa
sources have probably had most of the residual gas swept out of them and are
bound young globular clusters.

The ages of the sources

Table~ gives equivalent widths for the Pa emission
sources. The equivalent width is relative to the continuum measured
in the F187N narrow line filter which is adjacent in wavelength to the
F190N filter that measures the Pa flux. Use of the F160W or
F205W filter images would give higher signal to noise but the uncertainty
in the detailed spectrum and the inclusion of other emission lines in the
broad filter compromises the accuracy of the equivalent width. In an
attempt to determine the ages of the emission line sources we ran a
Starburst99 simulation with a stellar mass range of
0.1-120 M_ , a standard Kroupa IMF, a metallicity of 0.001,
time steps of 10^5 years and an instantaneous burst of star formation.
The luminosity of the Pa line was
calculated from the output Pa luminosity using Case B recombination
and a temperature of 20,000K. From this line luminosity and the computed continuum
flux at the wavelength of Pa the equivalent width of Pa was
calculated and plotted versus age in Figure~. Note that the
continuum includes both stellar and nebular emission. The plot is
marked with asterisks at the equivalent width appropriate for each source.
The position marked for S8 is at the oldest consistent time. This equivalent width
is achieved at two earlier times but the time spent at those values is
very brief, 10^5 and 1.5 10^5 years, as opposed to 1.3 10^6
years at the marked position. The dip in equivalent width around
4 10^6 years is due to a rise in the infrared continuum rather
than a dip in the Pa luminosity.

The parameters of the Starburst99 simulation have little effect
on the age sequence and ages of the sources for an instantaneous starburst.
It is only the lifetimes of the high mass stars that affect the evolution
of the ionizing flux. Higher metallicities would decrease the ionizing
flux per unit mass and different IMFs would change the total mass needed
to achieve the observed ionizing fluxes but not the time evolution. To
check this assumption we produced another Starburst99 simulation with a
Salpeter rather than Kroupa IMF. The resultant equivalent to Figure~
was indistinguishable from Figure~. These changes only
affect the mass estimate discussed in ~. If, however, the
star formation in each of the clusters is not short relative to the present
age of the cluster the ages could be quite different from those derived
here. The ages from Figure~ are only valid if the star formation
epoch is short relative to the age of the clusters.

Figure~ indicates that S7 and S8 are young star forming regions
with ages less than 10 million years with S7, the youngest, at about 4 million
years. S1, S2 and S3-Pa all formed at roughly the same epoch and are now about
10 million years old. The diffuse emission is from an older group of stars
formed a million years before the S1, S2, S3-Pa group. The sources
without detectable Pa emission are at least 15 million years old
or older. This shows a general progression in age of the SSCs with oldest
sources in the north and the youngest in the south, evidence for triggered
star formation running from north to south. New star formation is now
occurring in S7 and the more distant S8. A 1 km/sec wind would propagate 10
pc in 10 million years which makes it doubtful that S8, which is 340 pc from
S1 and S2, is causally affected by the SSCs.

Stellar Masses

The Starburst99 output provides an estimate of the stellar mass for those objects
with Pa emission. The Starburst99 calculation used a stellar mass of
10^8 M_ , therefore, the ratio of the observed Pa power versus
the calculated Pa power times 10^8 M_ at the age given in
Figure~ gives the mass. The masses are given in the last column of
Table~. As discussed in ~ the masses are sensitive
to the parameters used in the Starburst99 model, particularly on the IMF
and metallicity
used. The metallicity is appropriate for that measured in the clusters but we
do not have sufficient information to accurately determine the actual IMF and
many of the low mass stars are still probably in their pre-main sequence evolutionary
stages. The largest mass components are the two compact sources S1
and S2 plus the diffuse component which total to a mass of 4.65 10^7 M_ .
If the SSCs with no Pa are included with an average mass of 10^7 M_
per SSC then the total mass is on the order of 8 10^7 M_ . Taking the
total gas mass as 2.1 10^9 M_ then the ratio of
total stellar mass in the nucleus of SBS0335-052E to the gas mass of 1 to 26
is significantly higher than the average nuclear cluster mass to gas ratio
found by set08. The average nuclear cluster mass to gas ratio in
set08, however, is dominated by nuclear clusters in large spiral
galaxies rather than in BCD low metallicity galaxies.
The objects S3-Pa , S7 and S8, which have less concentrated star formation
have significantly less mass, with S7 having only 9.4 10^4 M_ . This
may represent star formation in what we would term open clusters and they may not
remain bound for very long.

H_2 Emission in S1 and S2

A new finding of this investigation is the precise location of the
H_2 emission in S1 and S2. Previous ground based observations by
van00 did not have the spatial resolution to resolve the
sources. The contour map in Figure~ shows separate emission
regions in both S1 and S2. The emission region in S1 is consistent
with being point-like while the emission in S2 is extended as is the
continuum emission. Both of the regions are offset from the center
of the continuum emission. The H_2 emission region in S1 is offset
by 0.04 (11.6 pc) to the east from the continuum center and
the H_2 region in S2 is offset by the same amount to the south.
These offsets are less than the radii of the clusters so that the
molecular emission regions exist inside the region of Pa
emission. There is no chance that the offsets are due to misalignment
of the images as the new H_2 and Pa images were taken in
the same orbit for each dither position with no change is HST attitude.
Taken alone these images clearly show the offset. The additional
archival Pa images were then registered to the new Pa
images and the same offset was present. It is remotely possible that
the two H_2 regions are located along the line of sight to S1 and S2
but outside of the clusters. This might be considered a possibility
if only one SSC coincided with a H_2 source but it is highly unlikely
that two SSCs lie along the line of sight to the only two H_2
sources.

The survival of molecular gas inside the sources is another
line of evidence that the photo-ionizing flux does not reach throughout
the clusters. The molecular regions are also the most likely sources
of the observed mid-infrared emission found by hou04 and
further discussed by eng08. If these are the emission regions
and they are small dust regions embedded in the cluster then they are
not capable of absorbing all of the luminosity of the cluster and
re-emitting it in the infrared. This accounts for the low IR luminosity
to total luminosity ratio discussed in ~. Their
location inside the cluster also probably accounts for the high
temperature of the observed dust emission.

The calculation of the mass of H_2 needed to produce the observed
emission depends on the temperature of the H_2 gas and the ratio
of thermal to fluorescent emission, neither of which is accurately
available. van00 find that the emission is a mixture of
fluorescent and thermal emission which makes the line ratios an
unreliable monitor of the thermal temperature. To get a rough
estimate of the amount of H_2 needed to produce the observed
(1-0) S(1) emission we
calculate the H_2 abundance needed for a 2500 K thermal gas
using an Einstein A value of 3.471 10^-7 s^-1
. This estimate should be good to about a factor
of two to three, modulo the amount of extinction, if the
contributions from thermal and fluorescent emission are about equal.
Table~ gives the mass of H_2 needed to produce the
observed line strength under the assumption of the same extinction
as used in the Pa calculation. This is a lower limit on the
H_2 since the extinction will be significantly higher in the dust
protected molecular region. hou04 calculate a 9.7 \
extinction of 0.49 magnitudes which predicts about 2.6 magnitudes
of extinction at 2.12 \ as opposed to the 1.4 magnitudes
derived from the atomic hydrogen lines. van00 spectroscopically
observed a line strength that is about 2.2 times larger than that quoted
in the table. We may have missed some of the extended flux but the value
here is within 1.9 of the spectroscopic value.

Evolution and Feedback in SBS0335-052E

The primary conclusions on the nature of the SSCs S1 and S2 in TSKEV
remain intact. Although the possibility exists that the diffuse emission
around S1 and S2 is due to ionizing radiation from them, the more likely
explanation is that the ionization is done by in-situ stars. The lower
equivalent width of the diffuse radiation is strong evidence for this view.
If the diffuse emission was due to pure ionized gas with no stars its
equivalent width should be higher rather than lower than the equivalent
width of the star rich clusters S1 and S2. This leaves the conclusion that S1 and
S2 are currently not producing any negative feedback from photo-ionizing
flux on star formation in SBS0335-052E intact. The delay in photo-ionizing
feedback may also have implications for planet formation. The ambient
UV radiation field may be significantly less than the fields calculated
without considering absorption by stellar winds, eg. fat08. This
would increase the probability of planet formation even in the environment
of a SSC which would normally be considered not conducive to planet formation.
It also has implications on whether globular clusters are good sites for
future searches for planets.

The deeper and higher spatial resolution images have revealed that there are
star formation regions in SBS0335-052E that are not compact SSCs. Two of
these regions, S7 and S8, appear to be younger than S1 and S2 while the
other extended region, S3-Pa appears to be roughly coeval with
S1 and S2. The appearance of these extended regions of star formation may
mark the end of the formation of compact stellar clusters and perhaps
the beginning of negative photo-ionizing feedback. Because the volume emission
measures of the extended sources are significantly lower than that of S1 and
S2, modulo extinction, they do not contribute much to the net radio emission.
If the extended regions have extended HII regions then they should be optically
thin. Future observations with the EVLA should be capable of taking spatially
resolved radio images of the different sources to determine whether they
are optically thick or thin at radio frequencies.

elm97 discuss the effect of pressure on the ratio of compact to diffuse
star formation. They claim that high pressure favors the formation of compact
clusters as opposed to diffuse star formation. has simulated the
merger of two dwarf galaxies with stellar masses 4 10^8 M_ and
gas masses of 8 10^8 M_ . 22\
simulation appear in compact clusters, far more than in simulations at lower
pressures. SBS0335-052 has a gas mass of 2.1
10^9 M_ and a gas to stellar mass ratio of 25-26 (Pustilnik et al. 2001; this
work) therefore the central gas pressure should be significantly higher than
the model considered by bek08 leading to an increased fraction of star
formation in clusters.

Comparison with Other Recent Work

One day after the initial submission of this manuscript, new work on
SBS0335-052E became publicly available , hereinafter RJH,
which reaches some different conclusions than this work. RJH derive
significantly lower masses and ionizing fluxes than this work, particularly
for the youngest sources, S1 and S2, where the difference is a factor of 15
and 10 respectively. The main diagnostic tool of RJH
is SED fitting to the optically observed HST ACS images of ost08.
This fitting, confined to the first 4 ACS bands leads to significantly
lower dust extinction values than are derived in this work and TSKEV.
Our A_V value is 12.1 as opposed to 0.5 in RJH. This is the primary
reason for the different conclusions drawn between the two works. Source
fluxes redder than the F550M band deviate strongly from the RJH derived
SED and must be explained by a combination of hot dust and Extended Red
Emission . The extinction model needed to account for the
observed hydrogen emission line ratios is gray from H to Br
with 0.9 magnitudes of extinction for each line. Our model with an A_V
value of 12.1 and an extinction law given by rie85 implies significantly
more line flux which requires a larger N_e^2V and more mass in
stars to provide the ionizing flux. This model does not require the
extra emission components to match the observed fluxes.

Summary

New high spatial resolution NICMOS camera 2 images of the region of SBS0335-052E
that contains a compact group of SSCs have improved our detailed knowledge of the
geometry and physics of the system. There are 6 point-like objects, 7 if the binary
nature of S3 is taken into account, that are either currently SSCs (S1 and S2) or
were most likely previously SSCs (S3-S6). We now know that the continuum source
S3 is not at the same position as the Pa source S3-Pa . In addition
to the compact sources there are 4 diffuse or extended regions of Pa emission,
indicating current star formation in non compact objects. It should be noted, however,
that a diffuse distribution of many compact sources with stellar masses on the order
of 10^4 M_ would be difficult to differentiate from a diffuse distribution
of individual stars. Two of these regions, S7 and S8 appear to be significantly
younger than the two star forming SSCs. One of the star forming regions, S8, is
well separated from the compact group of previously known sources. These regions
are the first indication of significant star forming activity in SBS0335-052E in
anything other than very compact clusters. They are significantly less massive than the
very compact clusters, modulo extinction, and may be open clusters that will not
remain bound after the gas is expelled. The new images still support the general
picture of delayed photo-ionizing negative feedback from the sources S1 and S2
along with the general picture of propagating star formation from the north to
the south. This delay in feedback may also affect the number of planetary systems
that can form in what would normally be considered a very harsh environment.
We have also
confirmed that the H_2$ emission is inside both S1 and S2 but is not at the
exact center of the two objects and probably marks the location of the regions
producing the observed mid-infrared emission.

One result that differed from TSKEV is the size of S1 where the possibility
was raised that SSCs may be the origin of intermediate mass black holes through
the merging of stellar mass black holes created by supernova events in the
cluster. The new radius of 15 pc is approximately 3 times larger than the
previous radius and would affect the possibility of forming intermediate
mass black holes. Equation 1 of zwa06 indicates that the time scale
for forming merged intermediate mass black holes is dependent on radius to
the 3/2 power. The new radius of S1 would therefore increase the time scale
by about a factor of 5. Even at the new radius,however, SSCs seem to be a
leading candidate for the formation site of greater than stellar mass black
holes. See also the very recent discussion of massive black hole formation
in early low metallicity star clusters by dev08.



We wish to acknowledge very helpful discussions with Kelsey Johnson and to
thank an anonymous referee for comments that have improved this
manuscript. This work contains data from the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope
which is
operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy
(AURA) Inc. under NASA contract NAS5-26555.