[a4paper]jpconf
graphicx
document
Neutrinos and Future Concordance Cosmologies

Peter Adshead and Richard Easther

Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA

richard.easther@yale.edu

abstract
We review the free parameters in the concordance cosmology, and those
which might be added to this set as the quality of astrophysical data
improves. Most concordance parameters encode information about
otherwise unexplored aspects of high energy physics, up to the GUT
scale via the ``inflationary sector,'' and possibly even the Planck
scale in the case of dark energy. We explain how neutrino properties
may be constrained by future astrophysical measurements. Conversely,
future neutrino physics experiments which directly measure these
parameters will remove uncertainty from fits to astrophysical data,
and improve our ability to determine the global properties of our
universe.
abstract

Introduction

Over the last decade, a ``concordance cosmology'' has emerged, which is consistent with all major astrophysical datasets and offers a description of the overall history and global dynamics of our universe. This is a qualitative discussion of cosmological neutrino constraints, based on a paper given by RE at the Neutrino 2008 meeting. For an introduction to the technical literature see e.g. and references therein. . The current ``benchmark'' parameter set is provided by the WMAP team's analysis of their 5-year dataset, in conjunction with other survey information . The concordance cosmology contains just six free parameters, summarized in Table~. Most of these parameters are fixed by unknown fundamental processes, and thus encode information about ``new physics.'' Looking at Table~, three parameters describe the present day energy-density of our universe: baryonic matter, dark matter, and dark energy. Baryonic matter is of course familiar, but the quantity\/ of baryonic matter in the universe (relative to the photon number density) is not yet predicted by fundamental theory. There is no non-astrophysical evidence for dark matter or dark energy, although the concordance cosmology implies that the dark sector\/ comprises 95\

Of the remaining concordance parameters, h reflects the current expansion rate of the universe. When the first stars turn on, the universe reinonizes at a time parametrized by the optical depth . Neither of these quantities relies on ``new physics.'' However, the primordial perturbation spectrum is widely believed to have been fixed during the inflationary phase, which can occur anywhere between the GUT and TeV scales. In this case, A_s and n_s are determined by the properties of very high energy particle physics.
The standard concordance cosmology assumes only the three known neutrino species. The mass differences between these species are well established . According to the well-understood thermal history of the hot big bang, the neutrino sector decouples before\/ the photon gas cools until it no longer pair-produce electrons and positrons. The electrons and positrons then annihilate electromagnetically, heating the photons relative to the neutrino populations. Taking into account the Fermi statistics of the neutrinos, one computes

T_ = ( 411 )^1/3 T_ \, ,

from which one also deduces their number density (e.g. ).

Neutrinos and Concordance Cosmologies



The parameter set of the concordance cosmology is chosen to maximize the ^2 per degree of freedom, or via Bayesian evidence (e.g. ). One can set upper limits on many other parameters, and these would be added to the ``concordance'' set if they were detected in the data . Table lists some of the most commonly discussed parameters. Inflation is assumed to set the height and spectral index of the power spectrum, which is parametrized by


P_s(k) = A_s(k_ ) ( kk_ )^n_s(k_ )-1+ 12 _s(k_ ) (k/k_ )\,

where k_ is a specified by otherwise irrelevant pivot scale. The constraint on n_s given in Table~ is much weaker than it might appear, as n_s=1 corresponds to the ``default'' case of a scale-free or Harrison-Zel'dovich spectrum. In practice, A_s is a free parameter in most inflationary models, while n_s and the running are fixed by the detailed physics of the inflationary era. Taken together with possible measurements of a primordial tensor spectrum or non-Gaussianity, future concordance models could possess an ``inflationary sector'' containing several parameters, which would potentially shed light on GUT scale physics.

The concordance model assumes a) three neutrino species, b) with zero mass and c) relic abundances predicted by the conventional thermal history for the universe.
This last point may be the most robust, as it is checked independently by nucleosynthesis, which is sensitive to departures from the standard model and occurs at temperatures relatively close to neutrino freeze-out. However, cosmological data limits the number of additional neutrino-like species which freeze out with a substantial population in the early universe.
As the universe expands, the relative number\/ density of photons, neutrinos and massive particles is essentially constant. However, the energy of the photons and relativistic neutrinos redshifts, decreasing linearly with the expansion of the universe. Consequently, while the universe is initially radiation dominated, the contributions of radiation and matter cross over at the point of matter-radiation equality. The current temperature of the microwave background is 2.725 K; from astrophysical data we can deduce that matter-radiation equality occurs at redshift of around 3,200, and thus a temperature of 8,700 K. At a redshift of slightly less than 1,100 (or T = 3,000 K) the universe recombines, and becomes transparent. A temperature of 3,000 K corresponds to an energy 0.25 eV, which is less than the 13.6 eV required to ionize hydrogen. The universe contains approximately a billion photons for every proton, and cools well below 13.6 eV before the high energy tail of the blackbody distribution of photons cannot ionize hydrogen.




While neutrinos obviously do not interact directly with matter, they make their presence felt in two ways. Firstly, the relic neutrino background makes a nontrivial contribution to the expansion rate of the universe during recombination. Secondly, a neutrino species with a rest mass significantly greater than 0.25 eV moves non-relativistically during recombination, altering the detailed physics of the peaks in the microwave background power spectrum (e.g. ), as illustrated in Figure~.
Given the quality of present data, neutrino masses constraints are usually written in terms of m_ , with the individual masses degenerate. Results from the WMAP 5 analysis are shown in Figure~. We see that current\/ cosmological data puts a tight upper bound on the total mass of the neutrino sector. For comparison, KATRIN ( http://www-ik.fzk.de/ /) is projected to be sensitive _e mass of 0.2 eV, which is approximately one third of the current cosmological upper bound on m_ .
Figure~ shows that even a relatively small m_ produces a detectable shift in the CMB power spectrum, given that the peaks have now been accurately measured. However, this shift can be compensated for by adjustments to other cosmological parameters, an example of the well-known degeneracy in a cosmological parameter measurement. In particular, by modifying h or equivalently H_0 (the current value of the Hubble constant), we can significantly increase the allowed value of m_ . However, this degeneracy is broken by adding further cosmological data -- in this case baryon acoustic oscillation (BAO) and high redshift supernovae, which provide measurements of H_0 independent of assumptions about m_ , leading to a much tighter overall fit.



Future Concordance Cosmologies



Oscillation data puts a lower bound of around 0.05 eV on m_ , and the astrophysical bound is now within an order of magnitude of this limit. Fisher matrix forecasts (see Figure 3) show that a ``next generation'' CMB mission designed for excellent polarization sensitivity might make a 1- ``detection'' for m_ = 0.1 eV. The large degeneracy between m_ and h is broken by data which constrains h (or the _8 parameter). Future large scale structure and supernovae surveys will greatly tighten current bounds on these parameters, so it is very likely that astrophysical measurements will eventually detect m_ $, and the concordance cosmology will contain at least one parameter related to the neutrino sector. More ambitiously, high redshift 21cm data may be sensitive to the individual neutrino masses, and thus reveal whether these fall into a regular or inverted hierarchy .

Unlike terrestrial experiments, cosmological neutrino constraints necessarily involve assumptions about the overall form of the universe, and their uncertainties are correlated with measurements of other cosmological parameters. However, a further generation of terrestrial experiments may provide absolute determinations of at least one neutrino mass. In this case, the concordance cosmological parameter set could once again contain no free parameters directly related to the neutrino sector. By removing the freedom associated with the unknown neutrino masses when determining the overall form of the universe, experimental neutrino physics deepens our understanding of both particle physics, and the global properties of the universe.




RE is supported in part by the United States Department of Energy, grant DE-FG02-92ER-40704, and by an NSF Career Award PHY-0747868.

iopart-num