Title: The Ellis and Baldwin test of the Cosmic Dipole: Exploring the impact of multiple flux density cuts
Authors: Vasudev Mittal, Geraint F. Lewis
Published: 2026-05-26
Categories: astro-ph.CO

Accepted for publication in JCAP
The Ellis and Baldwin test of the
Cosmic Dipole: Exploring the
impact of multiple flux density cuts
Vasudev Mittal 1 and Geraint F. Lewis
Sydney Institute for Astronomy, School of Physics A28
The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
E-mail: vasudev.mittal@sydney.edu.au
Abstract.The cosmic dipole tension - the discrepancy between the Cosmic Microwave
Background kinematic dipole and the matter dipole inferred from all-sky surveys poses a
significant challenge to the Cosmological Principle, which dictates that the universe is ho-
mogeneous and isotropic at the largest scales. Traditional measurement of the matter dipole
requires selecting an appropriate limiting flux and calculating the dipolar modulation using
sources brighter than the flux. This approach, however, ignores the shape of the source lumi-
nosity function (LF) and deprives the analysis of this crucial information. In this study, we
present a new approach to calculate the matter dipole by integrating the source flux distri-
bution into the analysis. We achieve this by dividing the catalogue into disjoint flux bins and
simultaneously fitting the matter dipole across them. For non-power-law LFs, this method
gives a higher Bayes factor - and hence a better description of the matter dipole - as com-
pared to the traditional approach. The method works best when the flux cuts are selected in
regions where the LF’s shape changes significantly. We discuss the feasibility of this method
for upcoming cosmological surveys and show that it has the potential to yield decisive results
at both radio and infrared wavelengths.
Keywords:Bayesian reasoning, cosmological parameters from LSS, galaxy surveys
1Corresponding author
arXiv:2605.27520v1  [astro-ph.CO]  26 May 2026

Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Background 2
3 Mock Catalogues 4
3.1 Simulated Skies 4
3.2 Pixelising the sky 6
3.3 Expected matter dipole amplitude 6
4 Bayesian F ramework 6
4.1 Likelihood function 6
4.2 Hypotheses and Priors 8
4.2.1 Dipole 8
4.2.2 Monopole 8
4.2.3 Priors 8
5 Results 9
5.1 Power-Law Distribution 9
5.2 Double Power-Law Distribution 11
5.2.1 Two bins 11
5.2.2 Three bins 12
5.3 Schechter Distribution 13
5.3.1 Two bins 13
5.3.2 Three bins 14
6 Discussion & Conclusion 14
6.1 Shape of the Bayes factor curves 14
6.2 How many sources are needed? 16
6.3 Conclusions & Observational Feasibility 18
A Posterior distributions for the joint analyses 23
1 Introduction
The foundations of modern cosmology are built on the assumption that the universe is spa-
tially maximally symmetric, i.e. homogeneous and isotropic at the largest scales. Although
Einstein first used this assumption to describe a static universe within General Relativity, it
was Milne who established it as the ‘Cosmological Principle’ (CP) [1]. Today, CP is used to
derive the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker (FLRW) metric, which, when used in con-
junction with Einstein’s equations, underpins the current standard model of cosmology – the
ΛCDM model [2]. However, the notion that our universe obeys the CP is fundamentally an
a prioriassumption, originally introduced without direct observational support. This makes
it essential to establish ita posteriori, grounded in robust astronomical evidence. Over the
past century, a number of independent astronomical probes have supported the CP, but the
– 1 –

most substantial evidence in its favour comes from the smoothness of the Cosmic Microwave
Background’s (CMB) temperature map. Small-scale thermal fluctuations in this map, which
are of the order ofO(10µK), are theorised to be the seeds of the cosmic structure. These
anisotropies, however, are subdominant to themKscale dipole anisotropy, which is inter-
preted to arise due to our motion with respect to the ‘Cosmic Rest Frame’. The kinematic
interpretation of this dipole, inferred solely from CMB observations [3], therefore requires
independent verification using independent observables. If the ansatz of the observer’s mo-
tion is correct, then the all-sky distribution of high-redshift sources should have a similar
dipole imprinted upon it [4]. This ‘matter dipole’, which has been observed in all-sky dis-
tributions of both radio-galaxies [5] and quasars [6], disagrees with its CMB counterpart.
The disagreement, often dubbed the ‘dipole tension’, serves as a test of the assumption of
isotropy (popularly known as the Ellis & Baldwin test) and is a significant problem in modern
cosmology [7, 8].
A key assumption in Ellis & Baldwin’s test is that the observer can see the universe
up to a limiting flux-density. Under this, the test measures the change in the source density
when the observer shifts from a stationary frame to one moving with a velocityv. Hence, the
amplitude of the matter dipole depends on the flux limit of the observations, and selecting
an appropriate flux limit is a key step in cosmic dipole studies. In practice, this selection is
largely a matter of statistics: pushing to fainter flux limits increases the number of detected
sources and thereby improves the signal-to-noise of the dipole estimate. It is not uncommon
for studies to establish the validity of their results by demonstrating consistency in the matter
dipole estimated across different choices of limiting flux [see, for example, 9]. This approach
assumes that each flux-limited version of the dataset is statistically independent, and that
the underlying dipole-generating effect is flux-dependent.1 However, for the same dataset, a
catalogue with a brighter limiting flux is a subset of its fainter counterpart, and under the
E&B test, the matter dipole is generated by the observer’s motion. This challenges the above
assumptions and highlights avenues for improving the methodology.
In this study, we address this point and discuss a method for studying the catalogue
across multiple flux limits. We divide a dataset into multiple disjoint flux bins, and then use
Bayesian statistics to jointly analyse all flux bins to calculate the matter dipole. We select
our parameter space by noting that the dipole-generating effect is independent of the flux.
So, the matter dipole at different limiting fluxes should point in the same direction, and the
amplitudes should be proportional to each other. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method
by using it to study the matter dipole in simulated catalogues.
This paper is organised as follows. The next Section discusses the relevant literature
background. Then we discuss the setup used to generate the simulated catalogues in Section
3. In Section 4, we discuss the Bayesian framework used to calculate the matter dipole. We
present our results in Section 5 and discuss their properties and implications in Section 6.
2 Background
Special relativity dictates that, under the kinematic interpretation, the dipolar modulations
will be generated by two effects: relativistic aberration, which shrinks the observed solid
angles in the direction of motion, and the Doppler shift of light, which modifies the observed
source flux/observed CMB temperature based on their relative location with respect to the
1In this study, we use the phrases ‘catalogue with limiting flux’ and ‘flux-limited catalogue’ interchangeably.
We also refer to ‘flux-density’ simply as ‘flux’.
– 2 –

direction of motion. Taking these into account, the CMB’smKscale dipole predicts that the
solar system is moving towards the Galactic coordinates(264.◦021,48. ◦253)with a velocity
of369.82±0.11kms −1 [10]. Ellis & Baldwin’s work [4] calculates the matter dipole observed
in the all-sky distribution of sources by making the following additional assumption about
their population.
•the sources should be at high redshift: the meanzof the population should be≈1[4];
•the Spectral Energy Distribution (SED) has a power law dependence on the observation
frequency, i.e.S∝f −α;
•the flux distribution obeys a power-law survival function in the vicinity of the limiting
flux:N(> S lim)∝S −x
lim.
Then, the number density contrast in the directionndue to the observer’s velocityvis
∆N(n)
N = [2 +x(1 +α)] v
c ·n.(2.1)
Foravelocityof∼400kms −1, thisisaO(0.1%)effect, andhenceneeds∼ O(10 5)sourcesfora
significant detection [4]. Over the years, a number of studies have calculated the matter dipole
in different catalogues of radio galaxies, IR and optical quasars, and the current consensus
is that the matter dipole aligns with the kinematic dipole’s direction, but the former has a
significantly higher amplitude [see for eg 6, 11–24]. An in-depth discussion of the studies is
also available in some review papers [3, 25].
In addition to studying the catalogues, several works have also suggested improvements
to the E&B methodology. Some studies [26] have proposed that the spectral index,αand the
population’s shape parameter,x, should have a redshift dependence, but it has been shown
thattheinferredmatterdipoleisrobustagainstaredshift-dependentevolution[27]. Ithasalso
been suggested thatαandxshould be calculated for a small subset of the population around
the flux limit [27]. Some outstanding issues related to leakage from higher multipoles into
the dipole have been addressed by [28]. Other studies have focused on streamlining existing
statistical frameworks [21] and on implementing new statistical tools [29, 30]. Theoretical
formulations for extending E&B’s test to a general population of astronomical sources have
been discussed in some recent studies [31, 32]. Finally, studies have discussed methods for
testing dipole anisotropy using previously unexplored astronomical observables [33–36]. Even
though these improvements have helped in relaxing the assumptions on which E&B’s test is
based, the philosophy behind the calculation of the matter dipole remains unchanged.
One fundamental point that has not been adequately addressed in the literature concerns
theselectionofanappropriatefluxlimitforcalculatingthematterdipole. Sincetheamplitude
of the matter dipole depends on the cumulative population and SED of sources near the flux
limit, selecting a reasonable flux limit is the key to a proper inference. A broad consensus on
this issue is as follows: the catalogue should have high completeness and reliability beyond the
limiting flux, the impact of instrumental biases should be minimised, and the source density
should be homogenised across the sky. Once such a threshold is identified, it is equally
plausible to select any brighter flux value as the limiting flux. Many studies have utilised
this concept and demonstrated that their results are consistent across a number of limiting
fluxes [5, 9, 14, 37]. These studies further show that the computed matter dipoles for various
limiting fluxes are consistent with one another, demonstrating that their conclusions are not
contaminated by any flux-dependent effect.
– 3 –

This method, however, glosses over a number of statistical and physical nuances. First,
a critical assumption in demonstrating consistency is that the different flux-limited datasets
are statistically independent. Since a catalogue with a brighter limiting flux is a subset of
one with a fainter limiting flux, the former is contained within the latter. Consequently, the
dipole estimate in the latter already incorporates information from the former. This allows us
to claim only internal consistency, which is a weaker statement than external or independent
consistency. Second, when we calculate the matter dipole for different flux-limited versions in
isolation, we implicitly assume that the dipole at each flux limit arises from a different (flux-
dependent) underlying cause. However, the fundamental premise of E&B’s test is that the
dipolar modulation is induced by the observer’s motion, which is a flux-independent effect.
These subtleties point toward a refinement of the methodology. A more plausible approach
is to first construct disjoint, flux-binned versions of the dataset, thereby ensuring statistical
independence, and then fit a dipole at each flux limit, assuming it points in the same direction
across all flux limits while allowing its amplitude to depend on the source population near
each flux limit.
In this work, we demonstrate the power of this improved statistical approach by calcu-
lating the matter dipole for simulated all-sky catalogues. We construct multiple flux-limited
versions of a catalogue, use them to define disjoint flux bins, and then perform a Bayesian
analysis to jointly analyse all versions in order to estimate the amplitude and direction of the
matter dipole. Since the matter dipole’s amplitude depends on the properties of the source
population near the flux limit, we will study simulated populations having different lumi-
nosity functions. This would help establish the efficacy of our method for analysing source
populations with a complex distribution of sources around the limiting flux. We will also use
different values of the spectral indices to demonstrate that the analysis is independent of the
shape of the population’s SED.
3 Mock Catalogues
3.1 Simulated Skies
To construct the mock catalogues, we first generate an isotropic distribution ofNsources
scattered over the celestial sphere and assign them a flux value sampled from a Luminos-
ity Function (LF). We then shift the observer to a reference frame moving with a velocity
= 370kms −1 in the CMB dipole direction. This shift is achieved by modulating the coor-
dinates and flux of each source to account for relativistic aberration and Doppler boosting,
respectively.
We start by sampling 50 million isotropically scattered sources to generate our initial
distribution. This high initial source count gives us a sizable number of sources in the final
catalogues and enables us to probe the impact of brighter flux cuts.2 The next step is to
select an appropriate LF to sample source fluxes. E&B’s test does not depend on any specific
choice of the flux distribution; it only assumes that the cumulative source count (per unit
solid angle) above the flux limit is approximated by the power-law survival function evaluated
at the limiting flux. The simplest flux distribution satisfying this requirement is the power-
law function, which has been used in numerous important studies to assign the fluxes to a
simulated source populations [see, for example, 17, 20]. This distribution gives a constant
value ofxfor any limiting flux. However, a priori, there is no reason why the flux distribution
2We discuss the impact of source counts in the discussion section.
– 4 –

of a source population should follow a power-law. Therefore, in this work, in addition to
the power-law function, we work with two other popular LFs: the double power-law and
the Schechter/gamma function. Their functional forms, free parameters, and the magnitudes
of the free parameters we use in this study are listed in Table 1, while their shapes for
some choices of free parameters are shown in Figure 1. When sampling from the luminosity
functions, we adopt a minimum flux of10mJ y; this choice is arbitrary and does not affect
our analysis.
Flux Distribution PDF,N(S)Free Parameters Free Parameter values
Power-law xSxm
Sx+1, S > Sm
x= slope of the survival functionx={0.7,0.8,0.9,1,1.1,1.2,1.3,1.4,1.5}
Sm= minimum flux valueS m= 10 mJy
Double power-lawC1S−(x1+1), S∈[S m, St]
C2S−(x2+1), S > St
xi= slopes of the survival functionx1= 0.7, x2={1.4,1.5,1.6,1.7,1.8}
Sm= minimum flux valueS m= 10 mJy
St= transition fluxS t= 200 mJy
Ci= normalizationsC idetermined numerically
Schechter e−S/S∗
S∗Γ(1−υ)
S
S∗
−υ
, S > Sm
υ= slope of the PDFυ={0.7,0.8,0.9,1.1,1.2,1.3,1.4,1.5}
S∗= exponential cutoff scaleS ∗= 400 mJy
Sm= minimum flux valueS m= 10 mJy
T able 1: List of the luminosity functions used in this study. Their functional forms, free
parameters, and parameter values are listed. Each set of parameter values defines a distinct
realisation of the corresponding flux distribution.
101 102 103 104
Power-law
x= 0.7
x= 0.9
x= 1.1
x= 1.3
101 102 103 104
Schechter
υ= 0.7
υ= 0.9
υ= 1.1
υ= 1.3
101 102 103
Double power-law
x2 = 1.4
x2 = 1.6
x2 = 1.8
Flux (mJy)
PDF
Figure 1: Some of the luminosity functions used in this work, visualised on logarithmic plots.
Next, we need to assign the spectral indexαto the source population. This parameter
impacts the contribution of Doppler boosting to the matter dipole’s amplitude. For ease of
analysis, we assign a uniform spectral index to the entire source population. We select the
spectral index fromα∈ {0.7,0.9,1.1}to investigate its magnitude’s impact on the analysis.
Our choice ofαis representative of the range of spectral indices of extragalactic sources, with
radio surveys like NVSS having a meanα= 0.75[22], while infrared surveys like CatWISE
have a meanα= 1.26[6].
After selecting these parameters, we construct30isotropic skies for each(LF, α)combi-
nation. We then modulate the position and flux of each source to account for the observer’s
motion. After generating the modulated catalogues, we select all sources with flux>12mJ y,
– 5 –

as this removes edge effects from the modulated luminosity function. This gives us the mock
catalogues, which we will use for analysis.
3.2 Pixelising the sky
E&B’s test tracks changes in source density in any direction caused by the observer’s motion.
This necessitates discretising the sky into a finite set of equal-area patches. Ideally, each
patch’s spatial extent should be small enough to be considered as a point. At the same time,
it should have sufficient sources to make the shot-noise subdominant to the mean density
of the catalogue. We fulfil these requirements by pixelating the sky using thehealpix 3
algorithm inPython, through thehealpypackage [38, 39]. We usenside=64to generate
49,152equal-area pixels, each having an area of≈0.83deg 2. We then assign a number
density and a list of fluxes to each pixel, accounting for all sources within its spatial extent.
We use this list of fluxes to make the flux-binned sky maps, where the source count in each
pixel is the number of entries in the list within the limits of the bin.
3.3 Expected matter dipole amplitude
Before proceeding further, we need a method to calculate the amplitude of the matter dipole,
which we have injected in the catalogue using aberration and Doppler boosting. This will
be used to check whether the Bayesian inference yields the correct dipole as an output. We
calculate the expected dipole amplitude at the flux limit without assuming any specific shape
of the cumulative number counts. This is done by tracking changes in source counts due to
the observer’s motion. Although the method has been introduced by us in one of our previous
works [21], we discuss it briefly here as well:
1. We first compute the number of sources beyond a flux thresholdSl, and denote them
withn i
2. We apply Doppler boost to the j-th source, by modulating its flux fromSj toS jδ1+α,
whereδ=γ(1 + v
c cosθ)andγis the Lorentz factor.
3. Then, we count the number of sources with boosted flux beyond the threshold, and
multiply this number byδ2 to account for relativistic aberration. We denote this bynb
4. Using this, we calculate the expected dipole amplitude at the flux threshold as
D= nb −n i
ni
.(3.1)
Note that we measure the amplitude along the line of motion, where the density enhancement
is maximum, and setθ= 0, which givesδ=γ(1 + v
c ).
4 Bayesian Framework
4.1 Likelihood function
In this study, we will use Bayesian analysis to analyse the matter dipole present in the mock
catalogues. We use Bayes’s theorem
P(Θ|D, M) = L(D|Θ, M)π(Θ|M)
Z(D|M) (4.1)
3https://healpix.sourceforge.io/
– 6 –

to determine the probability distribution of a modelM’s free parametersΘ, if we fit it to a
datasetD. This allows us to incorporate our prior belief aboutΘ’s in the analysis pipeline
using the prior probability functionπ(Θ|M). The denominatorZis dubbed as the marginal
likelihood and is a normalisation over the parameter spaceZ=
R
ΩΘ
L(D|Θ, M)π(Θ|M)dΘ.
It is used to compare competing hypotheses by constructing the Bayes factors
lnB ij = lnZ i −lnZ j (4.2)
We use Jeffreys’s scale [40] to qualitatively interpret the Bayes factors.
To specify a likelihood function, we note that in a flux-limited dataset, the counting
statistics in each pixel follow a Poisson distribution - the observed source count in a pixel
has a shot noise contribution arising from sky pixelisation. Thus, we model the likelihood
function by assuming that the mean source count in the i-th pixel is characterised by a rate
parameterλ i, and the probability of observingNi sources is defined by a Poisson distribution
takingλ i as the input:
L(D|Θ, M) =
npixY
i=1
e−λiλNi
i
Ni! (4.3)
This likelihood function has been used by previous studies [19, 21] to estimate dipole param-
eters from all-sky quasar datasets. We need to adapt this likelihood function for the joint
analysis of the mock catalogues.
To achieve this, the first idea is to create a joint likelihood by multiplying the likelihoods
for different flux-limited versions of the mock catalogue. But this idea runs into the effects
related to overcounting. Let’s say we have two flux limited catalogues with limiting fluxes
S1 andS 2, such thatS 1 > S 2, thenN(> S 1)will have a contribution fromN(> S 2).
Consequently, the brighter sources will contribute to bothLS1 andL S2, which violates the
statistical independence of individual likelihoods. To counter this, we need to ensure that
each source in the dataset only contributes once to the net likelihood function. A natural way
to achieve this is to divide the catalogue into multiple disjoint flux bins and jointly analyse
them to determine the matter dipole. This gives us the following likelihood function:
Lnet(D|Θ, M) =
nbinsY
j=1
 npixY
i=1
e−λi,j λNi,j
i,j
Ni,j!
!
(4.4)
whereN i,j denotes the number of sources present in, andλi,j is the rate parameter for the
i-th pixel and j-th flux bin. We calculateN i,j by taking the difference of theN(> S)at
the upper and lower flux limits of the catalogue, i.e.Ni,j =N(> S lower)− N(> S upper).
Similarly, we specify the rate parameter asλi,j =λ lower −λ upper, whereλ lower andλ upper are
the rate parameters at the flux limits. This likelihood removes the excess contribution of the
brighter sources to the likelihood function.
We calculate the posterior distributions and Bayes factors using the Nested Sampling
algorithm, which samples posteriors in shells of increasing likelihood [41, 42]. We use a Nested
Sampling Monte Carlo algorithmMLFriends[43, 44], which efficiently samples likelihood
shells for complex multi-dimensional likelihood space. This algorithm has been implemented
in theUltraNest 4 pythonpackage [45].
4https://johannesbuchner.github.io/UltraNest/
– 7 –

4.2 Hypotheses and Priors
4.2.1 Dipole
Our aim is to determine the matter dipole present in the catalogue by jointly analysing the
disjoint flux bins. This requires us to write a functional form of the expected source count,
i.e. the rate parameterλi,j for the flux bins. As we have discussed above, the rate parameter
for a flux bin can be written in terms of the rate parameters at the flux limits. Similar
to our previous works [19, 21], we define the expected source counts by noting that for an
observer in motion, the observed source count in any pixel of a flux-limited catalogue is a
dipole modulated isotropic source count. In other words, for a catalogue having sources up
to the faintnessSlim, the rate parameter for the i-th pixel is
λi = ¯N(> S lim)(1 +D Slimcosθi)(4.5)
whereθ i is the angular offset between the expected dipole direction(l◦, b◦)and the pixel
coordinates;D Slim is the dipole amplitude at the flux limit, and¯N(> S lim)is the mean count
of the isotropic sky. Using this, we defineλi,j as
λi,j = ¯N(> S j,l)(1 +D Sj,lcosθi)− ¯N(> S j,u)(1 +D Sj,ucosθi)(4.6)
whereS j,l andS j,u are the lower and upper limits of the flux bins. Since the flux bins are
disjoint, we haveSj+1,l =S j,u and our parameter space isΘ =

{ ¯N(> S j,l)}j,{D Sj,l}j, l◦, b◦	
i.e. fornbins, there will be2n+ 2parameters.
4.2.2 Monopole
In a Bayesian framework, competing hypotheses can be ranked using Bayes factors. For
completeness, we also define a null hypothesis by assuming that the observer is stationary,
i.e. the observed source count in any pixel is uniform, or a monopole. Analogous to the above
discussion, we define the pixel-specific rate parameter for the flux bin to be
λi,j = ¯N(> S j,l)− ¯N(> S j,u)(4.7)
Now, the parameter space isΘ ={ ¯N(> S j,l)}j, which givesnparameters fornbins.
4.2.3 Priors
We adopt the following prior distributions for the free parameters of both the dipole and
monopole models.
1. The number densities at the flux limits are sampled uniformly within a range of±5
sources around the true number density at the corresponding flux limit:
¯N(> S j,b)∼ U
  ¯Ntrue(> S j,b)−5, ¯Ntrue(> S j,b) + 5

.
2. Dipole amplitudes are sampled uniformly between 0 and 0.1, i.e.DS ∼ U(0,0.1)
3. Directions are sampled uniformly over the surface of the sphere:l◦ ∼ U(0,2π), and
b◦ ∼cos −1(1−2u)foru∼ U(0,1).
HereUdenotes a uniform distribution within the mentioned limits. In principle, we can use
a broader prior range for both¯N(> S j,b)andD S, but they only affect the absolute values of
the Bayes factors and do not alter the qualitative outcomes of our results.
– 8 –

−4
−2
0
α = 0.7
 α = 0.9
 α = 1.1
101 102 103
−2.5
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
101 102 103
 101 102 103
0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
x value
−2.30
−1.10
0.00
1.10
2.30
3.40
4.61
Jeﬀreys scale
log(Bayes Factor)
Flux ( S, mJy)
Figure 2:Evolution of the Bayes factor (dipole vs monopole) with location of the flux cut for
power-law LF. The top panels show results for fitting a dipole amplitude at each flux limit, while the
bottom panels show the results for fitting a single observer velocityv, shared across all flux limits.
Each column corresponds to a differentα, and colours indicate the LF parameterx. The left-most
point in each curve represents the Bayes factor from the traditional E&B analysis; the remaining
points are obtained by bifurcating the catalogue at the indicated flux threshold and jointly analysing
the two bins. The vertical axis is shifted to show the difference relative to the traditional analysis.
5 Results
5.1 Power-Law Distribution
The first LF we probe is the power-law distribution, which has been used in a number of
important dipole studies to model the flux distribution of a source population. This function
maintains a constant slope of the survival function for any choice of limiting flux, i.e.N(>
S)∝S −x, withx=constant∀S. Consequently, the dipole amplitude at all flux limits is
constant provided that the source population has a common spectral index (which it is in
this study).
As a starting point, we first probe the case where we bifurcate the catalogue into two
flux bins by selecting an arbitrary flux cut. Here and in the following joint analyses, we select
the flux cuts by ensuring that they give at least 10 sources per pixel per flux bin, i.e. each
flux bin should have at least500,000sources. To achieve this, we bifurcate the catalogue
starting from a15mJ yflux cut and continue probing randomly selected flux cuts until the
second flux bin has just fewer than500,000sources. This is done because our analysis shows
that flux bins with sparsely populated pixels introduce shot noise, thereby affecting both the
posterior and the Bayesian evidence.
We show the evolution of Bayes factors (dipole vs monopole) in the top panels of the
Figure 2. Each panel differs in the spectral index of the sources, and the colour of the curves
represents the value of thexparameter used to generate the luminosity function. In each
curve, the left-most point represents the Bayes factors for the traditional E&B. The Bayes
– 9 –

factors at the other points on a curve were calculated by bifurcating the catalogue at the
corresponding abscissa flux value, and then jointly analysing the two bins. Note that the
Bayes factors at each point are consolidated over all the corresponding mock catalogues for
the(x, α)combinations. We shift the y-axis in each plot to show the relative difference
between the traditional and the joint analyses.
We find that traditional E&B provides a better description of the dipole parameters
than joint analysis. Curiously, if the flux cut for joint analysis is placed near the catalogue’s
limiting flux (where E&B’s fit is done), then the joint analysis is strongly disfavored with a
(log) Bayes factor difference of≈6. And as we shift the demarcation flux towards brighter
values, we find that although the explanatory power of the joint analysis increases slightly,
E&B’s approach still provides the best grip on the matter dipole. This seems to hint that,
since both fits are performed on the same dataset, the joint analysis of a flux-binned catalogue
is not a good approach to analyse the dataset. To establish whether this is the case, we need
to analyse the corresponding posterior distribution of the joint fits.
As an example, we show the evolution of the posterior distributions (consolidated over
the NS runs) of the fitted dipole parameters with the location of the flux cut, forα= 0.7,
x= 0.7in the Figure 9. We find that the dipole direction, and dipole amplitude at lower flux
limits are in excellent agreement with the input values, and have minimal (and stable level
of) uncertanity regardless of the location of the flux cut. But, the uncertanity in the dipole
amplitude at the flux cut increases with the brightness of the flux cut. The stability of dipole
direction is understood by noting that these parameters are shared across both the flux bins,
and hence, are constained by all the sources in the catalogue. Similarly, the dipole amplitude
at lower flux limit is constrained by the sources in the first flux bin, and since their count
increases with shifting the flux cut to brighter values, the uncertanitity remains minimal, and
stable. But, the dipole amplitude at the flux cut is constrained by the sources in second flux
bin, and since the count here decreases with shifting the flux cut, the uncertanity increases
progressively. Note that the corresponding posterior distributions for other choices of{α, x}
show a similar trend.
To understand the Bayes factor curves, note that when the flux cut is placed in the
vicinity of the lower flux limit, both the amplitudes are correlated with each other. In this
regime, we see a substantial decrease in support for the joint analysis. If we move the flux
cut towards brighter values, the amount of correlation decreases progressively, and this is
augmented by the Bayes factors of both traditional and joint setup being almost equal to
each other. This suggests that the substantial decrease in support for joint analysis might
stem from Occam’s penalty, which penalizes overfitting. To address this, instead of fitting a
dipole amplitude at each flux limit, we fit the observer’s velocityv, which is shared across all
flux limits. This reduces the parameter space toΘ =

{ ¯N(> S j,b)}j, v, l◦, b◦	
, and fitsn+ 3
free parameters fornbins. We sample the velocity from a uniform distribution in the prior
range 0 to 0.1, i.e.v∼ U(0,0.1) 5.
We repeat our analysis using this reduced parameter space, and show the evolution of
Bayes factors in the bottom panels of Figure 2. To demonstrate that we get the correct dipole
parameters in the output, we show the evolution of the consolodated posterior distributions
of{v, l ◦, b◦}for{α, x}={0.7,0.7}in Figure 10. We find that all the parameters agree
with the input values, are well constranined regadless of the location of the flux cut, and the
uncertanity remains stable, which can be attributed to them being constrained by sources in
5Note that a similar approach of rescaling dipole amplitudes to a shared velocity parameter has been used
in [30], to analyse different all-sky datasets jointly.
– 10 –

both flux bins. This time, we find that the disagreement between the joint and traditional
analyses reduces to an almost insignificant level. We will address the decrease in Bayes factors
for flux cuts near the lower flux limits in the discussion section. This shows that, for a power-
law LF, both E&B and joint fit have equal explanatory power for the matter dipole - so,
splitting the catalogue into disjoint flux bins offers no advantage for a pure power-law LF.
5.2 Double Power-Law Distribution
Next, we analyse the double power-law LF. This function characterises a source population
withaslightlysteeperLFtowardsbrighterfluxes. Wepinthetransitionfluxlimitat200mJ y,
because it enables us to place a sufficient number of flux cuts in either power-law region. We
first analyse the impact of dividing the catalogue into two bins, then discuss the impact of
introducing a third flux bin.
5.2.1 T wo bins
101 102
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
α = 0.7
101 102
α = 0.9
101 102
α = 1.1
1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8
x2 value
−2.30
−1.10
0.00
1.10
2.30
3.40
4.61
Jeﬀreys scale
log(Bayes Factor)
Flux ( S, mJy)
Figure 3:As in the bottom panels of Figure 2, where a shared observer’s velocityvis fitted across
the flux limits, but for the double power-law LF. The colorbar indicates the magnitude of the LF
parameterx 2. The vertical dashed line marks the location of the transition fluxSt = 200mJ y.
We perform the joint analysis of the two flux bins created by dividing the catalogue at a
range of flux cuts by using the reduced parameter spaceΘ =

{ ¯N(> S j,b)}j, v, l◦, b◦	
. Figure
3 shows the evolution of the consolidated Bayes factors with the location of the flux cuts. Each
subplot shows the result for a unique spectral indexα, while the colours represent the values
for the second power law indexx2. The first point in each curve gives the Bayes factors for
the traditional E&B, and the y-axis has been shifted to show the relative difference between
this and the joint analysis for different flux cuts. We find that the posterior distributions are
in excellent agreement with the input values, and their uncertanity remains constant for any
choice of flux cut. We illustrate this by showing the evolution of the posterior of the shared
parameters{v, l ◦, b◦}for{α, x 2}={0.7,1.7}in Figure 11.
Here, we find that, similar to the power-law LF, the Bayes factor curve initially dips,
implying that the E&B approach is preferred for low-magnitude flux cuts. However, as we
shift the flux cut towards higher values, we see that the Bayes factors initially increase, reach
a maximum near the transition fluxSt (marked with a vertical dotted line), and then decrease
for higher flux cut values. The increase depends directly on the magnitudes ofαandx2, with
larger values giving stronger preference to joint analysis. This shows that the joint analysis
– 11 –

captures the transition between the two power-law regions and integrates this aspect of LF
into the analysis, providing a better grip on the matter dipole.
5.2.2 Three bins
(a) Double power-law LF
 (b) Schechter LF
Figure 4:Heatmap depicting the Bayes factors (dipole vs monopole) for three-bin joint analysis
of mock catalogues constructed using a)- double power-law LF with parameters{α, x2}={0.9,1.7},
b)- Schechter LF with parameters{α, υ}={0.7,0.7}. The colourbar has been shifted to show the
difference relative to the traditional E&B analysis.
The aforementioned shows that, for a double power-law LF, the two-bin joint analysis provides
a better understanding of both the matter dipole and the flux distribution. We now check
if increasing the number of flux bins enhances this effect. We use a range of flux cuts to
divide the catalogue into three flux bins, and perform a joint analysis by using the reduced
parameter setΘ =

{ ¯N(> S j,b)}j, v, l◦, b◦	
. We show the consolidated Bayes factors for joint
analysis (relative to E&B) for{α, x2}={0.9,1.7}in the left panel of Figure 4. The Bayes
factor for the traditional analysis is set to0in the colourmap. Note that the heatmap is
not a perfect triangular plot, because, as we move towards the diagonal cells, the difference
between the two flux cuts reduces, and we get<10sources per pixel in the middle flux bin.
We only focus on the middle flux bin, because, the minimum and maximum values of the flux
cut range, viz15mJ yand541mJ yare selected to give adequate source counts in the first
and third flux bins. In particular, the maxima was selected such that there were just over
500,000sources beyond it. The recovered dipole parameters agree with inputs, and we show
the posterior distribution for shared parameters{v, l◦, b◦}for some combinations of the flux
cuts in Figure 12. The heatmaps for other combinations of{α, x2}differ quantitatively but
qualitatively portray the same picture.
We find that the heatmap broadly shows four distinct regions: First, when the first flux
cut is in the immediate vicinity of the catalogue’s limiting flux, the E&B is preferred over the
– 12 –

joint fit. Second, when the first flux cut lies well within the first power-law region and the
second flux cut lies well within the second power-law region, we see that both methods have
equal constraining power. Third, when one of the two flux cuts is nearSt, the joint analysis
yields slightly higher Bayes factors (withinln2) than the E&B. And fourth, when both flux
cuts are well within the same power-law region, we see that E&B performs significantly better
than the joint analysis for most of the time. If we compare the increase in Bayes factors near
the transition flux in this scenario with its two-bin analysis counterpart, we find that the
increase here is almost equal to the increase in the two-bin joint analysis. This shows that
adding an extra flux bin in analysis does not offer any additional insights into either the
matter dipole or the flux distribution - rather, a two-bin joint fit with the flux cut nearSt
provides the strongest boost to the Bayesian evidence.
5.3 Schechter Distribution
We now probe the Schechter LF, which has a power-law slope towards the fainter end and an
exponential decrease at the brighter end. This function is a popular choice for characterising
the luminosity functions of a broad class of astronomical objects. We pin the exponential
decay limit atS∗ at400mJ y, because it enables us to make a sizable number of adequately
spaced flux cuts in both the power-law and exponential decay regions. We first examine the
impact of bifurcation, then discuss that of trifurcating the catalogue.
5.3.1 T wo bins
101 102 103
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
α = 0.7
101 102 103
α = 0.9
101 102 103
α = 1.1
0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
υ value
−2.30
−1.10
0.00
1.10
2.30
3.40
4.61
Jeﬀreys scale
log(Bayes Factor)
Flux ( S, mJy)
Figure 5:As in Figure 3, but for Schechter LF. The colourbar indicates the magnitude of the
LF parameterυ. The vertical dashed line marks the location of the limit of exponential decay
S∗ = 400mJ y.
We perform our joint analysis by bifurcating the catalogue using a range of flux cuts, and
fit the reduced parameter spaceΘ =

{ ¯N(> S j,b)}j, v, l◦, b◦	
. We show the evolution of
consolidated Bayes factors in Figure 5. Here, each panel show the results for a particular
value ofα, while different colours represent different values of the parameterυ. As in the
previous analyses, the first point on each curve represents the Bayes factors for the E&B,
and the y-axis is scaled to show the difference between this and joint analyses. We again find
that the recovered parameters agree with our input parameters. As an example, we show the
evolution of posterior distribution for the shared parameters{v, l◦, b◦}for{α, υ}={0.7,0.9}
in Figure 13, where the parameters remain well constrained and their uncertanties remain
stable.
– 13 –

This time, we find that even though support for joint analysis decreases initially, as we
move the flux cut towards the brighter region of the luminosity function, the Bayes factors
first increase overwhelmingly, then decrease significantly as the flux cut approaches the upper
flux limit. We also observe that the increase in Bayes factors is more pronounced for lower
values ofυas compared to that for higherυ. This means that the joint analysis performs
better for an LF with a shallower power-law region and a more pronounced exponential
decay. Additionally, as in the double power-law LF, we observe that the increase is directly
proportional toα- for the sameυ, a largerαgives a higher peak.
5.3.2 Three bins
We perform our joint analysis by trifurcating the catalogue into three flux bins for a range
of flux cuts, using the reduced parameter spaceΘ =

{ ¯N(> S j,b)}j, v, l◦, b◦	
. In the right
panel of Figure 4, we show the Bayes factors for the joint analysis for{α, υ}={0.7,0.7}.
Similar to the double power-law analysis, the colorbar is scaled so that the Bayes factor for
the traditional analysis corresponds to the0point of the colour scheme. The heatmaps for
other combinations of{α, υ}are qualitatively similar, but differ in their exact range of Bayes
factors. Similar to previous cases, we find that the recovered parameters agree with our input
parameters. The recovered dipole parameters agree with inputs, and we show the posterior
distribution for shared parameters{v, l◦, b◦}for some combinations of the flux cuts in Figure
14. Similar to the previously discussed cases, the uncertanities remain constant, because the
shared parameters are being constrained by sources in all the flux bins.
Here, we find that if the first flux cut is placed quite near the lower flux limit of the
catalogue, then, if the second flux cut is not in the middle of the LF, there is almost equal
support for both methods. While if the second flux cut is in the middle of the LF, there is an
overwhelming preference for the joint analysis with a maximum∆log(BF)≈8. As we shift
the first flux cut away from the lower limit and the second flux cut is a bit further towards the
brighter fluxes, then we see that joint analyses provide a better grip on the dipole parameters
than the usual E&B. In fact, the highest support stems from placing both cuts somewhere
in the middle of the LF, away from both the upper and lower limits of the catalogue, and
ensuring that there is a sufficient space between them. Finally, if both the flux cuts are
either well in the power-law region (towards the upper corner of the heatmap) or well in the
exponential decay region (towards the bottom right corner), then although the support is
somewhat higher than E&B, it is still lower than the case where both flux cuts are in the
middle region of the LF.
6 Discussion & Conclusion
6.1 Shape of the Bayes factor curves
In the previous section, for any(LF, α)combination, we observed a significant shift in Bayes
factors as we switched from traditional to joint analysis. We saw two major trends: first, if
we placed the flux cut (or one of the flux cuts) near the catalogue’s limiting flux, support
for the joint analysis decreased. Second, for non-power-law LFs, as we shifted the flux cut(s)
towards brighter fluxes, the joint analysis was decisively favoured.
We first examine the decrease in support for joint analysis over E&B if we place the flux
cut (or one of the flux cuts) near the catalogue’s limiting flux. This trend is observed in almost
all of the above-discussed cases, except for the three bin joint analysis of Schechter LF, which
we will discuss shortly. The generality rules out its relation to any LF-related systematic;
– 14 –

734
.5
735
.0
878.5
879.0
879.5 15 mJy
117
.5
118
.0
145 mJy
72.75
73.00
260 mJy
55.50
55.75
360 mJy
40.2
40.4
529 mJy
24.6
24.7
Power-law
α= 0.9, x= 0.8
937 mJy
747
.0
747
.5
886.0
886.5
887.0 15 mJy
96.75
97.00
140 mJy
58.50
58.75
200 mJy
36.2
36.4
270 mJy
17.2
17.3
430 mJy
9.25 9.30 9.35
Double Power-law
α= 0.7, x2= 1.6
631 mJy
909
.0
909
.5
968.5
969.0
969.5
15 mJy
291
.5
292
.0
145 mJy
162
.25
162
.50
162
.75
260 mJy
105
.00
105
.25
360 mJy
54.25
54.50
529 mJy
13.3
13.4
Schechter
α= 1.1, υ= 0.9
937 mJy
¯N (> S cut)
¯N (> S 12 mJy )
Figure 6:Evolution of the{ ¯N(> S 12mJy ), ¯N(> S cut)}2-D histogram of the consolidated Posterior
distributions for the two-bin joint analysis of some of the LFs. Each row showcases the 2-D histograms
for a range of increasing flux cuts (mentioned in the subplot’s inset) for the LF mentioned in the right
label of each row. The contours enclose12%,39%,68%and86%of the distribution.
101 102 103
Flux ( S, mJy)
−2
0
2
4
6
8
log(Bayes Factor)
Schechter Function α = 0.7, υ = 0.7
Two-bin joint analysis
Three-bin joint analysis
Traditional E&B
Figure 7:Comparison of the evolution of consolidated Bayes factors for two-bin and three-bin joint
analysis of the Schechter LF with parameters{α, υ}={0.7,0.7}. For the two-bin curve, the x-axis
marks the location of the flux cut, while it marks the location of the second flux cut for the three-bin
curve. The y-axis for both curves is shifted to show the relative difference between the joint analyses
and the E&B analysis, with the latter fixed at 0.
rather, it hints towards its statistical origins. This dip is similar to the dip in Bayes factors in
Section 5.1, which was generated due to a correlation between{DS12mJ y,D Scut}. There, the
dip became less significant once we reduced the parameter space by rescaling the amplitudes
in terms of the observer’s velocity. Taking a cue, if we again look at the parameter space,
– 15 –

Θ =

{ ¯N(> S j,b)}j, v, l◦, b◦	
, we infer that the decrease here might be caused by a correlation
between the number density parameters{¯N(> S j,b)}j. To check if this is so, we plot the 2D
histograms between the posterior samples of ¯N(> S 12mJy )and ¯N(> S cut)for a range of
flux cuts for the two bin joint analysis of all three luminosity functions in Figures 6. We
see that forS cut = 15mJ y, both ¯N(> S 12mJy )and ¯N(> S cut)are highly correlated with
each other, while the correlation is negligible for other flux cuts. The correlation implies
that ¯N(> S 15mJy ) =k ¯N(> S 12mJy )(wherekis a scaling constant), i.e. we are using more
than the required number of parameters. This activates Occam’s penalty, which decreases
the Bayes factors whenScut is near12mJ y.
Coming to the three bin joint analysis of Schechter LF, in Figure 4, we observe that if
the first flux cut is placed at15mJ y, then the joint analysis is favoured for almost all choices
of the second cut. This seems to contradict Occam’s penalty explanation for the decrease
in support for joint analysis. To explain this scenario, in Figure 7, we present a comparison
between the15mJ ycolumn of Figure 4, with the corresponding two-bin curve of Figure 5.
We find that both curves align well and have peaks in similar regions. But the Bayes factors
for the three-bin analysis are always less than those of the two-bin analysis, i.e., the Bayes
factor decreases upon introducing an additional flux cut near the limiting flux. Thus, even
though the correlation between¯N(> S 12mJy )and ¯N(> S 15mJy )injects an Occam’s penalty,
the magnitude of the penalty is not sufficient to phase out the increase in Bayes factors due
to the shape of the luminosity function.
Next, we examine the increase in Bayes factors for the joint analyses of the double
power-law and Schechter LFs. We first note that for a double power-law LF, the magnitude
of the increase in Bayes factors in two-bin analysis depends directly on the difference between
the magnitudes ofx1 andx 2, with a larger difference yielding a higher peak in the curves. As
the difference betweenx1 andx 2 decreases and the LF approaches a pure power-law curve,
the peak becomes negligible, and we get equal support for both traditional and joint analysis.
In its three-bin analysis, we do not observe any significant increase in support for dipole over
the two-bin case. In fact, only when one of the two flux cuts is placed near the transition
region, the three bin analysis gives comparable Bayes factors to the two bin counterpart. In
all other cases, it performs at par with the traditional analysis.
For the Schechter distribution, the most significant increase in Bayes factors for the
two bin analysis occurs when we use a lowυ, which gives a pronounced transition to the
exponential decay region. As we increaseυ, and the LF starts to approach a pure power-
law, the increase in Bayes factors becomes negligible. Similarly, for its three-bin analysis,
we only get a decisive verdict in favour of joint analysis when both flux cuts are placed in
the non-power-law region, where the source counts drop significantly upon a small increment
in flux. Taken together, these features show that if the LF has pronounced deviations from
a power-law structure, then placing a flux cut in the deviating region gives a better grip
on the matter dipole. In other words, capturing the global shape of the LF through joint
analysis of flux-binned catalogue gives a stronger grasp of the underlying matter dipole signal
as compared to traditional E&B, which only analyses the local shape of the LF at the limiting
flux.
6.2 How many sources are needed?
Now that we understand the origin of the increase in Bayes factors for the joint analysis,
the next question concerns the minimum number of sources required to robustly apply this
method. While our results establish that joint analysis provides a better characterisation of
– 16 –

−2
−1
0
1
x2 = 1.4
α = 0.7
0
2
x2 = 1.6
α = 0.9
0
2
Double Power-law
x2 = 1.8
α = 1.1
101 102 103
−2
0
2
4
 υ = 1.1
101 102 103
0
5
υ = 0.9
101 102 103
0
5
10
Schechter
υ = 0.7
5 10 20 30 40 50
Initial Source Count (in millions)
−2.30
−1.10
0.00
1.10
2.30
3.40
4.61
Jeﬀreys scale
log(Bayes Factor)
Flux ( S, mJy)
Figure 8:Evolution of the Bayes factors (dipole vs monopole) with a change in initial source counts
for some of the LFs studied in this work. While each column corresponds to a differentα, each row
corresponds to a different LF type with the corresponding free parameter mentioned in the inset of
each plot. The colours represent the initial source count used to make the mock catalogues. Other
properties of the plot are similar to the Figure 3.
the matter dipole, its practical recovery is fundamentally limited by survey characteristics
and the total number of observed sources. Determining this minimum source-count threshold
is therefore essential for connecting theoretical expectations with observational feasibility. To
addressthis, weexaminehowtheBayesfactorsevolveasthenumberofsourcesisprogressively
reduced.
In Figure 8, we show the evolution of Bayes factor curves for two bin joint analyses of
somerandomlyselected(LF, α)withtheinitialsourcecountsusedtoconstructthemocks. We
observe the following salient features in each subplot. Firstly, for an initial source count of≈
10millionsources, eventhoughtheBayesfactorcurvesreachtheregionsbeyondthetransition
fluxes of200mJ yand400mJ yfor double power-law and Schechter LFs, respectively, there
is only a marginal difference between the Bayes factors for traditional and joint analysis. This
trend holds regardless of the location of the flux cut and suggests that merely having a decent
number of sources in the non-power-law regime does not give any significant improvement in
the analysis’s outcome. For high spectral indices (α= 0.9,1.1), if the initial source count
is increased beyond 20 million, we find that joint analysis is decisively favoured over the
traditional analysis for both LFs. Whereas for a low spectral index of0.7, we need around 30
million initial sources to get decisive support for the joint analysis.
One important point deserves clarification here. The initial source count of 20 million
(forα= 0.9,1.1or 30 million forα= 0.7) is for constructing the isotropic sky map, with
a limiting flux of10mJ y. However, as we have mentioned in Section 3, after we inject a
dipole in this map, we select all sources above12mJ y, as this removes the distorted region of
the LF, which occurred due to Doppler boosting. Therefore, the actual source counts in the
catalogue used for analysis are a bit less than 20 million. After accounting for this trimming,
we find that having at least 18 (or 27) million sources in the final catalogue will provide
sufficient sources for this analysis.
– 17 –

6.3 Conclusions & Observational F easibility
In this study, we discussed a new method of calculating the matter dipole from all-sky cat-
alogues of cosmological sources. Our method builds on the classic Ellis & Baldwin test and
integrates the flux of sources in the analysis. We calculate the matter dipole by simulta-
neously calculating the matter dipole at a number of flux limits. We achieve this by first
dividing the catalogue into multiple disjoint flux bins and then jointly analysing all the flux
bins to calculate the matter dipole at their boundaries. In the process, we reparameterize the
dipole amplitudes at each flux limit/cut in terms of the observer’s velocity, which, along with
the dipole direction, is shared across all flux bins. Additionally, we fit the cumulative source
count at the limiting flux and the flux cut. We calculate our Bayes factors by selecting the
monopole as the reference hypothesis.
We find that if the source population’s LF follows a pure power-law distribution, our
method offers no significant advantage over E&B’s method. But if the source population
follows another LF, such as the double-power-law or Schechter function, then our method
provides improved grip over the matter dipole parameters. The level of improvement depends
on four factors: the location of the bin boundaries, the deviation of LF from a power law,
the SED of the population, and the number of sources in the catalogue. If we place the bin
boundary close to the catalogue’s limiting flux, support for our method decreases relative
to the E&B. This occurs because of the strong correlation between the cumulative number
counts for the limiting flux and the bin boundary, which activates Occam’s penalty, and
decreases the Bayes factors by≈ln2. On the other hand, if we place the flux cut in the
region where the LF deviates from a power-law structure, we find that the Bayes factors for
joint analysis increase. A larger deviation from the power-law LF gives a larger increase in
Bayes factors, and enables an increase in the number of flux cuts. As an example of this, a
double-power-law LF gives maximum grip on matter dipole if we place a single flux cut in
the proximity of the transition flux, while a Schechter LF allows for more flux cuts in the
exponential decay region. The increase in Bayes factors upon joint analysis also depends on
the spectral indexα- a source population with a higherαgives a larger increase in Bayes
factors. Finally, a larger source count yields more sources on either side of a flux cut placed
in the non-power-law region, leading to a higher Bayes factor.
Having established the requirements for obtaining a robust outcome using joint analysis,
we turn to the question of observational feasibility. We now discuss how ongoing and planned
surveys can be used to detect the dipole using the method derived in our simulations. This
analysis allows us to assess which surveys can provide meaningful constraints and identify
observational regimes where a significant detection is likely. Below, we discuss the feasibility
of our methods for two regimes in which the discrepancy between the kinematic and matter
dipoles has posed a significant challenge for the CP.
Forradiowavelengths, flagship simulations like T-RECS [46] predict a non-power-law LF
for upcoming radio continuum surveys. As an example, in T-RECS II [Figure 3 of 47], where
the LFs have been calculated at1.4GHzafter accounting for H-I emission, we find that for the
1-1.2 redshift bin, the LF shows a characteristic non-power-law shape for Luminosities which
are in the range1023 −10 26 W/Hz, or equivalently flux range of3.9−3900µJ y(assumingΛ-
CDMcosmologyandα= 0.8toaccountfork-correction). MultibandsimulationslikeSPRITZ
[Figure 22 of 48] also predict a characteristic non-power-law LF in a similar observational
regime. This suggests that the redshift cumulated LF will be characteristically non-power-
law for1.4GHzin theµJ yto sub-mJ yregime. Ongoing surveys such as the Evolutionary
Map of the Universe (EMU) [49, 50] and upcoming surveys such as the Square Kilometre
– 18 –

Array (SKA)6 will probe the sky in this band and flux ranges. EMU expects to observe 40
million sources in the southern sky at sub-mJ yfluxes, which extrapolates to a high all-sky
source count and would provide an excellent dataset for joint analysis [51]. Similarly, SKA-
low expects to observe9×10 8 galaxies over30,000deg 2, up toz≈2withµJ ysensitivities,
providing sufficient information for joint analysis of the flux-binned catalogue.
In theinfrareddomain, E&B fit is done on quasar candidates. Results from the Sptizer
telescope have shown that the quasar candidates follow a broken/double power-law LF [see
Figure 4 of 52]. This suggests that a sizable population of quasar candidates should allow
for a flux-binned analysis. Euclid [53] will observe around 8.1 million quasar candidates over
14,000deg 2 of the extragalactic sky, which translates to around 24 million all-sky sources.
Since quasars have a highα∼1−2in IR, this source count should be sufficient to perform
a flux-binned analysis of the source population.
Building on the framework presented above, future work can extend this analysis in
several directions. We outline a few of them here. At present, flux-cut locations are selected
randomly; developing a formulation to determine these locations from first principles for a
general luminosity function would improve the speed and efficiency of the method. Similarly,
identifying the optimal number of flux cuts without resorting to simulations would further
simplify the analysis. Another line of work involves reducing the number of sources required
by this method, thereby broadening its applicability to existing datasets. Finally, using this
method to analyse the higher-order multipoles in the number density contrast can enhance our
understanding of real survey catalogues. In conclusion, while this method provides a better
understanding of the matter dipole, further refinements will enhance its usability. This will
be the topic of a future publication.
Acknowledgments
VM acknowledges financial support from the Physics Foundation Scholarship. GFL thanks
Chris Clarkson and Charles Dalang for hosting him at the QMUL and for the discussions that
sowed the seed of this study. We thank the referee for their comments. This work used the
School of Physics, University of Sydney’s HPC cluster. This work made use of thepython
packagesUltraNest[41, 42, 45],Jax[54],healpy[38, 39],numpy[55],matplotlib[56],
scipy[57],pandas[58] andastropy[59].
References
[1] E.A. Milne,Relativity, Gravitation and World-structure, Oxford University Press (1935).
[2] S. Weinberg,Cosmology, Oxford University Press (2008).
[3] P. Kumar Aluri, P. Cea, P. Chingangbam, M.-C. Chu, R.G. Clowes, D. Hutsemékers et al.,Is
the observable Universe consistent with the cosmological principle?,Classical and Quantum
Gravity40(2023) 094001 [2207.05765].
[4] G.F.R. Ellis and J.E. Baldwin,On the expected anisotropy of radio source counts,MNRAS206
(1984) 377.
[5] C. Blake and J. Wall,Measurement of the angular correlation function of radio galaxies from
the NRAO VLA Sky Survey,MNRAS329(2002) L37 [astro-ph/0111328].
6https://www.skao.int/en
– 19 –

[6] N.J. Secrest, S. von Hausegger, M. Rameez, R. Mohayaee, S. Sarkar and J. Colin,A Test of the
Cosmological Principle with Quasars,ApJ Let.908(2021) L51 [2009.14826].
[7] P. Peebles,Anomalies in physical cosmology,Annals of Physics447(2022) 169159.
[8] N.J. Secrest, S. von Hausegger, M. Rameez, R. Mohayaee and S. Sarkar,Forty years of the
ellis–baldwin test,Nature Reviews Physics(2025) .
[9] T.M. Siewert, M. Schmidt-Rubart and D.J. Schwarz,Cosmic radio dipole: Estimators and
frequency dependence,A&A653(2021) A9.
[10] Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami, F. Arroja, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont et al.,
Planck 2018 results. I. Overview and the cosmological legacy of Planck,A&A641(2020) A1
[1807.06205].
[11] C. Blake and J. Wall,A velocity dipole in the distribution of radio galaxies,Nature416(2002)
150 [astro-ph/0203385].
[12] F. Crawford,Detecting the cosmic dipole anisotropy in large-scale radio surveys,The
Astrophysical Journal692(2009) 887–893.
[13] A.K. Singal,Large peculiar motion of the solar system from the dipole anisotropy in sky
brightness due to distant radio sources,The Astrophysical Journal Letters742(2011) L23.
[14] M. Rubart and D.J. Schwarz,Cosmic radio dipole from NVSS and WENSS,A&A555(2013)
A117.
[15] J. Colin, R. Mohayaee, M. Rameez and S. Sarkar,High-redshift radio galaxies and divergence
from the CMB dipole,MNRAS471(2017) 1045 [1703.09376].
[16] C.A. Bengaly, R. Maartens and M.G. Santos,Probing the cosmological principle in the counts
of radio galaxies at different frequencies,J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys.2018(2018) 031.
[17] N.J. Secrest, S. von Hausegger, M. Rameez, R. Mohayaee and S. Sarkar,A Challenge to the
Standard Cosmological Model,ApJ Let.937(2022) L31 [2206.05624].
[18] J. Darling,The Universe is Brighter in the Direction of Our Motion: Galaxy Counts and
Fluxes are Consistent with the CMB Dipole,ApJ Let.931(2022) L14 [2205.06880].
[19] L. Dam, G.F. Lewis and B.J. Brewer,Testing the cosmological principle with CatWISE quasars:
a bayesian analysis of the number-count dipole,MNRAS525(2023) 231 [2212.07733].
[20] J.D. Wagenveld, H.-R. Klöckner and D.J. Schwarz,The cosmic radio dipole: Bayesian
estimators on new and old radio surveys,A&A675(2023) A72.
[21] V. Mittal, O.T. Oayda and G.F. Lewis,The cosmic dipole in the Quaia sample of quasars: a
Bayesian analysis,MNRAS527(2024) 8497 [2311.14938].
[22] O.T. Oayda, V. Mittal, G.F. Lewis and T. Murphy,A Bayesian approach to the cosmic dipole
in radio galaxy surveys: joint analysis of NVSS & RACS,Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.531
(2024) 4545 [2406.01871].
[23] L. Böhme, D.J. Schwarz, P. Tiwari, M. Pashapour-Ahmadabadi, B. Bahr-Kalus, M. Bilicki
et al.,Overdispersed Radio Source Counts and Excess Radio Dipole Detection,Phys. Rev. Lett.
135(2025) 201001 [2509.16732].
[24] S. von Hausegger, N. Secrest, H. Desmond, M. Rameez, R. Mohayaee and S. Sarkar,Clustering
properties of the CatWISE2020 quasar catalogue and their impact on the cosmic dipole
anomaly,Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.546(2026) stag201 [2510.23769].
[25] N. Secrest, S. von Hausegger, M. Rameez, R. Mohayaee and S. Sarkar,Colloquium: The
Cosmic Dipole Anomaly,2505.23526.
– 20 –

[26] C. Dalang and C. Bonvin,On the kinematic cosmic dipole tension,Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society512(2022) 3895
[https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/512/3/3895/43290836/stac726.pdf].
[27] S. von Hausegger,The expected kinematic matter dipole is robust against source evolution,
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.535(2024) L49 [2404.07929].
[28] O.T. Oayda, V. Mittal and G.F. Lewis,Cosmic multipoles in galaxy surveys – I. How inferences
depend on source counts and masks,Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.537(2025) 1 [2412.12600].
[29] O.T. Oayda and G.F. Lewis,Wising up to CatWISE: using simulation-based inference to
interpret the ecliptic bias and confirm the cosmic dipole excess,Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.
546(2026) stag248 [2602.05070].
[30] M. Land-Strykowski, G.F. Lewis and T. Murphy,Cosmic dipole tensions: confronting the
cosmic microwave background with infrared and radio populations of cosmological sources,Mon.
Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.543(2025) 3229 [2509.18689].
[31] A. Bonnefous,The kinematic cosmic dipole beyond Ellis and Baldwin,2602.05700.
[32] T.T. Takeuchi,A General Formulation of the Kinematic Dipole as a Functional of Selection
and Source Properties: Beyond the Ellis–Baldwin Approximation,2602.07389.
[33] M. Blümke, K. Schmitz, T. Schröder, D. Agarwal and J.D. Romano,Kinematic Anisotropies in
PTA Observations: Analytical Toolkit,Symmetry18(2026) 355 [2512.24055].
[34] A. Martín, C. Skordis, D.J. Bartlett, H. Desmond, P.G. Ferreira and T. Yasin,The
Cosmological Dipole in Tilted Anisotropic Universes,2512.03867.
[35] T. Yasin, R. Stiskalek, H. Desmond, S. von Hausegger and P.G. Ferreira,Testing cosmic
anisotropy with cluster scaling relations,2602.06007.
[36] M. Millon, C. Dalang, T. Collett and C. Bonvin,Kinematic cosmic dipole from a large sample
of strong lenses,2603.11152.
[37] P. Tiwari and A. Nusser,Revisiting the nvss number count dipole,Journal of Cosmology and
Astroparticle Physics2016(2016) 062.
[38] K.M. Górski, E. Hivon, A.J. Banday, B.D. Wandelt, F.K. Hansen, M. Reinecke et al.,
HEALPix: A Framework for High-Resolution Discretization and Fast Analysis of Data
Distributed on the Sphere,ApJ622(2005) 759 [arXiv:astro-ph/0409513].
[39] A. Zonca, L. Singer, D. Lenz, M. Reinecke, C. Rosset, E. Hivon et al.,healpy: equal area
pixelization and spherical harmonics transforms for data on the sphere in python,Journal of
Open Source Software4(2019) 1298.
[40] R.E. Kass and A.E. Raftery,Bayes factors,Journal of the American Statistical Association90
(1995) 773.
[41] J. Skilling,Nested Sampling, inBayesian Inference and Maximum Entropy Methods in Science
and Engineering: 24th International Workshop on Bayesian Inference and Maximum Entropy
Methods in Science and Engineering, R. Fischer, R. Preuss and U.V. Toussaint, eds., vol. 735
ofAmerican Institute of Physics Conference Series, pp. 395–405, Nov., 2004, DOI.
[42] J. Skilling,Nested sampling for general Bayesian computation,Bayesian Analysis1(2006) 833 .
[43] J. Buchner,A statistical test for Nested Sampling algorithms,Statistics and Computing26
(2016) 383 [1407.5459].
[44] J. Buchner,Collaborative Nested Sampling: Big Data versus Complex Physical Models,PASP
131(2019) 108005 [1707.04476].
[45] J. Buchner,UltraNest - a robust, general purpose Bayesian inference engine,The Journal of
Open Source Software6(2021) 3001 [2101.09604].
– 21 –

[46] A. Bonaldi, M. Bonato, V. Galluzzi, I. Harrison, M. Massardi, S. Kay et al.,The Tiered Radio
Extragalactic Continuum Simulation (T-RECS),Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.482(2019) 2
[1805.05222].
[47] A. Bonaldi, P. Hartley, T. Ronconi, G. De Zotti and M. Bonato,The tiered radio extragalactic
continuum (T-RECS) simulation II: Hi emission and continuum-Hi cross-correlation,Mon.
Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.524(2023) 993 [2305.10175].
[48] L. Bisigello, C. Gruppioni, A. Feltre, F. Calura, F. Pozzi, C. Vignali et al.,Simulating the
infrared sky with a spritz,Astronomy &; Astrophysics651(2021) A52.
[49] R.P. Norris, A.M. Hopkins, J. Afonso, S. Brown, J.J. Condon, L. Dunne et al.,EMU:
Evolutionary Map of the Universe,PASA28(2011) 215 [1106.3219].
[50] A. Hopkins, R. Norris, T. Vernstrom, A. Kapinska and J. Marvil,Askap data products for
project as201 (emu): images and visibilities. v1., 2022.
[51] S. Camera, M.G. Santos and R. Maartens,Probing primordial non-Gaussianity with SKA
galaxy redshift surveys: a fully relativistic analysis,MNRAS448(2015) 1035 [1409.8286].
[52] M. Lacy, S.E. Ridgway, A. Sajina, A.O. Petric, E.L. Gates, T. Urrutia et al.,The Spitzer
mid-infrared AGN survey. II-the demographics and cosmic evolution of the AGN population,
Astrophys. J.802(2015) 102 [1501.04118].
[53] M. Selwood, S. Fotopoulou, M.N. Bremer, L. Bisigello, H. Landt, E. Bañados et al.,Euclid
preparation: Lvii. observational expectations for redshift z<7 active galactic nuclei in the euclid
wide and deep surveys,Astronomy &; Astrophysics693(2025) A250.
[54] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins and et al., “JAX: composable transformations of
python+numpy programs.”https://github.com/jax-ml/jax, 2018.
[55] C.R. Harris, K.J. Millman, S.J. van der Walt, R. Gommers, P. Virtanen, D. Cournapeau et al.,
Array programming with NumPy,Nature585(2020) 357.
[56] J.D. Hunter,Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment,Computing in Science & Engineering9
(2007) 90.
[57] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T.E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau et al.,
SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python,Nature Methods17
(2020) 261.
[58] The Pandas Development Team,pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas, Feb., 2020.
10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
[59] Astropy Collaboration, A.M. Price-Whelan, P.L. Lim, N. Earl, N. Starkman, L. Bradley et al.,
The Astropy Project: Sustaining and Growing a Community-oriented Open-source Project and
the Latest Major Release (v5.0) of the Core Package,apj935(2022) 167 [2206.14220].
– 22 –

A Posterior distributions for the joint analyses
250 275 300
40
60
b (in degrees)
Scut = 15 mJy
250 275 300
Scut = 145 mJy
250 275 300
Scut = 260 mJy
250 275 300
Scut = 360 mJy
250 300
Scut = 529 mJy
250 275 300
Scut = 937 mJy
0.003 0.004 0.0050.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
DScut
0.003 0.004 0.005 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.003 0.004 0.005
l (in degrees)
DSlim
Figure 9: Evolution of the consolidated posterior distributions of the dipole parameters for
two-bin joint analysis of the mock catalogues constructed using the power-law luminosity
function withx= 0.7andα= 0.7. In each column, the top histogram gives the distribution
of the inferred dipole directions, while the bottom histogram gives the distribution for the
inferred dipole amplitudes at both the lower flux limitSlim and the flux cutScut. The title of
each column indicates the magnitude of the flux cut. The true parameter values are marked in
black. The contours enclose12%,39%,68%and86%of the distribution in the 2D histograms.
250 275 300
30
40
50
60
70
b (in degrees)
Scut = 15 mJy
250 275
Scut = 145 mJy
250 275
Scut = 260 mJy
250 300
Scut = 360 mJy
250 275
Scut = 529 mJy
250 275
Scut = 937 mJy
0.0008
0.0010
0.0012
0.0014
0.0016
v (in Km/s)
l (in degrees)
Posterior Density
Figure 10: Evolution of the consolidated posterior distributions of the dipole parameters
for two-bin joint analysis of the mock catalogues constructed using the power-law luminosity
function withx= 0.7andα= 0.7. In each column, the 2D histogram gives the distribution
of the inferred dipole directions, while the 1D histogram gives the distribution for fitting the
dipole velocity at both the lower flux limitSlim and the flux cutScut. The title of each column
indicates the magnitude of the flux cut. The true parameter values are marked in black. The
contours enclose12%,39%,68%and86%of the distribution in the 2D histograms.
– 23 –

250 275
30
40
50
60
70
b (in degrees)
Scut = 15 mJy
250 275
Scut = 140 mJy
250 275
Scut = 200 mJy
250 275
Scut = 270 mJy
250 275
Scut = 430 mJy
250 275
Scut = 631 mJy
0.00075
0.00100
0.00125
0.00150
v (in Km/s)
l (in degrees)
Posterior Density
Figure 11: As in Figure 10, but for the catalogues constructed using double power-law LF
withx 2 = 1.4andα= 0.9.
250 275
30
40
50
60
70
b (in degrees)
Scut2 = 178 mJy
250 275
Scut2 = 250 mJy
250 275
Scut2 = 359 mJy
250 275
Scut2 = 414 mJy
250 275
Scut2 = 468 mJy
250 275
Scut2 = 522 mJy
0.00100
0.00125
0.00150
0.00175
v (in Km/s)
l (in degrees)
Posterior Density
Figure 12: As in Figure 10, but for the three bin joint analysis of catalogues constructed
using double power-law LF withx2 = 1.7andα= 0.7. The first flux cut is fixed at141mJ y,
while the title of each column indicates the magnitude of the second flux cut.
250 300
20
40
60
b (in degrees)
Scut = 15 mJy
250 300
Scut = 145 mJy
250 300
Scut = 260 mJy
250 300
Scut = 360 mJy
250 300
Scut = 529 mJy
250 300
Scut = 937 mJy
0.0010
0.0015
v (in Km/s)
l (in degrees)
Posterior Density
Figure 13: As in Figure 10, but for the catalogues constructed using Schechter LF with
υ= 0.9andα= 0.7.
– 24 –

250 300
20
40
60
b (in degrees)
Scut2 = 385 mJy
250 300
Scut2 = 467 mJy
250 300
Scut2 = 590 mJy
250 300
Scut2 = 714 mJy
250 300
Scut2 = 837 mJy
250 300
Scut2 = 961 mJy
0.0010
0.0015
v (in Km/s)
l (in degrees)
Posterior Density
Figure 14: As in Figure 12, but for the catalogues constructed using Schechter LF with
υ= 0.7andα= 0.7. The first flux cut is fixed at344mJ y, while the title of each column
indicates the magnitude of the second flux cut.
– 25 –