Title: Exploring non-Poisson satellite occupation in HOD models and its impact on 2- and 3-point galaxy clustering
Authors: Antoine Rocher
Published: 2026-05-27
Categories: astro-ph.CO

Prepared for submission to JCAP
Exploring non-Poisson satellite
occupation in HOD models and its
impact on 2- and 3-point galaxy
clustering
A. Rocher a
aInstitute of Physics, Laboratory of Astrophysics, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
(EPFL), Observatoire de Sauverny, CH-1290 Versoix, Switzerland
E-mail: antoine.rocher@epfl.ch
Abstract.Understanding the connection between galaxies and dark matter halos is a
central challenge in modern cosmology. The Halo Occupation Distribution (HOD) framework
provides a widely used statistical description of how galaxies populate dark matter halos,
enabling precise modelling of galaxy clustering. A common assumption in standard HOD
modelsisthatthenumberofsatellitegalaxiesfollowsaPoissondistributionatfixedhalomass.
In this work, we revisit this assumption and introduce the Conway–Maxwell–Poisson (CMP)
distribution as a minimal extension of of the Poisson model, which add a single parameter,
ν, to explore sub- and super-Poisson behaviour. We derive analytical approximations for
the CMP expectation parameterλand develop a numerical scheme that smoothly connects
small- and large-λregimes, achieving∼5%accuracy for0.5< ν <2. Using theHODDIES
package, we study the impact of non-Poisson satellite occupations on mock galaxy catalogues
and clustering statistics. Variations in the variance of the satellite occupation significantly
affect small-scale clustering, producing deviations of up to10%in projected clustering and5%
in the monopole and quadrupole. We further investigate higher-order statistics using counts-
in-cylinders (CiC) and the tree-level galaxy bispectrum. CiC statistics are highly sensitive to
changes in the variance, with variations up to∼30%, while the tree-level galaxy bispectrum
(in the Sugiyama basis) is only weakly affected (<2%up tok max = 0.3). These results
suggest that non-Poisson satellite statistics are important for small-scale analyses, but should
have a limited impact on cosmological constraints from power spectrum and bispectrum
measurements using large scaleskmax <0.3.
arXiv:2605.28644v1  [astro-ph.CO]  27 May 2026

Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Halo occupation statistics 3
3 Describing satellite occupation with the Conway–Maxwell–Poisson distri-
bution 4
3.1 Conway–Maxwell–Poisson as a minimal extension 4
3.2 Mean and variance scaling acrossλvalues 6
3.3 Regime I: Smallλ6
3.4 Regime II: Largeλ7
3.5 Global scaling behaviour 7
4 Impact of the CMP distribution on HOD galaxy mocks 9
4.1 Impact on mocks and occupation numbers 9
4.2 Implications on clustering statistics 11
4.2.1 2-point correlation function 11
4.2.2 Galaxy bispectrum 13
4.2.3 Count-in-cylinders 14
5 Conclusion 15
1 Introduction
The large-scale structure (LSS) of the universe is one of the most powerful tools to study cos-
mology. Over the last two decades, the field of LSS has evolved from theory to data-driven,
and has recently shifted towards Stage-IV cosmological surveys, thanks to experiments such
as the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI, [1]), the 4-Metre Multi-Object Spectro-
scopic Telescope (4MOST) [2],Euclid[3] or the upcoming Vera Rubin Observatory [4]. In the
comingyears, unprecedentedimprovementsintheprecisionofgalaxyclusteringmeasurements
will provide opportunities to study the cosmological model and expand our understanding of
galaxy formation. Recent results of the DESI experiment combine with other cosmological
probes already suggest an evolution of dark energy with time [5, 6], from the measurement of
the baryon acoustic oscillation (BAO; [6, 7]) scale and the full shape analyses of the two-point
correlation function at large-scales [8] . While analytical models such as effective field theory
(see [9, 10], for a review) models are efficient to probe the non-linear dark matter structure
growth and the galaxy clustering up to quasi-linear scales>30[Mpc/h], they break down
in smaller, non-linear scales. Since galaxies form and evolve in dark-matter halos [11], small
scales provide valuable information about the connection between galaxies and their host
dark matter halos. These scales contribute significantly to constraints on the growth rate of
structure, therefore a correct modelling of the galaxy-halo connection is a critical ingredient
to extract cosmological information and understand galaxy formation from observed galaxy
clustering statistics. In addition, accurately modelling the galaxy-halos connection is essential
for the construction of realistic mock catalogues that are used to design large-scale analyses
and to evaluate systematic uncertainties [12, 13]. With the increase of precision of galaxy
– 1 –

clustering measurements, uncertainties related to the galaxy–halo connection are expected to
become increasingly more relevant and a precise understanding of the galaxy–halo connec-
tion will therefore be necessary to derive robust systematic error budgets for cosmological
measurements.
Thegalaxy–haloconnectioncanbemodelledthroughseveralcomplementaryapproaches,
ranging from full-physics hydrodynamical simulations to empirical or physically motivated
methods built on top of gravity-onlyN-body simulations (see [14] for a review). Semi-analytic
models (SAMs) describe galaxy formation through a set of coupled differential equations that
encode the main physical processes driving galaxy evolution [15–18]. Alternatively, subhalo
abundance matching (SHAM) provides an empirical framework by assigning galaxies to ha-
los or subhalos through a monotonic relation between galaxy properties (e.g., luminosity or
stellar mass) and halo properties, typically with some scatter [19–24]. Another, very popular
approach is the Halo Occupation Distribution (HOD) [25, 26] that provides a simple and
flexible statistical description of how galaxies populate dark matter halos in N-body simula-
tions. Within this framework, the galaxy population of a halo of massMis described through
the conditional probability distributionP(Ngal |M), typically decomposed into contributions
from central and satellite galaxies. The functional form of the HOD depends on the galaxy
type. The model proposed in [26] has demonstrated considerable success in reproducing the
occupation statistics of galaxies selected above a minimum luminosity or stellar mass like
Luminous Red Galaxies (LRGs) [24, 27–29]. In this model the average number of central
galaxies⟨N c⟩is well described by a smooth step function while the average number of satel-
lite galaxies follows a power law. For star forming galaxies, such as Emission Line Galaxies
(ELGs), the halo occupation for central galaxies is different from a step function and best
described by an asymmetric Gaussian distribution [29–33]. The central galaxies are defined to
reside at the centre of mass of the halo and are usually modelled through a Bernoulli process
(either 0 or 1 galaxy at the centre of the halo). In contrast, satellite galaxies will reside in
the gravitational potential of the DM halo defined by their DM profile, assuming generally
a Navarro-Frenk-White profile [34]. The number of satellite galaxies at fixed halo mass is
commonly assumed to follow a Poisson distribution with mean⟨Nsat(M)⟩.
Due to its simplicity, the Poisson assumption is not guaranteed to hold in realistic galaxy
populations. Several numerical studies have found evidence for departures from Poisson
statistics in the abundance of subhaloes within dark matter halos. For example, [35] showed
that the number of low-mass subhaloes in host halos is better described by a negative binomial
distribution, corresponding to a super-Poissonian scatter in the subhalo population. Using
semi-analytic galaxy formation models, [36] further demonstrated that ignoring non-Poisson
behaviour in the halo occupation of subhaloes can lead to systematic errors in predicted
galaxy clustering. More recently, analyses based on hydrodynamical simulations have also
found evidence for deviations from Poisson statistics in satellite galaxy populations. For
instance, studies of LRG and ELG galaxy samples constructed from the IllustrisTNG [37]
simulation indicate that satellite counts can exhibit super-Poissonian scatter in specific halo
populations, particularly for halos with low concentration, leading to discrepancies between
standard HOD predictions and simulated galaxy–galaxy lensing signals [29, 38]. These results
suggest that the Poisson assumption commonly adopted in HOD models may not provide a
complete description of satellite galaxy statistics. The signature of non-Poisson statistic in
the satellite occupation will affect higher-order clustering, which are currently included in
main analysis of galaxy clustering [39–41]. Therefore, allowing for controlled deviations from
Poisson statistics offers a promising route to improve the realism of galaxy–halo connection
– 2 –

modelsandtobettercapturethestatisticalpropertiesofsatellitepopulations. Informerwork,
several extensions to the Poisson distribution has been studied [33, 42, 43] using nearest
integer and negative binomial distribution for sub-Poisson and super-Poisson distribution,
respectively. In [43], they performed a detailed study of the satellite variance and introduced
an extended scheme of binomial distribution by adding one parameter to continuously probe
the variances between sub-Poisson to super-Poisson distribution.
In this work, we introduce the Conway–Maxwell–Poisson (CMP; [44]) distribution as a
minimal and flexible extension of the Poisson distribution. This approach introduces a sin-
gle additional parameter that controls the variation between sub-Poisson and super-Poisson
regimes. We present how the variance of the satellite occupation effect the clustering signal in
the two-point correlation function and three point function using the tree-level galaxy bispec-
trum (in the Sugiyama basis [45]). In addition, we investigate the Count-in-Cylinder (CIC)
statistics [46] as an alternative statistics to probe higher-moment of the galaxy distribution
on small scales.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduce the halo occupation distribution
(HOD) framework and discuss the standard Poisson assumption for satellite galaxies, along
with motivations for considering deviations from this model. In Section 3, we present CMP
distribution and detail the numerical implementation of the CMP distribution, including
the evaluation of the normalization constant and sampling procedure. We derive analytical
approximations for the mean and variance of the CMP distribution in both the small- and
large-λregimes, and construct a smooth interpolation between these limits to obtain an
accuratemappingbetweenthetargetmeanoccupationnumberandtheexpectationparameter
of the CMP distribution. Section 4 investigates the impact of CMP statistic on HOD-based
mock galaxy catalogues and two-point clustering measurements. We describe the impact of
non-Poisson statistics on satellite galaxy occupation and the modifications to the one-halo
term. We extended this analysis to higher-order statistics using counts-in-cylinders (CIC) and
bispectrum measurements to assess their sensitivity to the non-Poisson satellite occupation.
Finally, we summarize our results and discuss future prospects in Section 5.
2 Halo occupation statistics
The Halo Occupation Distribution (HOD) framework provides a powerful statistical descrip-
tion to populate galaxies in dark matter haloes inN-body simulation. In the HOD framework,
the galaxy population is specified through the conditional probabilityP(Ngal |M h)which
describes the number of galaxies residing in a halo of massMh. The total occupation is typ-
ically decomposed into contributions from central and satellite galaxiesNgal =N cen +N sat.
In standard HOD formalism, central galaxies are modelled as a Bernoulli process, meaning
that either zero or one central galaxy will populate a halo. The number of satellite galaxies
is assumed to follow a Poisson distribution around a meanλ=⟨Nsat⟩:
P(k) = λke−λ
k! .(2.1)
The mean of the Poisson distribution is expressed as:
E(X) =
∞X
k=0
k λke−λ
k! =λ,(2.2)
– 3 –

and the variance of the Poisson distribution is equal to its mean,
Var(Nsat |M) =⟨N sat(M)⟩.(2.3)
The Poisson assumption is motivated by the interpretation of satellites as independent tracers
within an halo, arising from the superposition of independent merger events. Under this
assumption, the second factorial moment satisfies
⟨Nsat(Nsat −1)⟩=⟨N sat⟩2,(2.4)
whichdirectlycontrolstheamplitudeoftheone-halocontributiontoclustering, as⟨N sat(Nsat−
1)⟩directly connects to the number of satellites-satellites pairs. However, numerical simula-
tions and observational analyses have suggested that satellite occupation may deviate from
strict Poisson behaviour, particularly in regimes of high halo mass [29]. Sub-Poissonian or
super-Poissonian fluctuations can arise from halo assembly bias, tidal stripping, correlated
infall histories, or baryonic processes affecting satellite survival [38]. These effects lead to a
modified second moment of the occupation number⟨Nsat(Nsat −1)⟩ ̸=⟨N sat⟩2, and therefore
alter the small-scale clustering signal. Several extensions to the Poisson assumption have
been proposed in the literature, including binomial distribution or nearest-integer models, as
well as empirical rescaling of the satellite variance [29, 33, 43]. Detecting such deviations
is challenging, as their impact on two-point clustering statistics is relatively small and can
be degenerate with other HOD parameters. The use of high-order statistics like Count-in-
Cylinder (CIC) has more constraining power over the variance of the satellite distribution
and help to break these degeneracies [43]. In the following, we present an alternative way to
study the Poisson behaviour of satellite galaxy occupation.
3 Describing satellite occupation with the Conway–Maxwell–Poisson dis-
tribution
3.1 Conway–Maxwell–Poisson as a minimal extension
In this section, we present the Conway–Maxwell–Poisson (CMP; [44]) distribution as a min-
imal generalization of the Poisson model for satellite occupation. The CMP distribution
introduces a single dispersion parameterνthat controls deviations from Poisson behaviour
while preserving the discrete count nature of the occupation statistics:
P(N sat =k|λ, ν) = λk
(k!)νZ(λ, ν) .(3.1)
whereZ(λ, ν)is a normalisation constant defined as:
Z(λ, ν) =
∞X
j=0
λj
(j!)ν (3.2)
In this parametrisation the Poisson distribution is recovered whenν= 1. The additional
parameterνcontrols the dispersion of the distribution:
ν <1⇒super-Poissonian, ν >1⇒sub-Poissonian.
– 4 –

The mean and the variance of the CMP distribution are defined as:
E[X] =λ ∂
∂λ logZ(λ, ν)
Var(X) =λ ∂
∂λ E[X].
(3.3)
The normalizing constantZ(λ, ν)has no closed form but can be approximated numerically
by computing a the sum up to a large enough value ofjthat tails contribute negligibly. The
minimum number ofjiteration that ensure a convergence of the normalizing constantZ(λ, ν)
willdependonthevalueofλ, withhighernumberofiterationswithincreasingλ. Thereforewe
setthenumberofiterationsjdependingtothevalueofλ, withaminimumnumberofiteration
of 300. This ensure to always reach the convergence of the normalizing constantZ(λ, ν). This
scaling have been tested up toλ= 105, which is largely sufficient for⟨Nsat(M)⟩values. For
computational efficiency the probability mass function in Equation (3.1) is evaluated in log
space:
log(P(k|λ, ν) =klogλ−νlog(k!)−log(Z(λ, ν)),(3.4)
To evaluate thelog(Z(λ, ν))in a numerically stable way, we use the log–sum–exp identity:
log

X
j
ef(j,λ)

 =m+ log

X
j
ef(j,λ)−m

 ,
withm= max
j
f(j, λ), f(j, λ) =jlog(λ)−νlog(j!)
(3.5)
Factoring out the largest exponent ensures that all exponential terms satisfyef(j,λ)−m ≤1,
thereby preventing overflow and underflow in floating–point arithmetic. Once the probabil-
itiesP(k|λ, ν)are computed, the cumulative distribution function (CDF) is obtained by
taking the cumulative sum of the probability mass function up to a truncation valuemaxk.
The resulting CDF is then normalized by its final value to ensure that it ranges between 0
and 1. Random samples can subsequently be generated using inverse transform sampling by
drawing uniform random numbers in the interval[0,1]and mapping them to integer values
through the inverse CDF. The choice ofmaxk depends on the value ofλ, since the support
of the distribution broadens asλincreases. Similarly to the strategy used for evaluating the
normalization constant, we implement a scaling ofmaxk withλ, imposing a minimum value of
300. This scaling ensures thatmaxk is always large enough to capture the full support of the
distribution without truncating the cumulative probability. This design serves two purposes.
First, it guarantees that the CMP distribution can be sampled accurately for any value of
λwithout introducing truncation bias. Second, it reduces the number of iterations required
for smallλvalues compared to using a fixed large truncation limit, thereby significantly
improving the computational efficiency of the sampling procedure.
In the context of HOD, this parametrisation provides a direct way to test the Poisson
nature of satellite galaxy statistics. For a Poisson distribution, the mean number of satellites
⟨Nsat(M)⟩is preserved when drawing random realizations, since the expectation value satisfies
E(X) =λ. However, this property no longer holds for the CMP distribution. In that case,
the mean depends on bothλand the dispersion parameterν, and is given by the derivative of
the logarithm of the normalization constantZ(λ, ν)(see Equation (3.3)). As a consequence,
the parameterλcannot be directly interpreted as the mean number of satellites. Instead, the
– 5 –

expected value evolves withλthrough the behaviour of the normalization constantZ(λ, ν).
In order to preserve the physical interpretation of the HOD parameter⟨Nsat(M)⟩, one must
therefore determine the mapping between the target mean occupation and the corresponding
value ofλfor a givenν. In the following, we construct corrections that ensure the resulting
CMP distribution preserves the desired mean satellite occupation⟨Nsat(M)⟩.
3.2 Mean and variance scaling acrossλvalues
The primary analytical difficulty lies in the normalizing constantZ(λ, ν), which has no closed
form. As a consequence, the mean and variance must either be computed via infinite sum-
mation or approximated asymptotically. We developed different approximations depending
on the value ofλas the structure of the CMP distribution changes qualitatively depending
on its value:
➣Forλ <<1, small values ofk= 0,1,2...dominates the probability mass.
➣For largeλ, the distribution becomes sharply peaked around specific value ofkand
admits a saddle-point expansion.
3.3 Regime I: Smallλ
Forλ→0, the probability mass of the CMP distribution is concentrated almost on the first
few integersk= 0,1,2, . . .. Truncating the expansion at fourth order inλyields:
Z= 1 +λ+ λ2
2ν + λ3
6ν + λ4
24ν +O(λ 5).(3.6)
Using Equation (3.3) the mean and the variance can be approximate as:
E[X] =λ+λ 2 
21−ν −1

+λ 3
 3
6ν − 3
2ν + 1

+λ 4
 4
24ν − 4
6ν − 2
22ν + 4
2ν −1

+O(λ 5)
Var[X] =λ+λ 2 
22−ν −2

+O(λ 3).
(3.7)
The mean is evaluated up toO 4 as it provide non-negligible correction forλ∼0.1(see
Figure 1). At leading order for the case ofλ→0we get:
E[X]∼λ,Var(X)∼λ(3.8)
Hence, independently ofν, the CMP distribution is locally indistinguishable from a Poisson
distribution at sufficiently small value ofλ. To estimate theλthat leads to a mean of the
CMP distributionE=⟨N sat⟩one has to seek a power series given by:
λ=E+αE 2 +βE 3 +γE 4 +O(E 5).(3.9)
By substituting this power series with the expansion from Equation (3.7), the coefficients
can be obtained by matching powers ofµorder by order. This procedure yields the inverse
relation:
λ=E−AE 2 + (2A2 −B)E 3
+ (−5A3 + 5AB−C)E 4 +O(E 5)
(3.10)
– 6 –

where the coefficientsA, B, Cdepend come from the mean expansion in Equation (3.7):
A= 2 1−ν −1, B= 3
6ν − 3
2ν + 1,
C= 4
24ν − 4
6ν − 2
22ν + 4
2ν −1.
(3.11)
Using the above equations we can estimate the correct values the expectation parameter
λthat reproduces the excepted mean valueE=⟨N sat(M)⟩. This inversion is tested in
Figure 1. Usingλvalues from 0.001 to 10 we computed the expected mean value of the CMP
distribution from Equation (3.7). Then, we draw10 6 samples from the CMP distribution
using this aforementionedλvalue and compare to the targeted mean value for0.5< ν <2.
This approximation remains accurate at∼5%up toλ= 0.8for0.5< ν <2. For higherλ
values the mean of the CMP distribution starts to differ from the targetedλvalue. Therefore,
we limit the validity of this regime toλ <0.8.
3.4 Regime II: Largeλ
Forλ→ ∞, the dominant contributions arise from large value ofk. The sum of the CMP
normalisationZ(λ, ν)is dominated by the value ofkthat maximizes the individual term
λk/(k!)ν. The distribution becomes sharply peaked around a this specific value ofkand
all other contributions are exponentially suppressed. In this case previous mathematical
works [47] have demonstrated that the mean and variance of the CMP distribution can be
approximate for any values ofν >0by:
E[X] =λ 1/ν − ν−1
2ν + ν2 −1
24ν2 λ−1/ν +O(λ −1/ν),
Var(X) = λ1/ν
ν

1− ν2 −1
12ν2 λ−1/ν

+O(λ −2/ν).
(3.12)
Thus at leading order it yields:
E[X]∼λ 1/ν,Var(X)∼ λ1/ν
ν .(3.13)
Unlike the Poisson distribution, whereE[X] =λ, in the regimeλ→ ∞the mean of the
CMP distribution scales asλ1/ν. Even if this approximation remain valid for anyν >0, The
accuracy of this approximation depends of the couple values(λ, ν). Similarly to the smallλ
regime we test this approximation forλvalues from 0.1 to 10000. Given a target meanE[X],
one can invert Eq. (3.12) to estimate the corresponding CMP parameterλ:
λ=

λ+ (ν−1)
2ν
ν
(3.14)
Results of the test are shown in Figure 1. This approximation remains accurate at∼5%
up toλ >0.8for0.5< ν <2. Therefore, we set the lower limit for this approximation at
λ >0.8. These findings are similar to what was found in [47].
3.5 Global scaling behaviour
The asymptotic limits of the CMP distribution gives:
E[X]∼
(
λ, λ→0,
λ1/ν, λ→ ∞, (3.15)
– 7 –

Figure 1. Comparison betweenλvalues and the mean of the CMP distributionE λ→0 (left panel)
andE λ→∞ (right ) over a random sampling of size106. Each red lines show different values of the
parameter0.5< ν <2with a colour gradient from lighter to darker with increasingν. The blue
shaded regions represent the agreement within 5% between the two quantities and the grey shaded
regions show the region where the approximation is not correct any more.Left panel: The mean of
the CMP distributionEstarts to differ at more than 5% from the inputλvalue atλ >0.8. For
comparison grey dashed lines are similar to the red lines but using approximation to the second order
O(E2). In this case the deviation arise atλ∼0.1.Right panel: The mean of the CMP distribution
Estarts to differ at more than 5% from the inputλvalue atλ <0.8.
and
Var(X)
E[X] →
(
1, λ→0,
1/ν, λ→ ∞. (3.16)
The transition occurs atλ≈0.8. In the following we construct a continuous transition
between the small and large -λregimes. To smoothly switch between these two regimes we
construct a transition based on an error function:
E= (1−w)λ →0 +w λ →∞,
withw= 0.5
 λPoisson −0.8
0.2 −1
 (3.17)
whereλ →0 andλ →∞ are the expectation parameter for the two regimes from Equation (3.7)
and Equation (3.12)). The transition is centre at the limit of validity of the two regimes
with a smoothing scale of 0.2. The result of this continuous function for anyλvalues is
shown in Figure 2. This transition allows to recover the expected mean valueλfrom the
CMP distribution on all scales within5%for0.6< ν <2and within10%forν∼0.5.
The right panel of Figure 2 displays the variance of the CMP distribution compare to its
mean, showcasing the super-Poissonian behaviour atν <1and sub-Poissonian behaviour at
ν >1forλ >1. The deviation from Poissonity approaches a constant at high occupation,
implying that the CMP distribution modifies the amplitude of satellite pair counts in the
1-halo term without introducing a scale-dependent divergence at large halo mass. The CMP
model provides a minimal and controlled mechanism to quantify such effects through a single
– 8 –

Figure 2. Comparison betweenλvalues and the mean (left panel) and the variance (right panel) of
the CMP distribution over a random sampling of size106 for the combined asymptotic behaviours.
Each red lines show different values of the parameter0.5< ν <2with a colour gradient from lighter
to darker with increasingν.Left panel:The blue shaded regions represent the agreement within 5%
between the two quantities. The mean of the CMP distributionEalmost agrees with the inputλ
value at within the 5% region across all scales. At the transition scaleλ= 0.8, the mean of the CMP
distribution differs at most to 20% forν= 0.5which is the lower limit allowed forν.Right panel:
The variance of the CMP distribution follows a Poisson behaviour at smallλvalues and starts to
deviation to Poisson atλ0.1.ν <1behaves as super-poission andν >1sub-poisson.
parameterν. Thus, fittingνin addition to the standard HOD parameters that control
the mean occupation⟨N sat(M)⟩provides a quantitative and minimal test of the Poisson
hypothesis within the HOD framework.
4 Impact of the CMP distribution on HOD galaxy mocks
4.1 Impact on mocks and occupation numbers
In this section we implement the CMP distribution into the HOD frameworkHODDIES1 [48] to
evaluate the impact of the CMP on the galaxy catalogue generation and galaxy clustering. To
perform these tests we rely on theAbacusSummitN-body simulations [49] to generate the
mock catalogues. Specifically we use the snapshot at redshift z=1.1 from thebasesimulation
box of size 2 Gpc/hwith 69123 particles. This simulation is based on a Planck 2018ΛCDM
cosmology [50] withh= 0.6736, A s = 2.0830×10 −9, ns = 0.9649, ωcdm = 0.12, ωb = 0.02237
andσ 8 = 0.8079.
The HOD model used for this test is the standard HOD (SHOD) –the most common
HOD functional– that uses a step function to describe central occupation and a power law
to describe the satellite mean number [26]. This model describe galaxy samples selected by
luminosity or stellar mass, where⟨Nc(Mh)⟩is described by a smooth step function eventually
1https://hoddies.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
– 9 –

reaching 1 for large-mass halo [24, 28, 51, 52]:
⟨Nc (Mh)⟩= Ac
2

1 + erf
log10(Mh)−log 10(Mc)
σ

,
⟨Nsat(Mh)⟩=A s
 Mh −M 0
M1
α
· ⟨Nc (Mh)⟩,
(4.1)
where the parametersM c characterize the minimum halo mass to host a central galaxy,σ
describes the steepness of the transition from 0 to 1 in the number of central galaxies and
Ac modulates the amplitude of the distribution accounting for incomplete galaxy population.
⟨Nc(Mh)⟩must be at maximum one as only one galaxy can be at the centre of one halo, which
set the upper bound ofAc to one.A s defines the amplitude of the satellite distribution,M0 is
a cut-off halo mass below which no satellite galaxy can be present,αis the power law index
that controls the variation in satellite richness with increasing halo mass, andM1 is the mass
at which 1 satellite is expected per halo ifAs = 1andM 0 ≪M 1. For testing purposes, we
fixed all HOD parameters and only vary the parameterνof the CMP distribution to mimic
a luminous red galaxy (LRG) sample of density7·10−4 [Mpc/h]3 with a fraction of satellites
of∼15%. The HOD parameter are:A c = 0.88,M c = 12.75,σ= 0.5,A s = 0.88,M 0 = 12.5,
M1 = 13.5,α= 1. All the masses are express inlog 10(M⊙/h). At the end, 16 mocks are
created with increasingνvalue from 0.5 to 2 with a step of 0.1.
The first sanity check is to validate the scaling withνdescribed in Section 3.5. The
left panel of Figure 3 shows the mean number of satellite galaxies per halo (hosting at least
one satellite) in red, relative to the Poisson case. The blue curve in the left panel shows
the variance of the satellite counts as a function ofν, exhibiting the expected behaviour:
the variance increases forν <1(super-Poisson regime) and decreases forν >1(sub-Poisson
regime). Thevariationinthemeannumberofsatellitesreachesupto±5%(representedbythe
grey region), which remains acceptable within the context of HOD modelling. This variation
can be understood from the fact that most halos satisfy⟨Nsat(Mh)⟩<1, placing them in
the regime where the CMP distribution is highly asymmetric (i.e.λ→0). In this regime, a
larger variance (corresponding to lowerν) increases the probability of drawing higher satellite
counts (e.g.N sat = 2,3,4), which in turn raises the total number of satellites in the mock
catalogue. Conversely, higher values ofνsuppress these high-occupancy tails, leading to a
smaller satellite count. The middle panel of Figure 3 presents the distribution of the number
of halos hostingNsat satellite galaxies for three representative values ofν= [0.5,1,1.5]. This
provides a complementary visualization of the same effect, showing broader satellite count
distributions for lowerνand narrower distributions for higherν. Finally, we compare the
meannumberofsatelliteperhalosandvarianceofthesatelliteoccupationasafunctionofhalo
mass. We consider the ratio between the variance and the mean number of satellites, which
directly quantifies deviations from the Poisson expectation. Satellite galaxies are grouped
into halo mass bins defined using 10 quantiles, ensuring an equal number of satellites per bin.
As expected, the variance is higher than the mean forν <1and lower forν >1relative
to the Poisson case (shown in black), with deviations increasing toward higher halo masses.
This behaviour arises because the deviation of the CMP distribution from the Poisson case
becomes more pronounced at largeλ(see Figure 2), while⟨N sat⟩increases with halo mass.
Such trends have also been observed in hydrodynamical simulations. For example, [29] (see
their Figure 2) use the ratio of variance to mean to highlight departures from Poisson statistics
for both star-forming and luminous red galaxy samples, particularly at high halo masses. In
– 10 –

this context, our results demonstrate that the CMP parametrisation provides a simple and
flexible framework to capture and quantify such deviations in galaxy samples.
Figure 3.Left panel:Ratio of the mean (red line) number of satellites per halo hosting at least one
satellite galaxy and its variance (blue line) in the mocks, relative to the Poisson caseν= 1, shown as a
function of the CMP dispersion parameterν. The grey band represents a±5%variation with respect
to the Poissonian case (dashed black line). The mean number of satellites varies by up to±5%, with
larger satellite counts forν <1and smaller counts forν >1. The variance of the satellite distribution
behaves as expected, decreasing asνincreases.Middle panel:Number of halos as a function of the
number of satellite galaxies per halos for three cases:ν= 0.5,ν= 1(Poisson), andν= 2. The CMP
distribution produces broader satellite count distributions forν <1and narrower distributions for
ν >1compared to the Poisson case.Right panel:Ratio of the variance and the mean of the number
of satellite galaxies in bins of halo masses. Bins are divided in 10 quantiles to have the same number
of satellite galaxies per halo mass bin. The Poisson case, Var(Nsat)/⟨Nsat⟩= 1, is represented in black
and other lines show the mocks with differentνvalues with the colour gradient from lighter to darker
with increasingν.
4.2 Implications on clustering statistics
4.2.1 2-point correlation function
Once the galaxy catalogues are created, we compute the clustering using the two-point cor-
relation 2 function (2PCF). We first define the galaxy two-point correlation function in two
dimensions,ξ(r p, π), whereπandr p are the galaxy pair separation components along and
perpendicular to the line-of-sight, respectively. We then introduce the projected correla-
tion function,w p(rp), obtained by integratingξ(r p, π)over the line-of-sight, as well as the
monopole and quadrupole of the two point correlation functionξ(s, µ), wheresis the galaxy
pair separation andµthe cosine of the angle between the line-of-sight and galaxy separation
vector:
wp(rp) =
Z πmax
πmin
ξ(rp, π)dπ
ξl(s) = 2l+ 1
2
Z 1
−1
ξ(s, µ)Pl(µ)dµ
(4.2)
wherel= [0,2]andP l(µ)is the Legendre polynomial of orderl. We rely on the DESI
implementation of the Corrfunc [53] package,pycorr 2, to computeξ(r p, π)andξ(s, µ).
2https://github.com/cosmodesi/pycorr
– 11 –

Figure 4.Top panels:Clustering measurements of the projected correlation functionw p (left), the
monopole (middle) and quadrupole (right) from the mocks with different values ofνwith a colour
gradientfromlightertodarkerwithincreasingν.Bottom panels:Ratiooftheclusteringresultsrelative
to the Poisson caseν= 1. Small scales (1 -halo term) are impacted by the CMP dispersion parameter
νshowing an increase(decrease) of clustering power for larger(smaller) variance (lower(higher)ν).
For mock catalogues which are obtained from cubic boxes, the 2PCF is computed using the
natural estimator [54]DD/RR−1which compares galaxy pair counts to the expected pair
count for a uniform distribution in the box volume. For our test we use 25 logarithmic bins in
rp between 0.01 and 30 Mpc/hand 80 linear bins inπbetween -40 and 40 Mpc/hto compute
ξ(rp, π),. The same binning and range are used forwp(rp)so thatπ max =−π min = 40 Mpc/h
in Equation (4.2). For the 2PCF multipoles, we use 25 logarithmic bins insbetween 0.1 and
30 Mpc/hand 101 linear bins inµbetween -1 and 1.
The correlation function of the different mocks are displayed in Section 4.2.1. The upper
panels shows the clustering measurements of the projected correlation functionwp (left), the
monopoleξ 0(middle) and quadrupoleξ 2(right) at different values ofν. Changing the CMP
dispersion parameterνonly impact the one-halo term at small scales as the mean number
of satellites is conserved, and therefore the linear bias of the galaxy sample remain the same.
A larger variance increases the probability of high-occupancy satellite realizations, thereby
enhancing the one-halo contribution, as shown in Figure 3. The impact of the PDF variance
has a stronger impact on the projected clustering, compare to the monopole and quadrupole.
Similar behaviour has been found in former studies of the satellite PDF variance [33, 43].
However a smaller but similar trend is still present in the monopole and quadrupole with an
increase (resp. decrease) of clustering power when variance is larger (resp. smaller) (smaller
(resp. larger)ν)) compare to the Poisson case. This trend is expected to be significant as
current spectroscopic survey (like DESI or 4MOST) can perform high precision small scale
clustering measurement [24, 32].
The above findings are expected form the halo model [55, 56], as the 1-halo term depends
– 12 –

explicitly on the first and second moments of the satellite distribution:
P 1h
gg (k) = 1
¯n2g
Z
dM n(M)
h
2⟨NcNsat⟩u(k|M) +⟨N sat(Nsat −1)⟩|u(k|M)| 2
i
,(4.3)
wheren(M)describe the halo mass function,¯ng is the galaxy density,u(k|M)represent the
normalized Fourier transform of the halo profile. The quantity governing satellite clustering
is the second factorial moment⟨Nsat(Nsat −1)⟩with is the Poisson assumption is equal to
⟨Nsat⟩2. For the CMP distribution, the small-λregime behave as the Poisson distribution but
in the large-λregime, the asymptotic behaviour isVar(Nsat)≈ ⟨Nsat⟩
ν (see Section 3.5). For a
any count distribution,⟨Nsat(Nsat −1)⟩can be written as a function of the variance as:
⟨N(N−1)⟩= Var(N) +⟨N⟩ 2 − ⟨N⟩.(4.4)
Using the asymptotic regime for large-λ(Equation (3.16)) gives:
⟨Nsat(Nsat −1)⟩ ≈ ⟨N sat⟩2 +⟨N sat⟩
1
ν −1

.(4.5)
leading to a modification of the⟨Nsat(Nsat −1)⟩compare to the Poisson case that depend on
ν, modifying the number of satellite–satellite galaxy pairs that contributes to the one-halo
term in the clustering signal.
4.2.2 Galaxy bispectrum
Current cosmological analyses now include three-point statistics in their fiducial clustering
analysis (e.g. upcoming DESI DR2 and Euclid DR1 analysis). The three-point correlation
functionor thebispectrum inFourier space, ispowerfultoextractingcosmological information
on a given galaxy distribution, which complements that from the two-point statistics. The
modelling of small scale galaxy physics can lead to modification of the observe three point
signal. Therefore, in the following we quantify the impact of the satellite occupation variance
on the galaxy bispectrum to assess how much it can change the bispectrum onkrange used
for cosmological analysis. To compute the galaxy bispectrum we use the implementation
of the Sugiyama estimator [45] injaxpower3. This estimator uses a decomposition of the
bispectrum into the a tri-polar spherical harmonic [57] to distinguish the anisotropic signal
induced by the redshift space distortions (RSD;[58]) or Alcock-Paczynski effects (AP;[59])
from the isotropic signal. The bispectrumB(k1,k 2, ˆn)as function of two wavevectorsk1,k 2
and the line-of-sight vectorˆnin the under the local plane-parallel approximation is given as:
B(k 1,k 2, ˆn) =
X
ℓ1,ℓ2,L
Bℓ1ℓ2L (k1, k2)S ℓ1ℓ2L

ˆk1, ˆk2, ˆn

,(4.6)
assumingparitysymmetryconditionthatrestrictsℓ 1+ℓ2+Ltoevennumbers.S ℓ1ℓ2L

ˆk1, ˆk2, ˆn

is the tripolar spherical harmonics basis [57] define as:
Sℓ1ℓ2L

ˆk1, ˆk2, ˆn

= 1
Hℓ1ℓ2L
X
m1m2M
 ℓ1 ℓ2 L
m1 m2 M

ym1
ℓ1

ˆk1

ym2
ℓ2

ˆk2

yM
L (ˆn).(4.7)
3https://github.com/adematti/jax-power/tree/main/jaxpower
– 13 –

where coefficientsHare defined in terms of Wigner3−jsymbols asH ℓ1ℓ2L =
 ℓ1 ℓ2 L
0 0 0

andy m
ℓ =
q
4π
2ℓ+1 Y m
ℓ are the reduced spherical harmonics. The multipole coefficients of the
bispectrum are given by:
Bℓ1ℓ2L (k1, k2) =N ℓ1ℓ2LHℓ1ℓ2L
X
m1m2M
 ℓ1 ℓ2 L
m1 m2 M

×
Z d2ˆk1
4π
d2ˆk2
4π
d2ˆn
4π ym1∗
ℓ1

ˆk1

ym2∗
ℓ2

ˆk2

yM ∗
L (ˆn)B(k 1,k 2, ˆn)
(4.8)
with the prefactorNℓ1ℓ2L = (2ℓ1 + 1) (2ℓ2 + 1) (2L+ 1). The multipole indexLcharacterizes
the anisotropy of the bispectra along the LOS direction induced by the RSD or AP effect.B000
andB 202 are the dominant monopole (L= 0) and quadrupole (L= 2) moments, respectively,
and are expected to yield the largest signal-to-noise ratio [45].
Similarly to the previous section we computed the bispectrum multipolesB000 andB 202
for our 16 mocks with varyingν∈[0.5,2]. We use 20 bins linearly space within a range of
k∈[0,0.3][h/Mpc]witha400sizemeshgrid. TheresultsareshowninFigure5. Interestingly,
the bispectrum does not show strong variation when varying the CMP dispersion parameter
ν. We observe a2%variation on the monopoleB 000 are observed atk max = 0.3which
is smaller compare to what we can expected from data errors. For the quadrupoleB 202,
measurements from mocks are nosier but the overall trend is similar to the monopole with
only small variation withνand the expected data errors are also expected to be larger. Thus,
the bispectrum seems to be robust again the change of Poisson assumption forkmax <0.3
and therefore we do not expect strong biases on cosmological constrains. However, a detailed
analysis has to be done to investigate more on the impact of non Poisson satellite distribution
on cosmological constrain using the bispectrum, and would be the purpose of a future work.
4.2.3 Count-in-cylinders
Count-in-cylinders (CIC; [46]) statistics are sensitive to higher-order clustering and therefore
provide a powerful complement to the two-point correlation function. The CIC statistic is
defined as the probability distribution of the number of companion galaxies found within
cylinders of radiusRC and lengthL C centred on galaxies. As such, it probes the local galaxy
environment and is particularly sensitive to variations in the variance of the satellite occupa-
tion. Unlike two-point statistics, the CIC explicitly depends on the galaxy number density,
since the number of companions within a fixed volume scales with the underlying density
field. Recently, CIC statistics have been used to constrain HOD parameters and evidenced
positive sign of assembly bias in low redshift galaxy sample from SDSS and DESI [60, 61].
In the following we investigate the impact of the satellite occupation variance on the
CIC statistic. The number of galaxy counts enclosed in a cylinderNCIC is performed using
cylinders of radiusRC = 2and lengthL C = 10centred on each galaxy of our sample, similarly
to previous work from [60, 61]. We also exclude self-counting allowingNCIC = 0. Then, the
CIC distributionP(N CIC)is evaluated in linear bins ofN CIC between -0.5 and 10.5. The
results are presented in Figure 6. The number counts of cylinderP(NCIC)as a function of
the number of galaxy counts enclosed in a cylinderNCIC is display in the left panel for mocks
with differentνvalues. The right panel shows the relative difference between allP(N CIC)
and the Poisson caseP(N CIC,P)(ν= 1). The CIC distribution shows a higher number of
cylinder with higher galaxy counts and oppositely, a smaller number of cylinder with lower
– 14 –

Figure 5.Top panels:Bispectrum measurements of the the monopoleB 000 (left) and quadrupole
B202 (right) from the mocks with different values ofν. The colour gradient indicate the value of
increasingνfrom lighter to darker.Bottom panels:Ratio of the clustering results relative to the
Poisson caseν= 1. The impact of the CMP dispersion parameterνshowing is small (<2%) up to
kmax = 0.3.
galaxy counts when the variance of the satellite occupation is larger (ν <1) compare to the
Poisson case. This is expected and consistent with the results using the 2PCF. However, the
impact of the satellite PDF variance is stronger for CIC statistic compare to the 2PCF, with
variation up to30%relative to the Poisson case. This highlight the sensitivity of CIC to the
higher-order moments of the galaxy distribution and to test deviations from Poisson statistics
in satellite populations. This highlights the sensitivity of the CIC statistic to higher-order
moments of the galaxy distribution, showing its ability to probe deviations from Poisson
satellite statistics.
5 Conclusion
This work presents the Conway–Maxwell–Poisson (CMP) distribution as a minimal and flexi-
ble generalization of the Poisson distribution within the Halo Occupation Distribution (HOD)
framework. The CMP distribution introduces a single additional parameter, the dispersion
parameterν, which allows to control the variation between sub-Poisson (ν >1) and super-
Poisson (ν <1) regimes. One limitation of the CMP distribution is the numerical estimation
of the normalizing constantZ(λ, ν)(Equation (3.2)) which has no closed form. We design a
scale dependent way to numerically computeZ(λ, ν)that ensure to reach the convergence for
any value ofλand0.5< ν <2. In contrast to the Poisson distribution, the mean of the CMP
distributionE CMP is not equal to its expectation parameterλCMP (Equation (3.3)), which
– 15 –

Figure 6.Left panel:Number counts of cylinderP(N CIC)as a function of the number of galaxy
counts enclosed in a cylinderNCIC up to 10.Right panel:Ratio between allP(N CIC)and the Poisson
caseP(N CIC,P)(ν= 1). Different values ofνare represented with a colour gradient from lighter to
darker with increasingν.
complicates its direct use in HOD modelling where the mean satellite occupation⟨Nsat(M)⟩
must be preserved. To overcome this, we derive analytical approximations that allow us to
invert the CMP mean and recover the value ofλcorresponding to a target mean occupation.
We show that the CMP distribution exhibits distinct behaviours depending on the value ofλ.
In the small-λregime (Section 3.3), we derive a series expansion up toO(λ4), which extends
the validity of this approximation up toλ≲0.8with∼5%accuracy for0.5< ν <2. In
the large-λregime (Section 3.4), we adopt asymptotic expansions from previous work [47],
which are accurate at the∼5%level forλ≳0.8over the same range ofν. We then construct
a smooth interpolation between these regimes (Section 3.5), resulting in a continuous and
accurate mapping betweenλand⟨N sat(M)⟩. Overall, this provides an efficient and robust
method to control the variance of the satellite occupation while preserving its mean. We
find that deviations from Poisson behaviour become significant forλ≳0.1, with the variance
asymptotically scaling asVar(N)∼ ⟨N⟩/νat largeλ.
In the second part of this work, we implement the CMP distribution within theHODDIES
code [48] and construct mock galaxy catalogues to quantify the impact of non-Poisson satel-
lite statistics on galaxy occupation and clustering observables. In Section 2, we first validate
our implementation by examining how the satellite population varies with the dispersion pa-
rameterν. We find that the mean number of satellites varies by at most±5%as a function
ofν, consistent with expectations from the asymmetry of the CMP distribution at lowλ.
As expected, the variance of the satellite occupation increases forν <1(super-Poisson) and
decreases forν >1(sub-Poisson). This behaviour leads to a broader (narrower) distribution
of satellite counts in halos forν <1(ν >1). We also observe that these deviations become
more pronounced with increasing halo mass, reflecting the stronger departure from Poisson
statistics at largerλ. Similar mass-dependent deviations have been reported in hydrodynam-
ical simulations [29], highlighting the relevance of the CMP framework for modelling realistic
galaxy populations. Variations in the satellite occupation distribution directly impact small-
scale clustering. In particular, broader satellite distributions enhance the one-halo term of the
– 16 –

correlation function, leading to an increase in clustering amplitude at scalesrp ≲1h −1Mpc.
In Section 4.2, we quantify these effects by measuring the monopoleξ0, quadrupoleξ 2, and
projected correlation functionw p. We find that deviations from Poisson statistics lead to
relative differences of up to∼10%inw p and∼5%inξ 0 andξ 2 at small scales. While
moderate, these effects can be significant compare to the precision of current observational
datasets. We further investigated the impact ofνon bispectrum measurements using the
Sugiyama basis [45]. We found bispectrum measurements to be robust against the change
of Poisson assumption for satellite occupation with a small trend, less than2%, on the bis-
pectrum monopole up tokmax = 0.3. These variations are expected to be smaller than one
could expect from the bispectrum data errors at these scales and should not bias cosmolog-
ical analysis. However a detailed analysis should be conduct to confirm this statement and
would be part of a future work. Finally, we investigate counts-in-cylinders (CIC) statistics
as a complementary probe of small-scale clustering and higher-order moments of the galaxy
distribution. Unlike two-point statistics, CIC directly probe the local galaxy environment
and are particularly sensitive to variations in the variance of the satellite occupation. We find
that CIC statistics exhibit larger deviations from the Poisson case, with differences reaching
up to∼30%. This highlights their strong potential for constraining non-Poisson satellite
statistics. This results are overall similar to the one reported in [43]. In addition, recently
proposed higher-order statistics such as galaxy multiplets [62] offer promising new avenues
to probe these effects, as they are expected to be highly sensitive to deviations from Poisson
behaviour.
Overall, our results demonstrate that the CMP parametrisation provides a robust and
efficient framework to probe deviations from Poisson satellite statistics in galaxy surveys. It
offers a direct and minimally extended way to test the Poisson assumption within the HOD
framework using current and upcoming datasets. As cosmological analyses reach increasing
precision, incorporating such extensions will be essential to control systematic uncertainties
associated with the galaxy–halo connection. Future work will focus on constraining the CMP
parameterνusing observational data from DESI, exploring its dependence on galaxy prop-
erties and halo environment, and assessing the impact of non-Poisson satellite statistics on
higher-order clustering observables and cosmological parameter inference.
Acknowledgments
AR thanks Rafaela Gsponer, Charles Dalang and Shengyu HE for useful discussions and
constructive comment on this manuscript. AR acknowledge support from the Swiss Na-
tional Science Foundation (SNF) “Cosmology with 3D Maps of the Universe” research grant
200020_207379.
References
[1] B. Abareshi, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, D.M. Alexander, R. Alfarsy et al.,Overview of the
Instrumentation for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument,The Astronomical Journal164
(2022) 207.
[2] R.S. de Jong, O. Agertz, A.A. Berbel, J. Aird, D.A. Alexander, A. Amarsi et al.,4MOST:
Project overview and information for the First Call for Proposals,The Messenger175(2019) 3.
[3] R. Laureijs, J. Amiaux, S. Arduini, J.-L. Auguères, J. Brinchmann, R. Cole et al.,Euclid
Definition Study Report, (2011), 10.48550/arXiv.1110.3193.
– 17 –

[4] Z. Ivezic, S.M. Kahn, J.A. Tyson, B. Abel, E. Acosta, R. Allsman et al.,LSST: from Science
Drivers to Reference Design and Anticipated Data Products,The Astrophysical Journal873
(2019) 111.
[5] D. Collaboration, A.G. Adame, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, D.M. Alexander et al.,DESI
2024 II: Sample Definitions, Characteristics, and Two-point Clustering Statistics,Journal of
Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics2025(2025) 017.
[6] D. Collaboration, A.G. Adame, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, D.M. Alexander et al.,DESI
2024 III: Baryon Acoustic Oscillations from Galaxies and Quasars,Journal of Cosmology and
Astroparticle Physics2025(2025) 012.
[7] D. Collaboration, M. Abdul-Karim, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, L. Allen et al.,DESI DR2
Results II: Measurements of Baryon Acoustic Oscillations and Cosmological Constraints,
Physical Review D112(2025) 083515.
[8] A.G. Adame, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, D.M. Alexander, M. Alvarez et al.,DESI 2024 V:
Full-Shape Galaxy Clustering from Galaxies and Quasars,Journal of Cosmology and
Astroparticle Physics2025(2025) 008.
[9] G. Cabass, M.M. Ivanov, M. Lewandowski, M. Mirbabayi and M. Simonović,Snowmass White
Paper: Effective Field Theories in Cosmology, (2022), 10.48550/arXiv.2203.08232.
[10] L. Senatore,Bias in the Effective Field Theory of Large Scale Structures,Journal of Cosmology
and Astroparticle Physics2015(2015) 007.
[11] S.D.M. White and M.J. Rees,Core condensation in heavy halos: a two-stage theory for galaxy
formation and clustering.,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society183(1978) 341.
[12] N. Findlay, S. Nadathur, W.J. Percival, A.d. Mattia, P. Zarrouk, H. Gil-Marín et al.,Exploring
HOD-dependent systematics for the DESI 2024 Full-Shape galaxy clustering analysis,Journal
of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics2025(2025) 007.
[13] C. Garcia-Quintero, J. Mena-Fernández, A. Rocher, S. Yuan, B. Hadzhiyska, O. Alves et al.,
HOD-Dependent Systematics in Emission Line Galaxies for the DESI 2024 BAO analysis,
Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics2025(2025) 132.
[14] R.H. Wechsler and J.L. Tinker,The Connection between Galaxies and their Dark Matter Halos,
Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics56(2018) 435.
[15] S. Cole, C.G. Lacey, C.M. Baugh and C.S. Frenk,Hierarchical galaxy formation,Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society319(2000) 168.
[16] C.M. Baugh,A primer on hierarchical galaxy formation: the semi-analytical approach,Reports
on Progress in Physics69(2006) 3101.
[17] B.P. Moster, T. Naab and S.D.M. White,Galactic star formation and accretion histories from
matching galaxies to dark matter haloes,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
428(2013) 3121.
[18] P. Behroozi, R. Wechsler, A. Hearin and C. Conroy,UniverseMachine: The Correlation
between Galaxy Growth and Dark Matter Halo Assembly from z=0-10,Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society488(2019) 3143.
[19] A.V. Kravtsov, A.A. Berlind, R.H. Wechsler, A.A. Klypin, S. Gottlöber, B. Allgood et al.,The
Dark Side of the Halo Occupation Distribution,The Astrophysical Journal609(2004) 35.
[20] A. Tasitsiomi, A.V. Kravtsov, R.H. Wechsler and J.R. Primack,Modeling Galaxy-Mass
Correlations in Dissipationless Simulations,The Astrophysical Journal614(2004) 533.
[21] A. Vale and J.P. Ostriker,The non-parametric model for linking galaxy luminosity with
halo/subhalo mass,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society371(2006) 1173.
– 18 –

[22] C. Conroy, R.H. Wechsler and A.V. Kravtsov,Modeling Luminosity-dependent Galaxy
Clustering through Cosmic Time,The Astrophysical Journal647(2006) 201.
[23] G. Favole, J. Comparat, F. Prada, G. Yepes, E. Jullo, A. Niemiec et al.,Clustering properties
of g-selected galaxies at z 0.8,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society461(2016)
3421.
[24] S. Yuan, H. Zhang, A.J. Ross, J. Donald-McCann, B. Hadzhiyska, R.H. Wechsler et al.,The
DESI One-Percent Survey: Exploring the Halo Occupation Distribution of Luminous Red
Galaxies and Quasi-Stellar Objects with AbacusSummit, (2023), 10.48550/arXiv.2306.06314.
[25] A.A. Berlind and D.H. Weinberg,The Halo Occupation Distribution: Towards an Empirical
Determination of the Relation Between Galaxies and Mass,The Astrophysical Journal575
(2002) 587.
[26] Z. Zheng, A.A. Berlind, D.H. Weinberg, A.J. Benson, C.M. Baugh, S. Cole et al.,Theoretical
Models of the Halo Occupation Distribution: Separating Central and Satellite Galaxies,The
Astrophysical Journal633(2005) 791.
[27] Z. Zheng, A.L. Coil and I. Zehavi,Galaxy Evolution from Halo Occupation Distribution
Modeling of DEEP2 and SDSS Galaxy Clustering,The Astrophysical Journal667(2007) 760.
[28] I. Zehavi, Z. Zheng, D.H. Weinberg, M.R. Blanton, N.A. Bahcall, A.A. Berlind et al.,Galaxy
Clustering in the Completed SDSS Redshift Survey: The Dependence on Color and Luminosity,
The Astrophysical Journal736(2011) 59.
[29] B. Hadzhiyska, D. Eisenstein, L. Hernquist, R. Pakmor, S. Bose, A.M. Delgado et al.,The
MillenniumTNG Project: an improved two-halo model for the galaxy–halo connection of red
and blue galaxies,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society524(2023) 2507.
[30] J.E. Geach, D. Sobral, R.C. Hickox, D.A. Wake, I. Smail, P.N. Best et al.,The clustering of hα
emitters atz= 2.23from HiZELS: Clustering of HAEs atz= 2.23,Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society426(2012) 679.
[31] V. Gonzalez-Perez, J. Comparat, P. Norberg, C.M. Baugh, S. Contreras, C. Lacey et al.,The
host dark matter haloes of [O II] emitters at 0.5 < z < 1.5,Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society474(2018) 4024.
[32] A. Rocher, V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, E. Burtin, S. Yuan, A. de Mattia, A.J. Ross et al.,The DESI
One-Percent survey: exploring the Halo Occupation Distribution of Emission Line Galaxies
with AbacusSummit simulations,Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics2023(2023)
016.
[33] S. Avila, V. Gonzalez-Perez, F.G. Mohammad, A.d. Mattia, C. Zhao, A. Raichoor et al.,The
Completed SDSS-IV extended Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey: exploring the Halo
Occupation Distribution model for Emission Line Galaxies,Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society499(2020) 5486.
[34] J.F. Navarro, C.S. Frenk and S.D.M. White,A Universal Density Profile from Hierarchical
Clustering,The Astrophysical Journal490(1997) 493.
[35] M. Boylan-Kolchin, V. Springel, S.D.M. White, A. Jenkins and G. Lemson,Resolving cosmic
structure formation with the Millennium-II Simulation,Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society398(2009) 1150.
[36] F. Jiang and F.C. Van Den Bosch,Statistics of dark matter substructure – III. Halo-to-halo
variance,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society472(2017) 657.
[37] D. Nelson, V. Springel, A. Pillepich, V. Rodriguez-Gomez, P. Torrey, S. Genel et al.,The
IllustrisTNG Simulations: Public Data Release, (2021), 10.48550/arXiv.1812.05609.
[38] J. Chaves-Montero, R.E. Angulo and S. Contreras,The galaxy formation origin of the lensing
is low problem,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society521(2023) 937.
– 19 –

[39] A. Chudaykin, M.M. Ivanov and O.H.E. Philcox,Reanalyzing DESI DR1: 2. Constraints on
Dark Energy, Spatial Curvature, and Neutrino Masses, (2025), 10.48550/arXiv.2511.20757.
[40] G. D’Amico, Y. Donath, M. Lewandowski, L. Senatore and P. Zhang,The BOSS bispectrum
analysis at one loop from the Effective Field Theory of Large-Scale Structure,Journal of
Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics2024(2024) 059.
[41] Z. Lu, T. Simon and P. Zhang,Preference for evolving dark energy in light of the galaxy
bispectrum, (2025), 10.48550/arXiv.2503.04602.
[42] E. Jiménez, S. Contreras, N. Padilla, I. Zehavi, C.M. Baugh and V. Gonzalez-Perez,Extensions
to the halo occupation distribution model for more accurate clustering predictions,Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society490(2019) 3532.
[43] B. Vos-Ginés, S. Avila, V. Gonzalez-Perez and G. Yepes,Improving and extending
non-Poissonian distributions for satellite galaxies sampling in HOD: applications to eBOSS
ELGs, (2023), 10.48550/arXiv.2310.18189.
[44]R. W. Conway and W. L. Maxwell, “A Queuing Model with State Dependent Service Rates,”
Journal of Industrial Engineering, Vol. 12, 1962, pp. 132-136. - References - Scientific
Research Publishing, .
[45] N.S. Sugiyama, S. Saito, F. Beutler and H.-J. Seo,A complete FFT-based decomposition
formalism for the redshift-space bispectrum,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
484(2019) 364.
[46] B.A. Reid and D.N. Spergel,Constraining the LRG Halo Occupation Distribution using
Counts-in-Cylinders,The Astrophysical Journal698(2009) 143.
[47] R.E. Gaunt, S. Iyengar, A.B. Olde Daalhuis and B. Simsek,An asymptotic expansion for the
normalizing constant of the Conway–Maxwell–Poisson distribution,Annals of the Institute of
Statistical Mathematics71(2019) 163.
[48] A. Rocher,HODDIES: Dressing up halos with galaxies – a efficient hod code for stage-iv
cosmological surveys,Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics(in prep.) .
[49] N.A. Maksimova, L.H. Garrison, D.J. Eisenstein, B. Hadzhiyska, S. Bose and
T.P. Satterthwaite,AbacusSummit: A Massive Set of High-Accuracy, High-Resolution
$N$-Body Simulations,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society508(2021) 4017.
[50] P. Collaboration, N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi et al.,
Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters,Astronomy & Astrophysics641(2020) A6.
[51] S. Contreras, C. Baugh, P. Norberg and N. Padilla,How robust are predictions of galaxy
clustering?,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society432(2013) 2717.
[52] A. Smith, E. Burtin, J. Hou, R. Neveux, A.J. Ross, S. Alam et al.,The completed SDSS-IV
extended Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey: N-body mock challenge for the quasar
sample,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society499(2020) 269.
[53] M. Sinha and L.H. Garrison,Corrfunc — A Suite of Blazing Fast Correlation Functions on the
CPU,Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society491(2020) 3022.
[54]Peebles Hauser 1974 - Recherche Google, .
[55] M. Asgari, A.J. Mead and C. Heymans,The halo model for cosmology: a pedagogical review,
The Open Journal of Astrophysics6(2023) 10.21105/astro.2303.08752.
[56] U. Seljak,Analytic model for galaxy and dark matter clustering,Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society318(2000) 203.
[57] D.A. Varshalovich, A.N. Moskalev and V.K. Khersonskii,Quantum Theory of Angular
Momentum(Jan., 1988), 10.1142/0270.
– 20 –

[58] N. Kaiser,Clustering in real space and in redshift space,Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society227(1987) 1.
[59] C. Alcock and B. Paczynski,An evolution free test for non-zero cosmological constant,Nature
281(1979) 358.
[60] K. Wang, Y.-Y. Mao, A.R. Zentner, H. Guo, J.U. Lange, F.C. van den Bosch et al.,Evidence
of galaxy assembly bias in SDSS DR7 galaxy samples from count statistics,Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society516(2022) 4003.
[61] A.N. Pearl, A.R. Zentner, J.A. Newman, R. Bezanson, K. Wang, J. Moustakas et al.,The
DESI One-Percent Survey: Evidence for Assembly Bias from Low-Redshift Counts-in-Cylinders
Measurements, (2023), 10.48550/arXiv.2309.08675.
[62] H. Wang, D.J. Eisenstein, J.N. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, D. Bianchi, D. Brooks et al.,
Galaxy-Multiplet Clustering from DESI DR2, (2025), 10.48550/arXiv.2511.15354.
– 21 –