Title: Fast and Flexible Characterisation of Astronomical Light Curves Using Multi-Time Attention
Authors: Yash Gondhalekar, Anais Möller, Paula Sánchez-Sáez
Published: 2026-05-22
Categories: astro-ph.IM, astro-ph.GA

MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026) Preprint 26 May 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.3
Fast and Flexible Characterisation of Astronomical Light Curves Using
Multi-Time Attention
Y. Gondhalekar,1★ A. Möller,2 and P. Sánchez-Sáez3
1Department of Physics & Astronomy, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
2Centre for Astrophysics and Supercomputing, Swinburne University of Technology, John St, Hawthorn, VIC 3122, Australia
3European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-Str. 2, 85748 Garching bei München, Germany
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
We present an unsupervised, data-driven framework for rapid characterisation of astronomical photometric time series using
a Multi-Time Attention Network. The model learns time-aware latent representations directly from irregular, partial light
curves without heavy preprocessing. Through application on ZTF alert data retrieved with Fink, a community alert broker
for Rubin LSST, we demonstrate that the model: (i) produces accurate interpolations with small bias (0.01 mag) and scatter
(0.1 mag) even for sparse light curves, (ii) learns a temporally distributed latent space correlating with physically meaningful
properties(duration,peaktime,variability,color)whilebeingrobusttounimportantpropertiessuchasobservedmagnitudeand
number of observations, (iii) separates general SN and AGN samples despite data being heavily dominated by AGNs, and (iv)
generalises to unseen classes: The long-period variable and TDE show good interpolation and sensible latent space placement;
however, the model cannot capture RRLyrae’s∼0.4-0.5 day pulsation period, which is far below our model’s chosen two-day
temporal resolution. Attention map analysis reveals the capability of multi-time attention to capture local structure. The model
is extremely lightweight (a few hundred kilobytes) and has fast inference (∼0.01 and∼3×10−4 s per light curve on CPU and
GPU, respectively) that is independent of the number of observations, unlike GP regression. Our approach offers flexible and
scalablecharacterisation,withhighrelevanceintheRubinLSSTera.Wediscussfuturepossibilitiestoincorporateobservational
uncertainties and symmetries for robustness and forecasting applications for real-time follow-up.
Key words:methods: data analysis – methods:observational – supernovae:general – galaxies: active
1 INTRODUCTION
New wide-field astronomical surveys such as the Vera C. Rubin Ob-
servatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST Ivezić et al.
2019) and the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope’s High-latitude
Time Domain Survey (Rose et al. 2021) will transform our under-
standing of transient physics. LSST alone will detect≳106 super-
novae(SNe)annually,whichisroughly100×morethanfromcurrent
surveys combined (Bellm et al. 2019; Chambers et al. 2016; Tonry
et al. 2018; Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016) and orders of magnitude
morethancurrentlargesttypeIaSNsamples(Mölleretal.2022;DES
Collaboration et al. 2024; Möller et al. 2024; Rigault et al. 2025).
LSST’s immense type Ia SN sample will help improve cosmolog-
ical constraints (Graziani et al. 2020; Vincenzi et al. 2024), while
two orders of magnitude more superluminous SNe and tidal disrup-
tion events (TDEs) will challenge our understanding of their energy
sourcesandphysicalproperties(Villaretal.2018;Scovacricchietal.
2016; Bricman & Gomboc 2020). Additionally, tens of millions of
AGNs,anorderofmagnitudemorethanexistingsamples,willprobe
variabilityfromminutetoyeartimescalesandhelpbetterunderstand
their central engines (Ivezić et al. 2019).
Photometric classification is essential as follow-up spectroscopy
★ E-mail: yash.gondhalekar.25@ucl.ac.uk
willbefeasibleforonlyatinyfraction(≲1%)ofthedetectionsfrom
largesurveysduetolimitedtelescoperesources.Severalphotometric
classificationmethodshavebeendeveloped,rangingfromthoseusing
hand-curated features based on prior astrophysical knowledge (e.g.,
D’Isanto et al. 2016; Mistry et al. 2024), extracting features through
fitting parametric models to light curves (e.g., Möller et al. 2016;
Villar et al. 2019; Sánchez-Sáez et al. 2021a; de Soto et al. 2024b;
Leoni et al. 2022) or related template-fitting methods (e.g., Sako
et al. 2011, 2018), physical modelling (e.g., Guillochon et al. 2018;
Llamas Lanza et al. 2026), using host galaxy photometry for more
rapid follow-ups (e.g., Kisley et al. 2023) or combining it with light
curve data (e.g., Gagliano et al. 2023), to non-parametric feature
extraction methods using principal component analysis (e.g., Ishida
& de Souza 2013), Gaussian process (GP) regression (e.g., Boone
2019) along with wavelet decomposition (e.g., Lochner et al. 2016;
Alves et al. 2022).
However, these methods face some limitations. Curating hand-
engineered features is time-consuming and biased by our physical
understanding of transient phenomena, which may not be optimal
for complex subtype classification (e.g., Table 5 of Sánchez-Sáez
et al. 2021a; Möller & de Boissière 2020) or for identifying anoma-
lous events (Pruzhinskaya et al. 2026). Although model parameters
are generally interpretable, parametric models suffer from computa-
tionalexpense,thepossibilityofparameterdegeneracies(Villaretal.
©2026 The Authors
arXiv:2605.24095v1  [astro-ph.IM]  22 May 2026

2Gondhalekar et al.
2019;Möller&deBoissière2020),andmodelmisspecificationrisks
for poorly understood transients or require class-dependent fits. GP
regression, though popular for modeling astronomical light curves
(Aigrain&Foreman-Mackey2023),suffersfromhighcomputational
costandsensitivitytothechoiceofcovariancefunction,withnouni-
versal guidance for handling diverse transient types while keeping
low computational costs (see also section 5.5 of Boone 2019)1.
These limitations motivate the choice of data-driven approaches
using deep neural networks that learn ‘latent’ features from light
curves (see also Demianenko et al. 2023). Several such approaches
have been proposed (e.g., Charnock & Moss 2017; Muthukrishna
et al. 2019; Pasquet et al. 2019; Möller & de Boissière 2020; Boone
2021; Sánchez-Sáez et al. 2021b; Fraga et al. 2024), including those
aiming to forecast future photometric behavior based on a few ob-
servations for optimising the follow-up strategy (Sravan et al. 2020)
or those using a combination of image data, alert photometry, and
host information (Sheng et al. 2024). Attention-based architectures
have shown particular promise (e.g., Pimentel et al. 2023; Allam &
McEwen 2024). For example, Pimentel et al. (2023) demonstrated
especially beneficial for classification using a few observations on
real SNe data compared to traditional machine classifiers based on
random forest or recurrent neural networks.
We present an unsupervised approach using the Multi-Time At-
tentionNetwork(mTANNarayanShukla&Marlin2021a),whichis
basedontimeattentionandageneralisationofdiscretepositionalen-
codingintransformermodelstocontinuous-time.mTANcanhandle
irregularlyspacedvaluesintimeandbandwithoutanypreprocessing
formissingvalues,andwhileitcanbeincorporatedinanydeepneu-
ralnetwork,hereitisusedinanencoder-decoderarchitecture:itcan
serve as a feature learner–low-dimensional representations of light
curves–with the advantage that these representations directly repre-
senttime,orasagenerativemodel.mTANsharesconceptualconnec-
tionswiththetemporalmodulationapproachintroducedinPimentel
et al. (2023) to learn continuous-time representations. However, our
approach is structurally simpler: we directly compute attention over
the learned time embeddings, whereas they learn a temporal mod-
ulation using Fourier decomposition before attention, which offers
more interpretability at the cost of additional computation.
This paper focuses on whether mTAN learns physically inter-
pretable latent features from light curves, which is an important
precursortoanyclassificationmethod.Theselearnedfeaturescanbe
particularlyvaluableforhandlingthecomplexityoftransientclassifi-
cationarisingduetosubstantialoverlapamongdifferentclasses(e.g.,
see Figure 19 of Villar et al. 2017) or even a debatable definition of
classes themselves, like for SN IIP vs IIL. Another advantage is the
added flexibility of combining our approach with any metric-based
classificationmethod.Ourdataconsistsoflightcurvesbasedonreal
detections rather than on simulations to avoid making assumptions
about transient population diversity. Only the observed photometric
time series is used without auxiliary information about redshift or
otherpropertiesofhosts.Thispaperisstructuredasfollows.Section
2.1.1 describes the data collection and quality filtering, Section 2.2
provides theoretical details of the mTAN approach, our proposed
modification, and training details. Section 3 presents our evalua-
tion of the model, which includes testing generalisation to variable
starsandfast-evolvingtransientsabsentduringtraining(Section3.8)
and an interpretability test to better understand our model’s learning
1 Faster linear-time variants of GP with physically motivated covariance
function have been proposed (e.g., Foreman-Mackey et al. 2017); however,
these generally assume one-dimensional settings.
mechanism(Section3.6).Section4summarisesourfindingsandpo-
tentialforfuturework,followedbyconcludingremarksinSection5.
2 METHODS
Section 2.1 describes details of the data set used, including the
data collection (Section 2.1.1) and quality filtering of alerts (Sec-
tion 2.1.2). Section 2.2 with theoretical details of the mTAN in
Section 2.2.1, details of its integration with the encoder-decoder
framework in Section 2.2.2, details of our methodological modifica-
tion to the original mTAN in Section 2.2.3, and training details in
Section 2.2.4.
2.1 Data set preparation
2.1.1 Data collection
WepollpublicalertsfromtheZwickyTransientFacility(ZTF;Bellm
et al. 2019) survey from 1st July 2021 to December 31st 2022 (1.5
years) using the Fink broker, a community alert broker designed for
time-domain science with Rubin LSST (Möller et al. 2021). ZTF
alert data is based on difference imaging for measuring variations
in flux and point-spread function photometry. We use the PSF-fit
magnitudes (magpsf) and time of observation (jd) for𝑔and𝑟bands
of alerts, but ignore uncertainties on magnitudes and do not correct
for Milky Way or host extinction. Each alert contains a history of
photometrymeasurementsforthelast30days,whichallowsbuilding
light curves using multiple alerts from the same object. The typical
cadence of ZTF light curves is around two days.
We restrict our data collection to three types of alerts: (1) those
with confirmed Transient Name Server (TNS) classifications of any
SNe type: Type Ia and its subtypes (Ia-91T-like, Ia-91bg-like, Ia-
CSM, Ia-pec, Iax/02cx-like), Types Ib and its subtypes (Ib-Ca-rich,
Ib-pec,Ibn,Ib/c),Icanditssubtypes(Ic-BL,Ic-pec,Icn),TypeIIand
theirsubclasses(II-pec,IIP,IIL,IIn,IIn-pec,IIb),andsuperluminous
SN (SLSN-I, SLSN-II) (2) those flagged as an early supernova Ia
candidatethroughtheclassifierwithinFink(Leonietal.2022;Möller
et al. 2025), and (3) those with Milliquas (version 8 Flesch 2023)
classificationsofthefollowingActiveGalacticNuclei(AGN)types:
QSO(“Q”-type classes), type-I Seyfert (class “A”-type classes), BL
Lac(class“B”-typeclasses),andtype-IISeyfert(class“N”-or“K”-
typeclasses)–forthispurpose,theSIMBADlabelsfoundinFinkare
crossmatched with the Milliquas database within 1′′2. Alerts in (1)
are dominated by type Ia SNe (56%) and type II SNe (33%), and
alertsin(2)aredominatedbyQSO(72%)andtype-ISeyferts(20%).
Asourapproachisunsupervisedinnature,wedonotperformany
further data curation to handle class imbalance, and we do not use
supplementary information such as redshift. However, the class in-
formationisusefulforanalyzingourresults,andthus,forsimplicity,
wefocusonlyontheabovethreeclassesinsteadofallpossibletypes,
even though our model can be applied to any type of light curve.
2.1.2 Quality filtering
Toincreasethequalityofthesamplephotometry,onlyalertspassing
the following basic selection cuts are considered: real-bogus quality
score > 0.65, number of bad pixels in a5×5pixel region = 0, a
Full Width at Half Maximum≤5, elongation≤1.2, and absolute
2 1621 alerts did not have a corresponding Milliquas match, so we set their
class as ‘Unknown’.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN3
101 102
⟨L⟩
0
100
200
300
400
500Duration (days)
AGN
SN
Early SN Ia
0
1500
3000
0
800
Figure 1.Distribution of duration (difference between the latest and earliest
time of observation in days) and no. of observations, averaged across the
𝑔and𝑟bands for all polled light curves, separated by three coarse types:
SN, early SN Ia candidate, and AGN (see main text for included subtypes).
The Early SN Ia candidates are denoted by gray-colored crosses situated
near the bottom-left. The 1D histograms on top and bottom axes show the
marginaldistributionsoftheaverageno.ofobservationsandaverageduration,
respectively, where the y-axis shows the counts. A Gaussian kernel density
estimate is overlaid on the histograms for visualisation purposes.
value of difference magnitude≤0.1. Light curves are constructed
by time-ordering the set of alerts that pass these criteria. As light
curves with very few data points can not constrain the temporal
evolution of transients effectively, and thus make evaluation of our
model uninformative, we remove those that have fewer than three
observations in either the𝑔or the𝑟band. Finally, we remove two
other types of light curves: (a) those with object IDs starting with
“ZTF18”andhavingoneoftheTNSSNetype,becauseFinkreceived
datafromNovember2019onwardsfromZTF,somosttransientswith
ZTF18 designations would no longer generate alerts by then, except
in rare cases; indeed, most of them showed flat light curves, and
(b) those whose visual inspection showed multiple detections at the
sametime–atleasttensuchcasesarefound,botharisingduetoissues
with template images used for difference imaging. Apart from these
simple selection criteria, we donotperform any additional model-
oriented preprocessing, such as interpolating using GP regression,
projecting observations on an even grid, or grouping closely spaced
observations in time in order to ensure the evaluation of the model
remains transparent for less-than-ideal situations.
The above quality filter criteria result in 15,652 (51,367) light
curves corresponding to 437,935 (568,176) alerts, where values in-
sidebracketsshowstatisticsbeforeapplyingthefiltercriteria.Ofthe
15,652 light curves, 1389 have one of the SN classes, 10 are early
SN Ia candidates, and the rest have one of the AGN classes. Thus,
our dataset is biased towards AGN light curves.
Figure 1 shows a comparison of the number of observations and
thedurationoflightcurves.MostSNlightcurvesspanlessthanthree
months, whereas most AGNs span more than three months, with a
significant number that span more than a year, which is expected
due to the nature of the variations of SNe and AGNs. Early SN
Ia candidates lie at the lower-left end of the plot, around the same
location as SN.
In principle, SN and AGN classes can be linearly separated with
goodaccuracybasedonasimplecutontheduration(and,optionally,
thenumberofobservations),asAGNstendtohavelongerdurations.
However,thereareatleasttwochallengeswiththissimpleapproach.
First, this observed pattern would be unclear had the alerts been
polled for only a few consecutive months, i.e., there is a contribu-
tion of selection effect due to the time range for which the alerts
are polled. Second, this approach would misclassify rare yet astro-
physically important transients that do not follow the general trend
of that class of transients: for example, SLSN and certain subtypes
of SN II are expected to be long-lived but would get misclassified
as AGN type. Third, the stochastic nature of AGN variability and
the need for a5𝜎detection to trigger a ZTF alert can make AGN
light curves appear transient-like when there is flaring activity or
evenwhenthevariabilityamplitudesarelow,andsucheventsarenot
unusual in AGNs (Sánchez-Sáez et al. 2021b). Thus, we motivate
theuseofageneralisableandunsupervisedapproach–representation
learning–for characterising light curves in our dataset.
2.2 Approach
2.2.1 The Multi-Time Attention Network: mTAN
WeusetheMulti-TimeAttentionNetwork(mTAN)approach,which
is based on time attention (Narayan Shukla & Marlin 2021a). It
learns time embeddings without concatenating them with the input,
butbylearningtoattendtoobservationsatdifferenttimesusingtem-
poral similarity that is calculated from data, that is, without using
fixed similarity kernels like those used in traditional GP regression
or neural network interpolators with fixed kernel definitions (e.g.,
Narayan Shukla & Marlin 2019). The guiding mechanism for atten-
tion in mTAN is time embeddings of the query and the key, which
arelearnedduringtraining.AttentioninmTANisdirectlycomputed
overonlyobserveddatapoints,soitdoesnotrequireanypreprocess-
ingorimputationtohandlemissingdata.Sincedifferentlightcurves
may have different numbers of observed data points, computations
are parallelized by masking unobserved data points.
ThemTANcomputationstartswithlearningcontinuous-timeem-
beddings through𝐻embedding functions (or heads),𝜙 ℎ (𝑡), each
of which outputs a representation of size𝑑 𝑒. Embedding func-
tions are defined using a combination of periodic terms:𝜙ℎ (𝑡) [𝑖]=
sin(𝜔 𝑖ℎ ·𝑡+𝛼 𝑖ℎ )for0< 𝑖 < 𝑑 𝑒, and a linear term for the first
dimension(𝑖=0):𝜔 0ℎ ·𝑡+𝛼 0ℎ.These(continuous)timeembedding
functions can be viewed as a generalisation of the (discrete) posi-
tional encodings in transformer networks. These time embedding
functions are implemented using a one-layer fully connected layer
followed by a sine function non-linearity. The expressivity of the
resulting embeddings lies in the fact that time is expressed by learn-
ing𝑑 𝑒 frequencies and phase shifts of sinusoids for each embedding
function.
The mTAN takes in a query time,𝑡, and the observed light curve
(where the keys are the observed times and the values are the ob-
served magnitudes, for instance), and outputs an embedding vector
of dimension𝐽at the query time𝑡. Each dimension𝑗(𝑗 < 𝐽) of this
mTANembeddingisobtainedinbroadlytwosteps.First,continuous-
timefunctions,ˆ𝑥ℎ𝑑 (𝑡,s),areobtainedforeachdimensionofthetime
series,𝑑,andtimeembedding,ℎ,bylearninganinterpolationkernel:
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

4Gondhalekar et al.
ˆ𝑥ℎ𝑑 (𝑡,s)=
𝐿𝑑∑︁
𝑜=1
𝜅ℎ (𝑡, 𝑡 𝑜𝑑 )𝑥 𝑜𝑑 (1)
where𝑥 𝑜𝑑 and𝑡 𝑜𝑑 denotetheobservedvaluesandtimes,respectively,
for dimension𝑑, and𝜅 ℎ (𝑡, 𝑡 𝑜𝑑 )denotes the attention weights. Here,
s=(t,x)={(t 1,x 1), ...,(t N,x N)}is the set of observed times,tn,
and observed data (i.e., magnitudes),xn. The specific form of the
kernel,𝜅 ℎ (𝑡, 𝑡 𝑜𝑑 ),isasoftmaxfunctionwithitsactivationdefinedby
ascaledinnerproductofthetimeembeddingsoftheobservedtimes
and the time embeddings of the query time,𝑡; thus, the similarity
kernel depends only on the time embedding, which is learned from
dataitself.Second,dimension𝑗ofthemTANembeddingisobtained
using a linear combination of continuous time functions:
mTAN(𝑡,s) [𝑗]=
𝐻∑︁
ℎ=1
𝐷∑︁
𝑑=1
ˆ𝑥ℎ𝑑 (𝑡,s) ·𝑈 ℎ𝑑 𝑗 (2)
where𝑈denotes the linear combination weights learned by the
model; it is worth noting that𝑈does not depend on the input light
curve but is learned globally across the training dataset and is fixed
during inference. Such a formulation allows each dimension of the
timeseries(i.e.,differentbandsofalightcurve)tousedifferenttime
embeddings, but also allows information from different dimensions
to be shared in the resulting mTAN embedding. Moreover, mTAN
embeddings can be calculated for any continuous query time.
The flexibility of mTAN lies in the fact that time embeddings
are learnt in a data-driven manner rather than being fixed, which
allows for expressing complex kernel functions (Narayan Shukla &
Marlin2021a).Anotheraspectofflexibilityisthatthenon-lineartime
embeddingintroducedbythesinefunctionsmeansthatthequeryand
key time points are not necessarily required to be close together in
timetogethighattentionweights(NarayanShukla&Marlin2021b).
Since the mTAN outputs a continuous function of𝑡(due to the
sine non-linearity), it can be useful to discretize its outputs onto a
predefined set of reference time points,r=[𝑟 1, 𝑟2, ..., 𝑟 𝐾 ], which
may be uniformly spaced but are not required to be. The mTAN
canthenbe interfacedwithneuralnetworkssuch asrecurrentneural
networks. The discretized mTAN (or mTAND, for short) then takes
in a set of reference time points,r, along with the observed time
series and applies mTAN𝐾times, each time using𝑟𝑘 as the query
time point (𝑘=1to𝐾); note that the outputs at the𝐾query times
arecomputedparallelyinsteadofsequentially.Thus,mTANDlearns
representations of dimensions𝐾×𝐽for each observed light curve.
An important aspect of these learned representations is that the
notion of time is included in them, and thus, they encode data’s
temporal structure in a meaningful manner. This is in contrast to
several approaches based on self-supervised learning that use con-
trastive pretext tasks, for example, (see, e.g., Fraikin et al. 2023, for
an exception).
In principle, mTAND can be incorporated into classification ar-
chitecturesandcanbefollowedbyanyneuralnetworktoextractaux-
iliary information from the regularly spaced latent representations
produced by mTAND. In this work, we focus only on light curve
representation and follow the mTAN paper by using mTAND in the
encoder and the decoder of a Variational Autoencoder (VAE)-like
framework and interfacing the outputs of mTAND with a bidirec-
tional gated recurrent unit (GRU). The mTAN framework focuses
more on capturing local structure, while the additional GRU com-
ponent captures global structure in the light curve (Narayan Shukla
& Marlin 2021a), which in general has proven more effective than
purely attention-based architectures (Tan et al. 2025).
2.2.2 The encoder-decoder framework
Figure 2 provides an overview of the mTAND module and its role
within the overall encoder-decoder framework used in this paper.
First, define a set of latent states at𝐾reference time points:z=
[z1,z 2, ...,z 𝐾 ]whereeachz 𝑘 canbesampledfrom𝑃(z 𝑘)=N (0, 𝐼),
𝐼being the identity matrix (a multivariate standard normal distribu-
tion).TheencoderconsistsofthemTANDmoduledescribedabove,
which outputs representations evaluated at the𝐾reference points,
followed by a bidirectional GRU with a single recurrent layer. The
outputsoftheGRUarepassedthroughasetoffullyconnectedlayers
toreturnthemeanandthevariancethatareusedtoconstructaGaus-
sian distribution overzwith diagonal covariance. This distribution,
q𝛾 (z|r,s), is the one that is expected to make the observed data
likely when sampled from and input to the decoder component.
Here,𝑁is the number of training examples, and𝛾denotes the
parameters of the encoder model. Note that each𝑡𝑛 and𝑥 𝑛 in the
tuple(t n,x n)further comprises of the observed times and data, re-
spectively,foreachofthedimensions,𝑑,ofthelightcurve;however,
we do not explicitly mention it for ease of notation.
The structure of the decoder is the opposite of that of the encoder
described above. The latent states sampled fromq𝛾 are first passed
through a GRU decoder, and the resulting output, along with the
observedtimesasthequery(intheencoder,theobservedtimesacted
asthekey),arepassedtothemTANDmoduletoreturnasequenceof
embeddings of length equal to the number of observed time points.
Theseembeddingsarepassedthroughasetoffullyconnectedlayers,
which are then used to parameterize the output distribution, also a
Gaussian distribution with diagonal covariance, with mean given by
the decoded light curve and a fixed variance.
Let us call this output probability distribution𝑝𝜃 (x|z,t)where
𝜃denotes the parameters of the decoder model. During training,
the goal is to increase this probability, i.e., gradually improve the
model’s ability to explain the training data. As is the case for VAEs,
in practice, while optimising this probability, we also need to pull
q𝛾 (z|r,s)closer to the prior distribution,𝑝(z), which regularises
the encoder. Thus, the loss function is as follows:
L (𝜃, 𝛾)=
𝑁∑︁
𝑛=1
1Í
𝑑 𝐿𝑑𝑛
 
E𝑞𝛾 (z|r,s 𝑛 )

log𝑝 𝜃 (x𝑛 |z,t 𝑛)

−𝛽KL 𝐷KL
 𝑞𝛾 (z|r,s 𝑛) ∥𝑝(z) 
!
,(3)
where
𝐷KL
 𝑞𝛾 (z|r,s 𝑛) ∥𝑝(z)  =
𝐾∑︁
𝑘=1
𝐷KL
 𝑞𝛾 (z𝑘 |r,s 𝑛) ∥𝑝(z 𝑖) (4)
log𝑝 𝜃 (x𝑛 |z,t 𝑛)=
𝐷∑︁
𝑑=1
𝐿𝑑𝑛∑︁
𝑙=1
log𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥𝑙𝑑𝑛 |z, 𝑡 𝑙𝑑𝑛 )(5)
where𝐿 𝑑𝑛 is the number of observed data points for dimension𝑑
of the𝑛 𝑡 ℎ training example,𝐷 KL denotes the Kullback-Leibler di-
vergence,and𝛽 KL isahyperparametertocontroltheweightgivento
theKLterm.WhilethetraditionalapproachoftrainingaVAEmaxi-
mizestheevidencelowerbound,theabovelossfunctionnormalises 3
the ELBO using𝐿𝑑𝑛 to prevent prioritising light curves with more
3 This normalisation is performed as in the original mTAN paper. However,
KLisaregulariseronthelatentspace,andthus,abetternormalisationwould
be to not normalise the KL divergence term by the number of observations.
In our case,|z|is not constant, unlike the original mTAN paper, but de-
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN5
ATT
t = 0 t = Δr
Linear
Linear
...
h1 hk...
ATT ATT ATT...
t = 2Δr t = tlast
How many linear layers are there?
Does nth linear layer only consider outputs from nth ref point?
Find answers by printing shapes in model forward pass.
Deep Neural 
Network  (e.g., GRU)
Linear
...
Stress in the figure that K is not 
constant but dependent on the 
light curve…write in caption if 
not on figure…mTAND (Section 2.2.1)
Input: Reference times, r (|r| = K)
Output: Embeddings (K × J)
q𝛾(z1|r1,s) q𝛾(z2|r2,s) q𝛾(zK|rK,s)...
Latent state
Deep Neural 
Network  (e.g., GRU)
mTAND
mTAND
Input: Observed times, t
Output: Embeddings (|t|× J’)
Linear
Encoder
Decoder
(Section 2.2.2)
(Section 2.2.3)
}
Figure 2.ArchitectureofmTANDanditsintegrationintotheencoder-decoderframework.Themodeltakesanirregularlysampledlightcurvedirectlyasinput.
ATTdenotes an attention block implementing Equation 2.2.1, and the linear combination following it (Equation 2.2.1) produces the mTAN embedding. Unlike
the original mTAN approach, the length,𝐾, of the reference times is not fixed but dependent on the input light curve.
observations4. As this loss function does not use information about
labels (the type of transient), the training of mTAN in such a setting
is unsupervised in nature (see, Narayan Shukla & Marlin 2021a,
for demonstration of using mTAN for supervised learning using an
additional classification module).
Although the VAE-based framework described above can have
otherusesduringinference(suchasgeneratingnewsamplesoflight
curves using only the decoder and sampling from a standard nor-
mal prior), in this paper, we focus on studying the characteristics
of encoded representations and interpolation (encoding followed by
decoding of light curves).
2.2.3 Modification to mTAN
The original mTAN approach dealt with time series datasets span-
ning a given duration of time with observations for each datum
starting at the same time. Our astronomical transient light curves
peak at different times, evolve on widely different time scales, and
are sampled differently. As a result, using a predefined fixed num-
ber of (equally-spaced) reference points based on the minimum and
maximumobservedtimeacrosstrainingdata(asusedintheoriginal
paper) is not optimal; this is because those would capture the tem-
poral evolution of long-duration light curves (say, those evolving for
a year) adequately well but would be too coarse for shorter-duration
transients (say, those evolving over only several days).
pends on the light curve duration. Hence, future work would include a better
normalisation scheme that appropriately normalises, say, based on duration.
4 Given the imbalance in the total duration of light curves in our data (see
Figure 1), we tried normalising the contribution of ELBO based on both,
the number of observations and light curve duration; however, we did not
find improved validation performance during training and so did not use this
approach.
As light curves of arbitrary durations can be present during train-
ing or inference, we modify the calculation of reference times by
insteadfixingthetimeintervalbetweenadjacentreferencetimes(Δ𝑟
or‘temporalresolution’)andallowingthenumberofreferencepoints
to vary for each light curve depending on its time span or duration.
Weuseatemporalresolutionoftwodays,whichisroughlybasedon
thecadenceofZTFlightcurvesusedinthiswork.Thepresenceofa
differentnumberofreferencetimepointsfordifferentlightcurvesin
a batch is handled by masking for parallel computation. This modi-
ficationoffixingthetimespacingbetweenadjacentreferencepoints
rather than the number of reference points still allows a straightfor-
ward comparison of the temporal dynamics of any two light curves,
irrespectiveoftheirduration,becausetheywouldhavethesameref-
erencetimes.Thisaspectiscrucialasourgoalistocharacteriselight
curves but also to compare those evolving over vastly different time
scales.
2.2.4 Training
Our code is a modification of the open-source implementation of
mTAN5 and can be found here6. Hyperparameter values are taken
fromtheoriginalmTANpaper.Thetimeembeddingdimension𝑑 𝑒 =
128, the number of embedding functions𝐻=1(we tried using two
heads, but it showed slightly worse validation performance during
training), and𝐷=4(which is twice the number of dimensions of
light curves since we have𝑔and𝑟bands; the ‘two times’ arises
because the model is used in a VAE-like setup which outputs mean
andvariance).ThehiddensizeoftheGRUencoder,𝐽=64,andthat
oftheGRUdecoderis50,andweusealatentdimensionattheoutput
5 https://github.com/reml-lab/mTAN
6 https://github.com/Yash-10/astro-mtan
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

6Gondhalekar et al.
oftheencoder(aftertheGRU)oftwo,sinceourlightcurveshavetwo
bands, but we note that the original mTAN paper used much larger
values for realistic datasets.
SinceweuseresolutionΔ𝑟=2daysasmentionedinSection2.2.3,
the number of reference points𝐾is not fixed across the dataset, in
general, but caters itself to the duration of individual light curves7.
To handle variable lengths of queries, masking is used to ignore
irrelevantqueriesforagivenlightcurve,similartoattentionmasking
used to ignore unobserved data.
64%ofthelightcurvesarerandomlychosen(withoutusingtypes)
for training, 16% for validation, and the remaining 20% for testing–
out of the 15,652 light curves obtained after quality filtering de-
scribed in Section 2.1.2, this results in 10,016 for training, 2505 for
validation, and 3131 for testing. Because our data is biased towards
longerdurationlightcurves(seeFigure1),asemi-randomtruncation
augmentation is introduced during training to increase the represen-
tativeness of shorter duration light curves: a random percentage of
observations to sample is selected between 30% and 70% followed
by randomly selecting a starting observation and then selecting con-
tinuous subsequent observations as observed in the original light
curve. This augmentation is applied with 50% probability and the
semi-randomness arises because it is only applied to light curves
having at least ten observations in each band to prevent extremely
sparse light curves.8
The light curves are normalised using the following normalisa-
tion scheme. The observed times in the training, validation, and
testing dataset splits are normalised based on the minimum and
maximum time across the training set using the min-max scheme
( 𝑡−𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑡)
𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑡) −𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑡) ); before that, we shift the observed times of all
light curves to start at zero, since the absolute times are not rele-
vant for our purposes. The observed (apparent) magnitudes are nor-
malised based on the peak magnitude of the individual light curves
( mag−𝑚𝑖𝑛(mag)
2.5 ), where𝑚𝑖𝑛(mag)is the peak magnitude across
the𝑔and𝑟bands and the scaling factor makes it equivalent to the
logarithm of peak flux divided by any observed flux in the light
curve. Such a ‘global’ and ‘local’ normalisation of times and mag-
nitudes, respectively, allows the model to focus on light curve shape
and evolution trends in magnitude and time, while ignoring appar-
ent brightness. This approach makes the model less susceptible to
capturingredshiftsinceitensuresthatthemodeldoesnotlearnvery
differentlatentrepresentationsfortransientsshowingsimilartempo-
ral evolution, irrespective of their observed magnitudes.
The Adam optimiser is used for optimising the training with a
learning rate of1×10 −4 for both the encoder and the decoder and
default momentum parameters:𝛽 1 =0.9and𝛽 2 =0.99. A batch
size of 8 is used. Training is performed for 300 epochs. The model
is validated on a separate validation dataset at each epoch, and the
model with the smallest mean squared error between the observed
andpredictedlightcurveissaved;thishappensatthe298thepoch.To
7 The modifications described in Section 2.2.3 subsume the approach of
using fixed𝐾when all light curves have equal or almost equal durations in
the dataset.
8 Note that random truncation introduces examples with a lesser number of
observed data pointsandsmaller duration, but does not add examples with
onlysmallduration.Althoughdensertemporalsamplingislessfrequenteven
whenusingouraugmentationandfurtherincreasesthe‘heavy-tailed-ness’of
the marginal distribution of the number of observations in Figure 1, the nor-
malisationofthelossfunctionbythenumberofobservations(Equation2.2.2)
ensures that the augmentation does not introduce additional data bias while
stillvirtuallybalancingthepresenceofshort-andlong-durationlightcurves.
avoid the common problem of vanishing KL term, a monotonic KL
annealingscheduleisusedwherein𝛽 KL issettozeroforthefirstten
epochs and is gradually increased to approach𝛽KL =1during sub-
sequent epochs. Also, five samples from the distribution𝑞𝛾 (z|r,s 𝑛)
areusedtocomputethelossfunctiondefinedinSection2.2.2during
training, whereas a single sample is used for validation and testing.
The common reparameterization trick that enables optimisation us-
ing stochastic gradient methods is used to compute gradients. The
fixed variance used for parametrizing the decoder’s output distribu-
tion is set to0.012.
The model size of the encoder and decoder networks is roughly
340 KB and 250 KB, respectively, and is thus lightweight.
3 RESULTS
We evaluate the model on the test set. We first test the (a) decoding
of our model to observed light curves (Section 3.1), and (b) two-
dimensionalvisualisationoflatentspaceandcheckingforqualitative
correlationswithbasicpropertiesoflightcurvesandnon-correlations
with non-physical/trivial properties (Sections. 3.2.
We then check whether the SN and AGN light curves are repre-
sented in different areas in a UMAP and if there are correlations
with observed light-curve properties in Section 3.3). In Sections 3.4
and 3.5westudythesecorrelationsmoreindetailforSNandAGN,
respectively.
Followingthesetests,wevisualisethelearnedattentionweightsto
interpretthemodel’slearningmechanism(Section3.6),thenperform
a brief comparison of our model with GP regression (Section 3.7),
including execution time during inference, and finally showcase ap-
plication to variable stars and TDEs that the model wasnottrained
on (Section 3.8).
3.1 Light curve decoding
The mTAND’s decoder models the output Gaussian distribution,
𝑝 𝜃 (x|z,t), with its mean given by the decoded light curve, which
corresponds to an interpolation over the observed light curve. Here,
westudyhowwellthesedecodedlightcurvesreproducetheobserved
light curves from the test set. Before discussing the results, we note
that because we do not account for observational uncertainties, our
interpolations are implicitly overconfident.
Figure 3 shows that the mTAN model can accurately reproduce a
wide variety of SN and AGN light curves not seen during training.
In particular, the model residuals for all light curve observations
acrossthetestsethaveasmallbias,mean∼0.01mag,andasmall,in
absoluteterms,dispersionof∼0.1mag.Moreover,theinterpolations
remaingoodevenforsparselightcurveswithfewobservations(first
row rightmost, second row leftmost), which is not unexpected as
the model does not strongly use information about the number of
observations (Appendix A).
The middle example in the third row shows an example where
the general behaviour is not captured well, for which we do not
have a clear explanation – these might indicate problems with the
encoding, decoding, or both steps. For the last three examples, the
general behaviour is captured, but short-time-scale features (e.g.,
flare around the 300-day mark for ZTF19abgfgzy) are inadequately
captured.
More discussion of subclass-specific light curve features of tran-
sients is presented in Section 3.3.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN7
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
17
18
19 m
g: RMSE = 0.10
r: RMSE = 0.07
ZTF19aasszjp - QSO
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
g: RMSE = 0.07
r: RMSE = 0.07
ZTF18abkuccd - AGN
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
16
17
18 m
g: RMSE = 0.11
r: RMSE = 0.08
ZTF18aceytnk - QSO
g
r
0 15 30 45
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
g: RMSE = 0.14
r: RMSE = 0.10
ZTF22aabbfre - (TNS) SN Ia
0 30 60 90
Time (days)
17
18
19
20 m
g: RMSE = 0.06
r: RMSE = 0.08
ZTF21abghumo - (TNS) SN IIn
0 20 40 60
Time (days)
16
17
18
19 m
g: RMSE = 0.11
r: RMSE = 0.10
ZTF22abjvyib - (TNS) SN II
0 20 40 60
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
g: RMSE = 0.07
r: RMSE = 0.07
ZTF22aanmbrl - (TNS) SN II
0 30 60 90
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
g: RMSE = 0.24
r: RMSE = 0.05
ZTF22aakaygk - (TNS) SN II
0 10 20 30
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
g: RMSE = 0.36
r: RMSE = 0.30
ZTF21abrgbex - (TNS) SN IIb
0 40 80
Time (days)
16
17
18
19 m
g: RMSE = 0.31
r: RMSE = 0.22
ZTF18admwqvn - BL Lac
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
19
20 m
g: RMSE = 0.07
r: RMSE = 0.08
ZTF19abgfgzy - QSO
Figure 3.Visualisation of a few test-set interpolations by our model. The dots denote observations (uncertainties not shown), and the solid lines denote the
interpolations, with the blue and red colors corresponding to the𝑔and𝑟-bands, respectively. The root mean square deviation (RMSE) between the observed
and predicted magnitudes for each band is shownin each panel. The title of each light curve panel shows the ZTF IDalong with its classification from TNS (for
SNe) and Milliquas (for AGNs). More interpolation visualisations are shown in Figs. 6b and 7b.
3.2 Visualisation of latent space
As mentioned in Section 2.2.2, the mTAND encoder outputs the
mean and variance parameters of the Gaussian distribution learned
over latent variables, given a set of reference time points and the
input light curve:q 𝛾 (z|r,s). To understand the structure of the
learned latent space, we visualise the mean latent vector (of length
|r|)foreachlightcurveinthetestsetanddiscussqualitativepatterns
betweenpositioninthelower-dimensionalrepresentationofthelatent
space, simple derived properties from light curves, and confirmed
classificationsfromTNS/Milliquas.As|r|variesforeachlightcurve
(seeSection2.2.3),weusezero-paddingtohavemeanlatentvectors
ofthesamelengthandconcatenatethemacrossthelatentdimension
(of size two; see Section 2.2.4) before projecting them onto a lower-
dimensional space.
The projection of the latent space in two dimensions is obtained
using Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP),
coloured by different light curve features whose choices are moti-
vated below. The implementation of UMAP is taken from McInnes
etal.(2018),usingthecosinesimilaritymetricandthedefaulthyper-
parameters,includingalocalneighbourhoodsizeof15;thiscontrols
the tradeoff between local and global manifold structure learned in
the encodings, and different values may affect the clustering and its
interpretation
Figure 4 shows the latent space coloured by features wea priori
expect our model to learn, which are astrophysically important or
both. These hand-picked features are: (a) light curve duration, (b)
time of peak magnitude since the first observation in the light curve
(𝑡peak), (c) difference between the median of top and bottom five
percentile magnitudes, and (d) peak colour (𝑔−𝑟) obtained using
respective peak magnitudes. The heuristics for these choices are as
follows:(a)and(b)becausethemTANDencodingsdirectlyrepresent
time ((a) also because we zero-pad latent vectors corresponding to
shorter duration light curves before UMAP projection), (c) because
our magnitude normalisation scheme should still preserve the rela-
tive magnitude evolution, and (d) because the colour information is
preservedsinceournormalisationusespeakmagnitudeacross𝑔and
𝑟bands.
We find that the model learns the overall timescale of the light
curvebutalsowhenthepeakoccurs 9.Thesmalldifferencesinoverall
trends between the𝑔and𝑟bands for both features are because of
minordifferencesinsamplinganddataquality.Mostlightcurveshave
relatively small amplitudes, which is a property of our dataset, and
thosethathavehigheramplitudesarevisiblyseparatedatthetopand
top-right. Although not in the standard deviation of magnitudes are
very similar, as expected, because both are measures of variability.
Finally, the plot showing colour based on peak magnitude in the𝑔
9 In general, it is more appropriate to conclude that the model learns a
latent feature that correlates with the feature used for our analysis rather than
learning the used feature directly; however, for simplicity in discussion, we
would avoid this distinction.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

8Gondhalekar et al.
and𝑟bandssuggeststhatthelatentspaceseparateslightcurveswith
redder versus bluer colour.
Finally,inAppendixA,weshowthatthelatentspacedoesnotshow
strong correlations with features our model should not capture, such
as peak and mean magnitudes and the total number of observations,
or that any observed trends reflect underlying data characteristics.
This is desirable for a classifier that must generalise across redshifts
and survey depths.
We conclude that the correlations between the positions of light
curves in the latent space and our derived features demonstrate that
the model has learned multivariate photometric properties of our
data.
3.3 SN and AGN latent space
In the next two subsections, we provide an interpretation of why
a light curve representation is mapped to a specific UMAP region.
To achieve this, we colour the latent space projection using TNS
and Milliquas classifications and compare the known photometric
behaviour of supernova and AGN subtypes with what the model has
learned.
Beforediscussingthedetailedresults,wepointoutthattheUMAP
visualisation of latent space separates the SN and AGN classes, as
shown in Figure 4. This is despite the imbalance in the number
of examples in our data and the use of partial light curves. This
(unsupervised) separation of SN and AGN is because of differences
intheirgeneralphotometricpropertiesshownbythegeneralanalysis
in the previous subsection. In particular, the region of the projected
latentspacewhereSNelieisoccupiedbylightcurveswithanoverall
shorterdurationandslightlylargeramplitudesthanregionsoccupied
by most AGNs.
3.4 Supernovae
Figure5showsthatdurationistheprimaryorganisingaxisoftheSN
latentspace.Peakcolouranddeclinerateshowweakerbutpercepti-
blecorrelations.Weusethesetrendsasareferenceframefortherest
of this section.
3.4.1 Subtype overlaps and their physical origin
DifferentSNsubtypesoverlapinthelatentspaceforthreephysically
distinct reasons, which we discuss in turn.
Similar photometric timescales (SN Ia and SN Ibc).SNe Ia and
Ibc share similar decline timescales and/or duration, causing their
latent regions to overlap substantially. SNe Ibc lying near SN1 and
SN2 (e.g., SN15) occupy these regions for this reason. Since the
latent space does not strongly encode peak colour, the tendency of
SNIbctoberedderatpeakdoesnotseparatethemfromSNIahere.
SN1 and SN2 lie close despite a roughly 2.5 mag difference in peak
brightness,whichconfirmsthatthemodeldoesnotrelyonobserved
magnitude.
Partial light curves missing discriminating features (SN II near
SN Ia)SN II light curves that overlap with SN Ia typically lack
plateau coverage in the polled window. SN7 (IIb) and SN8 decline
rapidly without a visible plateau, producing SN Ia-like timescales
and latent positions. By contrast, SN9 (showing an𝑟-band plateau),
SN10 (IIP), and SN11 (a slow-declining IIn with plateau followed
by faster decline) occupy a distinct region defined by long duration
and slow decline rate, clearly separated from most SN Ia. A few
SN Ia with slow, plateau-like𝑟-band declines lie nearer to these
SN II than to the typical SN Ia. The latent space, therefore, does
distinguishplateau-likeevolutionwhensufficientcoverageispresent
inthepolledlightcurve.Wedonotusepeaktimesinthispartofthe
discussion since plateaus near peaks can produce misleading peak
time estimates.
Absent luminosity information (SLSN).Without redshift or abso-
lute magnitude, SLSN cannot be separated from their photometric
counterparts at similar apparent timescales. Most SLSN occupy rel-
ativelyemptyregionsneartheboundariesbetweentheSNandAGN
subpopulations. SN17 (SLSN-II) and SN13 (SN IIn) lie close to-
gether, which is physically understandable since SLSN-II are con-
sidereda(moreluminous)subtypeofIIn(Gal-Yam2012).SN18lies
near AGNs: inspection of its full light curve reveals post-peak ob-
servationscontainingabroadsecondaryfeaturewithlowvariability,
whichisphotometricallyAGN-likeatthatphase.Wefindnooverlaps
betweenourSLSNandthosepresentintheALeRCE(Sánchez-Sáez
et al. 2021a) or Superphot+ predictions of de Soto et al. (2024a),
which precludes direct comparison.
Early SN Ia candidates.The three early SN Ia candidates capture
onlytheveryfirstdaysofSNIaevolution,showingnegligiblemagni-
tude variation and very small durations (see also SN5). They cluster
awayfromthemainSNIaregionbecausethemodelassociatestheir
near-featureless,low-amplitudelightcurveswithadistinctcornerof
the latent space. As more observations of such candidates accumu-
late, their latent positions would be expected to migrate towards the
main SN Ia population.
3.4.2 Outlier positions as diagnostics
A handful of objects lie far from their class’s main latent region,
andtheirpositionsareinstructive.SN4(Ia)hasananomalouslylong
eight-month decay with a very large amplitude, untypical of SN Ia
in this sample, which places it in a sparsely populated outlier region
not captured in Figure 5. SN6 contains noise-dominated late-time
observations after the explosion, as we found by inspecting its full
light curve, and expectedly drifts toward AGN. SN14 (SN IIn) lies
nearhigh-amplitudeAGNs(Figure8).SN12(SNII)sitsinanoutlier
region characterised by very long duration, low-to-moderate decline
rate, and mildly red peak colour, qualitatively matching SN16 (SN
Ic).
SN3 represents a peculiar SN Ia (SN Iax) and its nearest neigh-
boursinthelatentspacecontainSNIa,SNII,andSLSNsubtypes.It
wasclassifiedasSNIIbytheALeRCEsupernovaclassifier(Sánchez-
Sáezetal.2021a),whileSuperphot+(deSotoetal.2024b)assigned
the highest probability to SN Ibc, followed by SN Ia, with a low
probability to SN II (predictions from de Soto et al. 2024a). Our
unsupervised placement is therefore intermediate between these ap-
proaches.Althoughnotshown,twomoreSNIIinourtestsetoverlap
withobjectspresentintheALeRCEandSuperphot+catalogues.The
first,locatedintheclustercontainingSN9andSN10andsurrounded
mainly by SN II, was classified as SN II by both approaches; our
expected prediction agrees with both approaches. The second, sur-
rounded by a mix of SN Ia, SN II, one SN Ibc, and one SLSN,
was classified as SN II by ALeRCE, while Superphot+ gave a low-
confidenceSNIa classificationwithSNIIasthe nextmostprobable
class; our expected prediction aligns more closely with Superphot+
in this case. Direct comparisons with other approaches should be
interpreted with caution because our polled light curves, and thus
the features available to each model, may differ from those used in
other studies. We find no overlaps between our SN Ibc sample and
the ALeRCE/Superphot+ catalogues, which precludes comparison
for that subtype.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN9
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
4
6
8
10
12UMAP 2
AGN
SN
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
6
8
10
12UMAP 2
100 200 300 400
Duration ( g, r) (days)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
6
8
10
12UMAP 2
100 200 300 400
tpeak (g, r) (days)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
6
8
10
12UMAP 2
0.2 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.8
Amplitude ( g, r)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
6
8
10
12UMAP 2
-0.15 -0.05 0 0.3 0.6
(g □ r)peak
Figure 4.Visualisation of the latent space in two dimensions using UMAP. The top panel shows that the general population of SN (blue) and AGN (red) are
separated in the latent space. The next panels show the latent space coloured by different light curve features. Each hexagon bin represents the mean feature of
all light curves in that bin, and only bins with at least three light curves are shown. The features used to colour the latent space are: the average of observation
time of peak magnitude in the𝑔and𝑟bands with respect to the first observation in the corresponding band (𝑡peak (𝑔, 𝑟)), average of light curve duration in
the𝑔and𝑟bands, where duration in each band is based on the time of last and the first observation in that band (Duration(𝑔, 𝑟)); the same metric is used
in Figure 1, average amplitude across both bands (A(𝑔, 𝑟)), and the colour calculated using respective peak magnitudes in𝑔and𝑟bands ((𝑔−𝑟)peak). For
this and the remaining figures, wherever applicable, such hand-curated features may be correlated: for example, peak time will necessarily be constrained by
duration,andlargerdurationmayincreasetheprobabilityofobservinghigh-amplitudetransients,especiallyforSNe.Thepatternswithaveragecolourobtained
using our model interpolations and standard deviation in colour are similar to the colour at peak and amplitude, respectively.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

10Gondhalekar et al.
4 6 8
UMAP 1
6
8UMAP 2
10 50 90
Duration ( g, r) (days)
(a)
4 6 8
UMAP 1
6
8UMAP 2
0.2 0.4 0.6
∆m15 (g, r) (b)
4 6 8
UMAP 1
6
8UMAP 2
□0.2 0.0 0.7
(g □ r)peak (c)
Figure 5.LatentspacevisualisationforonlySNlightcurves,includingallitssubtypes.Onlybinswithatleastthreedatapointsareshown,andthussomeoutliers
fromFigure6amaynotbeincluded.Thefeaturesusedare:themeanof𝑟-and𝑔-band(a)duration,(b)declinerate,definedasthedecreaseinmagnitude15days
after peak time (Δ𝑚15) in either band, and (c)𝑔−𝑟colour at peak. As our mTAND model’s interpolations fill unobserved dimensions of light curves in either
band, but are not continuous functions of time, the magnitude 15 days post-peak is calculated using linear interpolation on our individual band interpolations.
The panels showing the decline rate and peak colour do not show clear patterns but suggest weak trends. For example, bluer peak colors tend to be separated
from mildly red/no-colour light curves, and slow decline rates in both bands seem to be separated from faster decline rates in at least one band. The trends in
these plots are used in Section 3.4 to explain the positions of SN light curves from Figure 6a. Finally, while these plots show the mean features in each bin, in
Appendix C we show their1𝜎standard deviation, which, when compared with the mean features shown here, suggests that the variations in each bin are not
huge.
3.5 AGN
WecorrecttheAGNlightcurvesattesttimebeforerunningtheinfer-
enceusingtheALeRCElightcurvecorrectionpipeline 10 (Appendix
A of Förster et al. 2021). The primary motivation for accounting
for the reference flux through this correction is to reveal the actual
apparent magnitudes for these non-transients. However, the refer-
ence magnitude remained relatively constant for many AGNs11 and
thus this correction should not have a major effect on the model’s
test-timeresultsbecausethecorrectionrendersthenormalisedmag-
nitudes (Section 2.2.4) agnostic to it. Out of the 2847 AGNs in the
test set, 2359 had their light curves corrected, and 488 had their
light curves uncorrected due to at least one of their alerts having a
reference source farther than 1′′.4 or due to divergence in corrected
magnitude calculation. Only the corrected AGNs are considered in
the subsequent discussion for consistency.
For this analysis, we exclude AGNs with durations shorter than
3 months. For the class-specific discussion based on Figure 7, we
additionally exclude objects for which a Milliquas classification was
not found (the ‘Unknown’ class; Section 2.1.1).
We now interpret the positions of AGNs in the latent space using
the spatial trends in Figure 8. However, there are two caveats. First,
AGNs in some regions of latent space show noticeable scatter in
light curve features, and possible reasons for this are discussed in
Appendix C. Second, Milliquas uses luminosity-based criteria for
separating AGNs from QSOs (Flesch 2015), but since our model
10 https://github.com/alercebroker/lc_correction
11 ThisistrueforAGNswhosereferenceimagewasobtainedinaverybright
orfaintepochcomparedtotheotherepochs.However,ifthetemplateisatthe
middleofthemagnitudedistribution,itwillsignificantlychangetheresulting
light curve.
doesnotuseredshifts,someoverlapamongtheseclassesisexpected
(see also Appendix C.1 of Sánchez-Sáez et al. 2021a). For these
reasons, we focus on a broader latent space structure rather than a
sharp class distinction.
(A): Figure 7b highlights a handful of AGNs lying closer to SNe
in the latent space than to the bulk AGN subpopulation12. As these
regionsarescarcelypopulated,thisprecludestheuseofAGNfeatures
to discuss their location.
Remarkably, AGNs with durations longer than nearly all SNe in
our sample are also placed here (e.g., AGNs 1, 2, 3). This suggests
that their photometric evolution over the temporal interval shared
withnearbySNeissufficientlysimilartoproducesimilarencodings.
Nonetheless,suchcontaminationisrare,andadetailedcharacterisa-
tion is left for future work.
(B): These AGNs are characterised by high𝜎/𝜇(variability) and
long durations (Figure 8), and contain the majority of BL Lacs in
our sample (Figure 7a), consistent with their characteristic rapid
variability. Very short blazar flares – such as the≈3-day flare in
AGN4near𝑡≈310-340days–arenotrecoveredbytheinterpolation.
Longer flares spanning∼1to a few weeks – such as those in AGN5
(around𝑡∼200d), AGN6 (just after𝑡∼300d), and AGN7 (at
around𝑡∼450d) – are captured more reliably but still imperfectly.
Thesereflect challengesinencodingthe overdensityofobservations
during rapid events.
(C): This region is characterised by lower variability and shorter
durations on average compared to region B (Figure 8), though with
large scatter in duration (Figure C2a). Its distinction from region A
likely reflects the fact that they have low variability or even large
12 We verified that these AGNs remain separated from other AGNs across
different UMAP runs with different seeds.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN11
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
4
6
8
10
12UMAP 2
SN4
SN5
SN6
SN7
SN8
SN9
SN10
SN11
SN12
SN13
SN14
SN1
SN2
SN3
SN15
SN16
SN17
SN18
SN Ia
SN II
SN Ibc
SLSN
Early SN Ia
(a)
0 8 16 24
Time (days)
16
17
18
19 m
29, 0.94, -0.1
SN1
ZTF22abfvsbt - (TNS) SN Ia
0 10 20 30
Time (days)
19
20
21 m
29, -, 0.0
SN2
ZTF22aavctvq - (TNS) SN Ia
0 25 50 75
Time (days)
16
18 m
77, 1.04, 0.8
SN3
ZTF22aafuind - (TNS) SN Iax[02cx-like]
0 80 160 240
Time (days)
12
15
18 m
245, 0.84, 0.0
SN4
ZTF22aafoqrd - (TNS) SN Ia
g
r
0 2 4
Time (days)
18
19 m
4, -, -0.1
SN5
ZTF22aabwrov - (TNS) SN Ia
0 150 300
Time (days)
18
19 m
258, -, 0.3
SN6
ZTF19aaapnxn - (TNS) SN Ia
0 15 30
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
35, 0.73, -0.1
SN7
ZTF21abidrcn - (TNS) SN IIb
0 20 40
Time (days)
17
18
19
20 m
49, 0.71, 0.0
SN8
ZTF21abmwzxt - (TNS) SN II
0 25 50 75
Time (days)
17
18
19 m
80, 0.13, 0.2
SN9
ZTF21acafqtj - (TNS) SN II
0 30 60 90
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
68, 0.26, 0.2
SN10
ZTF22abhsxph - (TNS) SN IIP
0 25 50 75
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
87, 0.18, 0.2
SN11
ZTF22aagvxjc - (TNS) SN IIn
0 60 120 180
Time (days)
16
18
20 m
113, 0.29, 0.0
SN12
ZTF22aafxzfb - (TNS) SN II
0 80 160 240
Time (days)
18
20 m
244, 0.13, 0.6
SN13
ZTF21abtdvpg - (TNS) SN IIn
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
17
18
19
20 m
483, 0.2, 0.3
SN14
ZTF21abulpnc - (TNS) SN IIn
0 5 10 15
Time (days)
19
20
21 m
12, -, 0.3
SN15
ZTF22abgroeo - (TNS) SN Ic-BL
peak times, atypical of our SNe sample, which is mostly declining.
BL Lacs AGN8 and AGN9 are unusually optically quiescent and
therefore lie in this low-variability region.
(D): Region D shares the long-duration characteristic of region
B but has lower variability on average. AGN10 is a BL Lac whose
𝜎/𝜇anddurationiscomparabletoregion-BAGNs.Thisdiscrepancy
remainsunclear,butitmightoccurbecauseitslarge𝜎/𝜇isdrivenby
its significant rising trend rather than the rapid flaring characteristic
of region B.
To conclude, we have elucidated through a few examples that the
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

12Gondhalekar et al.
0 40 80 120
Time (days)
15
16
17
18 m
138, 0.15, 0.3
SN16
ZTF22aapubuy - (TNS) SN Ic
0 100 200 300
Time (days)
18
19
20
21 m
283, 0.04, 0.3
SN17
ZTF22aaacvyy - (TNS) SLSN-II
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
19
20
21 m
419, 0.19, -0.0
SN18
ZTF20aacbwbm - (TNS) SLSN-II
(b)
Figure 6.(a) Visualisation of the latent space like in Figure 4 but colored based on five SN subtypes based on TNS classifications (in decreasing order of
prevalence in our dataset): (1) SN Ia and subtypes, (2) SN II and subtypes, (3) SN Ib and Ic; we also include the ‘SN I’ TNS class, (4) SLSN and subtypes,
and (5) Early SN Ia candidates (see Section 2.1.1 for specific subtypes included). The gray contour shows the distribution of AGN data points, including all
their subtypes. (b) The panels below show a few light curves of different SN subtypes located at different locations in the latent space. The title of each light
curve panel shows the ZTF ID along with its spectroscopic classification from TNS. Also shown at the top-right of each light curve are the duration (in days),
declinerate(Δ𝑚 15),bothaveragedacross𝑔and𝑟bands,andcolouratpeak,inthatorder.ThesearealsousedinFigure5and B1.Ahyphenforthedeclinerate
indicates it could not be calculated because at least one band’s light curve terminated before 15 days after peak (see Figure 5 caption).
AGN latent space correlates with duration, variability, and colour
properties, and discussed how a tiny fraction of AGNs might reside
closer to SNe due to larger similarities in their encodings than to
other AGNs. This does not suggest that such AGNs are necessar-
ily SNe-like, as that would require checking sensitivity to the local
neighbourhoodsizeintheUMAPprojection(seeFigure4’scaption).
Instead, it is likely a consequence of using alert light curves, where
the5𝜎detection threshold can influence the observed durations and
gapsinAGNlightcurves.Asaresult,durationmaynotbearelevant
parameterforastrophysicalinterpretationofAGNs,eventhoughour
model captures it.
3.6 Visualisation of attention maps
The mTAND model used in this paper is trained to learn to attend
to irregularly spaced observations (key) and produce interpolations
over a set of regularly spaced query points (query). The correspond-
ing attention weights are denoted by𝜅in Equation 2.2.1. In this
section,weusetheattentionweightslearnedbytheembeddingfunc-
tion of the mTAND encoder (we use a single embedding function,
𝐻=1; Section 2.2.4) to understand how its outputs attend to ob-
servations. These are the outputs of the attention blocks (before the
linear combination that produces the mTAN embedding) shown in
Figure 2.
Figure 9 visualises the attention weight maps for each band sep-
arately for a few example light curves. Their visibly sparse and
‘diagonal’-like pattern suggests that queries attend to temporally
nearbyregions–thisisexactlywhatisexpectedofmTAND,aslonger-
range dependencies are captured in its latent representation through
the recurrent network following mTAND’s encoder.
Theattentionweightsforthetwobandsdisplaydistinctpatterns,in
thatagivenquerypointattendstodifferenttemporalregionsineach
band,dependingonthelocationofobservationsforthatband,which
illustrates how each dimension/band of the light curve is uniquely
represented on the set of query times. These intermediate represen-
tations of light curves are linearly combined using Equation 2.2.1
to obtain the mTAND encoder’s latent representation, which thus
explains how mTAN learns cross-band information.
Finally, this exercise can help understand model failure modes by
analyzing any correspondence between attention weights and per-
observationinterpolationquality.Here,webrieflymentionthatfast-
evolving observed features that tend to be missed by our interpo-
lations receive lower attention. For example, this can be seen for
ZTF19abgfgzy and ZTF19aagwxlv at𝑡≈310−340days in the
𝑟-band, where the attention weights are diminished (see the vertical
dotted lines).
3.7 Comparison with GP regression
Weimplement GPregression in bothwavelength andtime tohandle
cross-bandcorrelations,followingtheapproachofBoone(2019)and
the code implementation of Allam (2022). We use a Matérn 3/2 ker-
nel, and evaluate GP predictions at the observed times13. Although
GP regression explicitly accounts for observational uncertainties,
mTAND currently does not. We therefore use RMSE rather than the
commonly used𝜒 2 metric since it can be too strict for mTAND at
thebrightestendsthathavesmalluncertainties.mTANDremovesthe
restriction of GPs requiring a positive semidefinite covariance func-
tion, making it more flexible by design (Narayan Shukla & Marlin
2021b).
Figure 10 compares the interpolation performance of mTAND
and GP regression on three test-set light curves: two AGNs, one
densely sampled and the other sparsely sampled, and an SN. GP
regression produces better predictions than mTAND as shown by
its smaller RMSE values, particularly for outlier observations. This
is a consequence of the fact that the GP fits are optimised for each
light curve, whereas mTAND learns a single fit model for all light
curves; this could also explain why mTAND does not model outlier
observationsaswell.Ontheentiretestset,themedianRMSEsforGP
and mTAND are 0.03 and 0.26, respectively, with median absolute
deviations of 0.01 and 0.09.
Wealsodiscusscomputationalcosts.Asourgoalistocharacterise
andclassifylightcurves,wecomparetheexecutiontimerequiredfor
constructing (light curve-dependent) query times and encoding a
light curve using mTAND versus performing a GP regression fit,
both measured in identical CPU environments: Intel(R) Xeon(R)
Gold6140CPUat2.30GHz.FormTAND,weuseabatchsizeof32
to leverage its parallel processing capability, though we use a single
process for loading data. mTAND requires 36 seconds (one minute
with a batch size of one), and GP regression requires 41 seconds to
execute its operations on the entire test set consisting of 3131 light
curves; these values are the median over five independent runs. The
similar runtimes of both GP and mTAND arise because, although
exact GPs scale poorly with the number of observations (𝑂(𝑛3)),
13 Althoughnotshownhere,evaluatingtheGPpredictionsonafineruniform
time grid spaced apart by two days (equivalent to mTAND’s temporal reso-
lution) produces spurious features at observational gaps for the two AGNs.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN13
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
4
6
8
10
12UMAP 2
AGN1
AGN2
AGN3
AGN4
AGN5
AGN6
AGN7
AGN8
AGN9
AGN10
Quasar
AGN
BL Lac
(a)
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
17
18
19 m
526, 0.23, 0.2
AGN1
ZTF21aazltbp - QSO
g
r
0 50 100 150
Time (days)
17
18
19
20 m
151, 0.75, 0.4
AGN2
ZTF19aakxiwm - BL Lac
0 60 120 180
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
215, 0.29, 1.1
AGN3
ZTF18aakeosr - BL Lac
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
17
18
19
20 m
334, 0.33, 2.4
AGN4
ZTF19aagwxlv - BL Lac
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
14
16
18
20 m
534, 0.60, 4.0
AGN5
ZTF18abtrubp - QSO
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
18
20 m
504, -0.02, 2.3
AGN6
ZTF20acdcick - QSO
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
430, -0.05, 0.9
AGN7
ZTF18aalufuv - AGN
0 50 100 150
Time (days)
18
19 m
153, 0.01, 0.4
AGN8
ZTF18acsptos - BL Lac
0 50 100 150
Time (days)
19
20 m
103, 0.03, 0.4
AGN9
ZTF19aaaoiib - BL Lac
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
17
18
19
20 m
316, -0.22, 1.1
AGN10
ZTF18aaieyvr - BL Lac
(b)
Figure 7.Visualisation of the latent space like in Figure 4 but colored based on the following AGN subtypes based on Milliquas classifications (in decreasing
order of prevalence in our dataset): (1) QSO, (2) Type I Seyfert (or AGN), and (3) BL Lac. As mentioned in the text (Section 3.5), we remove <3 month AGNs
or those with no Milliquas match from this plot; this results in the removal of all four type II Seyferts in our data. The gray contour shows the distribution of SN
data points, including all their subtypes. The panels below show a few light curves of different AGN subtypes located at different locations in the latent space.
The title of each light curve panel shows the ZTF ID along with its Milliquas classification. Also shown at the top-right of each light curve are the duration (in
days), mean color, and𝜎/𝜇amplitude, in that order, where the two metrics apart from mean colour are averaged across𝑔and𝑟bands. These are also used in
Figure 8.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

14Gondhalekar et al.
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
100 200 300 400 500
Duration ( g, r) (days)
(a)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
0.5 1.0 1.5
σ/µ (g, r) ( ×100) (b)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
-0.4 -0.2 0 0.35 0.7
µg□r (c)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
□0.2 0.0 0.7
(g □ r)peak
(d)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
□0.2 0.0 0.7
(g □ r)faint (e)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
□0.5 0.0 0.2 0.4
(g □ r)peak □ (g □ r)faint (f)
Figure 8.Figure description: Latent space visualisation for only AGN light curves, including all its subtypes. As mentioned in the text, AGNs with duration <3
months are excluded. Only bins with at least three data points are shown. The features used are: the mean of𝑟- and𝑔-band (a) duration, (b) ratio of standard
deviation and mean magnitude, a common variability measure (see, e.g., Kim et al. 2011), expressed as a percentage, (c) mean color, (d) peak color, (e) colour
using respective faintest magnitudes, and (f) difference of (d) and (e). Since inspection of visual correlations is sensitive to value ranges, we have set colorbar
ranges using robust clipping at the 2nd and the 98th percentiles. Because our model ignores observational uncertainties, measure (b) may serve as a proxy for
excess variance, another standard AGN variability measure; however, the actual values are overestimated and thus are not comparable with the literature, since
wehavenotincorporatederrorbars.Comments:DurationchangessmoothlyacrosstheAGNlatentspace,likeinFigure4.Onaverage,lightcurveswithalarger
magnitude variation are separated from those with smaller magnitude variations. The average colour shows a weak separation between redder and bluer AGNs,
and similarly the peak colour shows separation from the reddest AGNs at peak from others. The colour at the faintest ends of the light curve also shows weaker
patterns. As a result, their difference shows that AGNs that are bluer when brighter are separated from others, and is in accordance with the commonly seen
“bluer-when-brighter”trend.InAppendixC,weshowthe1𝜎standarddeviationoffeaturesineachbinoftheAGNlatentspaceandgenerallyfindnon-negligible
scatterinbinscorrespondingtolow-duration,high-variationAGNs,orthosecorrespondingtoconsiderablyredandbluecolors.Nonetheless,thetrendsinthese
plots are used in Section 3.5 to roughly understand the positions of AGN light curves from Figure 7a.
most of our light curves have very few observations where GP costs
remain reasonable. To investigate this further, we show in Figure 11
thatGPindeedscalespoorlywiththeobservationcount,whereasthe
execution time of mTAND remains unaffected by it.
The top-left panel of the figure also shows that mTAND is slower
than GP on CPU for light curves with fewer than∼80 observations,
withamediantimeforsuchlightcurvesof0.023versus0.01seconds
andamedianabsolutedeviationof0.006and0.001seconds,respec-
tively.Thetop-rightpanelofFigure11showsthattheexecutiontime
showsamilddependenceonlightcurveduration,whichmightbebe-
causemTANDlearnstime-representativeencodingsthatcandepend
onthetimespanofthelightcurve.Thereareaconsiderablenumber
of long-duration and sparsely sampled light curves (Figure 1), and,
taken together, these trends explain why mTAND is slower for light
curveswithfewobservations:itisdrivenbytheiralsolongduration.
For all other combinations of observation count and duration (low
and high), we find the mTAND to be at least slightly faster than GP.
For example, for light curves with <80 observations and <120-day
durations, the median runtimes of mTAND and GP are 0.006 and
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN15
0 20 40 60
Time (days)
16
17
18
19 m
ZTF22abjvyib - (TNS) SN II
0 20 40 60
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
ZTF22aanmbrl - (TNS) SN II
Observed time ( g) (days)
0
20
40
60Query time (days)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Observed time ( r) (days)
0
20
40
60Query time (days)
Observed time ( g) (days)
0
20
40
60Query time (days)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Observed time ( r) (days)
0
20
40
60Query time (days)
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
19
20 m
ZTF19abgfgzy - QSO
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
17
18
19
20 m
ZTF19aagwxlv - BL Lac
Observed time ( g) (days)0
200
400Query time (days)
0 100 200 300 400 500
Observed time ( r) (days)
0
200
400Query time (days)
Observed time ( g) (days)0
200
400Query time (days)
0 100 200 300 400 500
Observed time ( r) (days)
0
200
400Query time (days)
Figure 9.Examplevisualisationofattentionweightsforfourlightcurves,whereeachpanelshowsthelightcurvefollowedbytheattentionmapsforthe𝑔and𝑟
bandsinthenexttworows.Eachattentionmapshowsthe(irregularlyspaced)observedtimesonthex-axisandthe(regularlyspaced)querytimesonthey-axis.
Forreference,theverticalticksonthex-axisdenotethetimeatwhichanobservationwaspresent,andthedashedlinesdenotethe𝑦=𝑥line.Thecorresponding
observed light curves, along with our model interpolations, are shown below each pair of attention maps. It is important to note that mTAND only attends to
locations where an observation exists. The shading between ‘blocks’ in the attention map is such that the boundaries of the blocks are defined at the midpoint
of adjacent observation times. As a result, the horizontal width of the blocks reflects irregular spacing between observations, and large-width blocks should not
necessarily be interpreted as a query attending to a large number of observations.
0.009 seconds, with median absolute deviations of 0.002 and 0.001
seconds, respectively.
However, the bottom panels show that, on the GPU, mTAND is
faster than GP across all light curves, including those with very few
observations, and that its execution-time dependence on duration is
diminished.Onaper-light-curvebasis,itisatleastafew(5-10)times
faster than on CPU; with a batch size of 32 across the entire test set,
ittakesjustunderasecond,comparedwith36secondsonCPU.The
GPU used is Tesla P100.
3.8 Application to new variables and transients
Here,wetestthegeneralisabilityofourmodelbyapplyingittolight
curves with types not included in our training dataset. Specifically,
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

16Gondhalekar et al.
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
14
16
18
20 m
RMSEGP = 0.01
RMSEmTAND = 1.20
ZTF18abtrubp - QSO
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
17
18
19
20 m
RMSEGP = 0.03
RMSEmTAND = 0.69
ZTF19aagwxlv - BL Lac
0 20 40 60
Time (days)
16
17
18
19 m
RMSEGP = 0.03
RMSEmTAND = 0.83
ZTF22abahblc - (TNS) SN Ia
Figure 10.Examples of interpolations using mTAND and GP regression. The mTAND predictions are shown by solid lines and the mean GP predictions by
dashedlinesfor𝑔-(bluecurves)and𝑟-bands(redcurves).TheRMSEsforbothapproachesaredenotedineachpanelandarecalculatedusingpredictionsfrom
both bands.
101 102
2⟨L⟩
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Execution time (sec)
mTAND encoder
GP ﬁt
0 100 200 300 400 500
Duration (days)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Execution time (sec)
mTAND encoder
GP ﬁt
101 102
2⟨L⟩
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Execution time (sec)
mTAND encoder (GPU)
GP ﬁt
0 100 200 300 400 500
Duration (days)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Execution time (sec)
mTAND encoder (GPU)
GP ﬁt
Figure 11.Execution time vs. total no. of observations in the light curve (left) and duration (right), for the mTAND encoder (includes design of light-curve-
dependent query times and encoder forward pass) and for the GP regression fit, for all light curves in the test dataset. The first and second rows show CPU and
GPU times for mTAND, respectively. The solid lines denote the running median. Here, we use a batch size of one for the mTAND predictions. For clarity, the
y-axis limits are truncated to remove some outlier observations; these remove some GP examples but do not affect the discussion of results.
we apply our model to RR Lyrae stars, long-period variable stars,
and TDEs, and briefly discuss their interpolation performance and
position in the model’s latent space. For a fair evaluation of the
model’sgeneralisationcapabilitiestonewclasses,theobservedlight
curves are truncated so as not to exceed their duration compared to
the light curves seen during training.
Figure 12 shows the interpolations for the three types of light
curves and the corresponding locations our model positions them
in the SNe + AGN latent space. The long-period variables and the
TDEs show good decodings, with RMSEs similar to those seen in
our previous analysis, despite these classes being absent from the
training set. This generalisation is consistent with the fact that our
modelistrainedtolearninterpolationsforarbitrarylightcurvesinan
unsupervisedmanner,ratherthanleveragingclass-specifictemplates
orpriorinformation.TheRRLyraeshowpoordecodingperformance
for A–D, as the model could not capture its variability effectively–
this is expected because its pulsation period (roughly 0.4-0.5 d) is
much smaller than the temporal resolution of our model, which is
two days.
Despite most of them having similar durations, these sources
occupy distinct regions in the latent space, which reconfirms that
the model encodes variability patterns beyond duration alone. The
RR Lyrae and the long-period variables lie away from SNe and
towardsAGNs,andthattoo(exceptfor‘E’)preferablytowardshigh-
variability and redder AGNs. For the long-period variable, this is
understandable as they are known to be a source of contamination
in variability-based AGN selection (MacLeod et al. 2011). Unlike
the long-period variables, RR Lyrae are not closely clustered in the
latent space. Part of the reason might be their poor interpolation
performance discussed above. The TDEs are clearly separated from
the variable stars. ‘I’ and ‘K’ lie at the edges of the AGN latent
space, and ‘J’ lies within the SN latent space, partly due to its small
duration. The location of these TDEs is also consistent with their
characteristic blue colour since they lie far away from redder light
curves (see Figure 4). We also checked that these lie far away from
regions with a high variation in colour, which matches their typical
behaviour of no colour evolution. Given the observational diversity
of TDEs, it may be worthwhile to study how large samples of TDEs
are arranged in the latent space.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN17
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
14
15
16
17 m
g: RMSE = 0.41
r: RMSE = 0.27
ZTF17aaaebgd - (A)
g
r
0 200 400
Time (days)
15
16
17 m
g: RMSE = 0.38
r: RMSE = 0.26
ZTF18abadkhl - (B)
0 200 400
Time (days)
15
16
17
18 m
g: RMSE = 0.47
r: RMSE = 0.33
ZTF18adalmbo - (C)
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
14
15
16 m
g: RMSE = 0.26
r: RMSE = 0.18
ZTF18abcosdx - (D)
0 200 400
Time (days)
14
15
16 m
g: RMSE = 0.12
r: RMSE = 0.06
ZTF18abklama - (E)
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
14
16 m
g: RMSE = 0.15
r: RMSE = 0.41
ZTF18abryodl - (F)
0 200 400
Time (days)
12
14
16 m
g: RMSE = 0.10
r: RMSE = 0.12
ZTF18aabjjhq - (G)
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
12
14
16 m
g: RMSE = 0.13
r: RMSE = 0.18
ZTF18aaaaogd - (H)
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
17
18
19
20 m
g: RMSE = 0.07
r: RMSE = 0.09
ZTF20aahmtso - (I)
0 20 40
Time (days)
19
20
21 m
g: RMSE = 0.12
r: RMSE = 0.13
ZTF25aclckzl - (J)
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
18
19
20 m
g: RMSE = 0.06
r: RMSE = 0.09
ZTF20accxwrk - (K)
0 150 300 450
Time (days)
18
20 m
g: RMSE = 0.12
r: RMSE = 0.13
ZTF22aadesap - (L)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
4
6
8
10
12
14UMAP 2 A B
C D
E
F G
H
I
J
K
L
Figure 12.Top: Interpolation visualisations of the three types of light curves with types not seen during training: RR Lyrae (A–E), long-period variable (F–H),
and TDEs (I–L).Bottom: The gray contour shows the latent space of SN and AGN (Section 3.2) and the crosses denote the locations of the three new light
curves in the latent space.
4 DISCUSSION
4.1 Summary and Outlook
We have shown that our unsupervised mTAND approach is able to
learn latent features that separate the general class of SNe and AGN
populationsfrompartiallightcurvesobtainedfromZTF,despitethe
significant class imbalance towards AGNs (90 vs. 10%). In partic-
ular, the presence of correlations between positions of light curves
in the latent space and derived features, such as peak magnitude
epoch, light curve duration, magnitude variability, and overall and
peak color, demonstrates that the latent space has learned multivari-
atephotometric‘properties’ofourdata.Atthesametime,themodel
is insensitive to unimportant features: peak and mean magnitude,
and total number of observations. Duration, while informative for
transient studies, can understandably be just an observational effect
for objects such as AGNs, and since our latent space captures dura-
tioninformation,non-transientcharacterisationshouldbeinterpreted
with this caveat in mind.
WithintheSNsubpopulation,durationwasfoundtobeoneofthe
important features in organising the latent space. Different subtypes
of SNe overlap in the latent space due to their similar photometric
signatures. However, long-duration SNe II, early SN Ia candidates,
andSLSNewereawayfromthegenericSNsubpopulation.TheAGN
latentspacewaslessinstructivethanthatofSNeduetomorescatter
intherelationbetweenlatentspacelocationandlightcurvefeatures–
in fact, the finding by Sánchez-Sáez et al. (2021a) that more than 30
featuresarerequiredtoseparateamongsomeAGNsubclasseshintsat
this challenge. Moreover, as their spectroscopic classifications were
based on luminosity, which the model did not have access to, the
AGN analysis was focused on more general trends. A large fraction
of Blazars were in regions of latent space corresponding to high
variability. A few AGNs that were closer to SNe than the general
AGN subpopulation were hypothesized to have SNe-like duration
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

18Gondhalekar et al.
andvariabilityorlongerdurationsbutsimilarvariabilityacrosstheir
temporaloverlap;butthismayalsopartlyarisefromthe5𝜎detection
threshold used to trigger an alert, which can cause low-amplitude
AGN variability to appear as transients.
We visualised the attention maps of the encoder network of
mTAND and demonstrated that its multi-time attention mechanism
captures the local structure of light curves, which is supplemented
by the capture of longer-range temporal structure through a simple
recurrentmodulefollowingtheencoder.Byvirtueoflearningunique
attentionpatternsforeachband,weprovideahigh-levelexplanation
of how mTAND learns cross-band information. We also found that
our model’s inability to interpolate over fast-evolving temporal fea-
turesarisesbecausetheencoderplaceslowattentiononthem.Unlike
Pimenteletal.(2023),whoseattention-basedmodelfocusedonnear-
peakSNeobservations(theirFigure12),ourmodeldoesnotseemto
showsuchapreference.Thisdifferencemayreflectourdifferentdata
characteristics–even though both studies used ZTF light curves–or
biasesintroducedbytheirpretrainingonsyntheticlightcurveswhere
the peaks should be better defined than sparsely-sampled real obser-
vations.
GP regression provided more accurate interpolations than
mTAND, including outlier/fast-evolving features, possibly because
GP fits were optimised for each light curve. Thus, GP can be a good
choice for analysing specific types of objects for follow-up studies
where prompt characterisation is not a priority, because of its sound
statisticalgroundinganditsallowanceofphysicallymotivatedkernel
choices.However,weobservedafewchallengeswithGPregression.
First, they can produce spurious features at observational gaps that
could bias downstream classification. Second, while kernel adjust-
ments can improve GP interpolation accuracy, these modifications
mustresultinasimplekerneltokeepcomputationalcostslow,which
canmakeGPsuboptimalforhandlingawidevarietyoflightcurves.
mTANDlearnsakernelfromdata,ratherthanbeingfixed,makingit
moreflexible.Third,GP’scomputationalscalingbecameprohibitive
for𝑛≳80 observations (Figure 11), while mTAND’s encoder run-
timeremainedessentiallyinsensitiveto𝑛.Therefore,mTANDcanbe
particularlyusefulforlarge-scaleapplications,suchasdatafromRu-
bin, having an overwhelmingly large dataset and six different bands.
mTAND’s runtime on CPU increased mildly with duration, likely
duetoitstime-awareencoding,andhenceitbecameslowerthanGP
forlongdurationbutsparselightcurves;however,onGPU,mTAND
showed no dependence of execution time on duration and remained
faster than GP for all light curves.
To demonstrate the generalisability of mTAN to light curves be-
yondthoseseenduringtraining,weappliedthemodeltolightcurves
of RR Lyrae, long-period variable stars, and TDEs. RR Lyrae’s pe-
riodic variability occurred at a much faster rate than the temporal
resolution of our mTAND of two days (which is a hyperparameter),
and thus, mTAND could not model its variability well. Kelly et al.
(2014) similarly found the CARMA model to be suboptimal for RR
Lyrae, although the reason was the non-stochastic nature of these
light curves, which resulted in model misspecification; mTAND, by
contrast, is less sensitive to such assumptions. mTAND could, how-
ever, model the long-period variable and the TDE. The TDE was
located in a sub-region of AGN latent space away from the redder
lightcurvesandthosewithlargevariabilityincolour,whichmatched
the TDE’s characteristic blue colour. Thus, the model could gener-
alise to other transient classes by virtue of not using class-specific
information during training. This aspect can be particularly valu-
able for rare transients from Rubin LSST. We note, however, that
this generalisation assumes that test-set light curves have durations
comparable to those in the training set, as we observed degraded
interpolation for sections of light curve at times well beyond those
seen during training (≲1.5 years).
We note that we have developed and used a modified version of
mTANDwherethesetofquery(orreference)timesisnotfixedforall
lightcurvesbutinsteadcaterstoeachlightcurveindependently.This
approachwasprovenessentialinourinternalexperimentstoimprove
overall interpolation quality since, unlike the fixed query approach,
itcancapturefinertemporalstructuresforlightcurvesevolvingover
long timescales but also those on much shorter timescales.
mTAND’s encoder required 36 seconds on a CPU but just under
a second on a GPU to process∼3k light curves. The model size of
the mTAND is only a few hundred kilobytes for both the encoder
and decoder. Hence, the primary advantage of the mTAND is being
fastandlightweight,whilebeingusefulformodellingawidevariety
of transients. Direct comparison with similar methods is challeng-
ing due to differences in hardware (e.g., CPU cores used), runtime
environments, and batch sizes. However, our mTAND encoder on
CPU is∼80 times faster than the ‘t2’ time-series transformer model
(at 1.5 seconds-per-light curve), even when evaluated with a batch
size of one, and is roughly three times smaller (Allam & McEwen
2024). A subsequent study (Allam et al. 2023) reported significant
improvementsinthatmodel,whichreduceditssizeby∼18timesand
inferencetimeby∼8usingtechniquessuchasdeepcompressionand
quantization;however,ourcurrent(unoptimised)implementationre-
mainsfaster.Finally,anotheradvantageofmTANDisitstemporally
distributedlatentspace,unlikemostcontrastivelearningapproaches.
Although we have not tested this idea, for example, this could open
applications for phase-dependent analysis of light curves.
4.2 Limitations and future directions
The primary limitation is our neglect of observational uncertainties,
which prevents the model from down-weighting noisier observa-
tions. At least two types of uncertainties can be considered. First
are the uncertainties on the observed magnitudes, whose inclusion
should be straightforward in our VAE architecture (see e.g., Boone
2021). Second, uncertainties arising from temporal sparsity can, in
principle,becapturedbydrawingmultiplesamplesfromourVAEla-
tentspace,buttheseuncertaintiesmaynotbeadequatelypropagated
through mTAN. An improvement to mTAN to allow representing
a heteroscedastic distribution of outputs conditioned on the latent
state, as suggested by Narayan Shukla & Marlin (2021b), could be
worth exploring.
Onasimilarnote,amorerobustencodingcanbeobtainedfromour
mTAND through multiple samplings from the posterior distribution
overthelatentstatesthanasinglesampleusedhere.Inaddition,dueto
our assumption of a Gaussian distribution for the posterior, possible
multimodalitiesinthetrueposteriordistributionwillnotbecaptured,
butwenotethatthisisaninherentchallengeforsuchneuralnetworks
asatradeoffforthecomputationalefficiencytheyprovide.Finally,our
datapreprocessingmadeourmTANDlesssensitivetoobservational
effects that directly affect observed brightness, but a more general
solution to this could be to incorporate such symmetries or other
relevant host galaxy features in the model’s latent space (section 3.3
ofBoone(2021)providesmoredetails).Thisadditionalinformation
canimprovediscriminationamongtransientsubtypesmorethanour
photometry-only approach, and even inform downstream parameter
inference for huge samples of transients.
The second set of limitations arises from some characteristics of
our model. As noted above, our interpolations struggle to capture
temporal features evolving over timescales similar to or faster than
thechosentemporalresolutionofourmTAND.Wefindthatwithour
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN19
two-day resolution,≲1-week features were challenging to capture,
and potentially a larger encoder latent dimension may be relevant to
capture fast variations, for example, increasing the latent dimension
from 2 to 32 only marginally increased the model memory foot-
print. Another idea for exploration is to exploit mTAN’s flexibility
byinterfacingitsencoderwithalternativedeepneuralnetworks,such
as convolutional or fully-connected networks, instead of the recur-
rentarchitectureusedhere.Weacknowledgethatrapidvariabilityor
short-lived events can be a defining characteristic of certain classes
of transients, such as Blazars and early phases of some SNe, such as
SN IIb and Ib/c. However, in this paper, we have shown that, at the
levelofdataqualityofZTF,themTANDissuitableforapplicationto
broadtransientclassificationtaskswhereoverallfeaturesareprimary
discriminants.
Another relevant task that can help in the efficient follow-up of
transients is forecasting (extrapolation). In theory, this should be
possiblesincethemTAND’sdecodercanbeconditionedonanygiven
querytime,andbecauseitstimeembeddingcontainsanon-periodic
term,whichcancaptureevolutionwithtime.However,thefullydata-
driven nature of our approach means that the extrapolations may
be scientifically meaningful only when trained on focused datasets
and applied to similar transient classes. Given the fast inference
of the mTAND model, it may be worthwhile for future work to
testitssuitabilityforreal-timefollow-upusingearly-phaseevolution
(see also, e.g., Sravan et al. 2020; Muthukrishna et al. 2022). For
these purposes, the current mTAN architecture can, in principle, be
modifiedtoapplytemporalmaskingtoitsdecodertobasepredictions
only on past observations (see Vaswani et al. 2017).
Finally, we leave for future work training for more epochs with
data from other surveys, such as Rubin, particularly since our best
modelwasobtainedtooclosetothechosenendofourmodeltraining.
We also leave for future work the application of mTAND to specific
objects (e.g., AGNs). Although detailed physical characterisation
is beyond the scope of this paper, future studies could study the
organisationoflatentspaceusingastrophysicalpropertiesratherthan
potentially ambiguous classes (e.g., type IIs).
5 CONCLUSIONS
We have demonstrated a lightweight data-driven unsupervised rep-
resentation learning method using a multi-time attention model
(mTAND) that provides a scalable and flexible way of character-
ising irregular, partial light curves. We used alert data from the Fink
broker, which is one of the Rubin/ZTF brokers (Möller et al. 2021).
For transparency of evaluation, we only applied minimal selection
cuts for photometric data quality with no heavy model-specific pre-
processing. The main methodological modification to the mTAND
we made was to allow the set of query times for the attention mech-
anism to fix the temporal resolution rather than to fix the number
of query times. This is necessary to handle datasets containing light
curves evolving on very different time scales.
Our approach learns latent representations correlating with phys-
ically meaningful features (duration, peak time, variability, colour)
without supervision, while being robust to observed magnitude and
observation count. By virtue of this, the model was able to separate
SNeandAGNlightcurvesasawholedespiteheavyclassimbalance.
Expected photometric overlaps among subtypes of SNe and AGN
and anomalies in the latent space were elucidated.
ThemTANDproducedgooddecodingsandlatentrepresentations
of light curves to long-period variables and TDEs, classes that were
unseen during training. Application to RR Lyrae, however, did not
produce reasonable decodings due to its periodic variability occur-
ring much faster than our model’s temporal resolution. Overall, the
model shows potential for application when training samples may
not be representative of the whole population within a given survey.
The limitations in our current application of mTAND are the ig-
norance of observational uncertainties, the inability to adequately
capture evolution faster than our model’s temporal resolution, and
lower interpolation accuracy than GP per-object fits. We have dis-
cussed how some of these challenges can be addressed within the
framework of our model.
Fast, data-driven characterisation of transients is important for
Rubin since it will detect a few million transients per night with
large sky coverage and depth. Our model’s scalability arises from a
few aspects. It required just under a second on a GPU (around half
a minute on CPU) to process∼3k light curves, achieved execution
times that remained invariant to the number of observations in the
lightcurve(andalsotodurationwhenusedonaGPU),andthemodel
occupies only of the order of few hundred kilobytes of memory at
runtime.ThemainbenefitscomparedtoGPregressionareitsability
to learn complex kernel functions in a data-driven manner, which
mitigates the risk of model misspecification, and insensitivity of its
runtime to observation count.
The results here suggest that mTAND can serve as an effective
classifier to rapidly identify strong candidates for follow-up based
ongeneralphotometricfeatures,withprecisesubtypediscrimination
(supervised classification) and uncertainty quantification as natural
next steps. As time-domain astronomy enters a regime dominated
by sheer data volume, methods such as mTAND can be beneficial
for new discoveries and characterisation of both common and rare
transientpopulationswhosephysicalunderstandinghasthusfarbeen
elusiveduetostatisticalerrorsarisingfromlimitedclassifiedsample
sizes.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was performed on the OzSTAR national facility at Swin-
burne University of Technology. The OzSTAR program receives
funding in part from the Astronomy National Collaborative Re-
search Infrastructure Strategy (NCRIS) allocation provided by the
Australian Government, and from the Victorian Higher Education
State Investment Fund (VHESIF) provided by the Victorian Gov-
ernment.This work was developed within the Fink community and
madeuseoftheFinkcommunitybrokerresources.Finkissupported
by LSST-France and CNRS/IN2P3. This research has made use of
the SIMBAD database, operated at CDS, Strasbourg, France. AM
research was supported by the Australian Research Council Dis-
covery Early Research Award (DE230100055). Y.G. acknowledges
the STFC Centre for Doctoral Training in Data Intensive Science
and support from the UCL Research Excellence Scholarship (UCL-
RES). Y.G. also acknowledges Ofer Lahav for discussions and for
providing additional comments.
DATA A V AILABILITY
The code for designing and training the mTAN model, and other as-
sociated scripts, is available athttps://github.com/Yash-10/
astro-mtan.ThedatawasobtainedusingFink’sDataTransferser-
viceforZTF:https://ztf.fink-portal.org/download,andis
publicly available.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

20Gondhalekar et al.
REFERENCES
Aigrain S., Foreman-Mackey D., 2023, ARA&A, 61, 329
Allam Jr. T., 2022, astronet: Multivariate Time-Series Classification of As-
trophysical Transients using Deep Learning,https://github.com/
tallamjr/astronet
Allam T., McEwen J. D., 2024, RAS Techniques and Instruments, 3, 209
Allam Jr. T., Peloton J., McEwen J. D., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2303.08951
Alves C. S., Peiris H. V., Lochner M., McEwen J. D., Allam T., Biswas R.,
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration 2022, ApJS, 258, 23
Bellm E. C., et al., 2019, PASP, 131, 018002
Boone K., 2019, AJ, 158, 257
Boone K., 2021, AJ, 162, 275
Bricman K., Gomboc A., 2020, ApJ, 890, 73
Chambers K. C., et al., 2016, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1612.05560
Charnock T., Moss A., 2017, ApJ, 837, L28
DES Collaboration et al., 2024, ApJ, 973, L14
D’Isanto A., Cavuoti S., Brescia M., Donalek C., Longo G., Riccio G., Djor-
govski S. G., 2016, MNRAS, 457, 3119
Demianenko M., Malanchev K., Samorodova E., Sysak M., Shiriaev A.,
Derkach D., Hushchyn M., 2023, A&A, 677, A16
Flesch E. W., 2015, Publ. Astron. Soc. Australia, 32, e010
Flesch E. W., 2023, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 6, 49
Foreman-MackeyD.,AgolE.,AmbikasaranS.,AngusR.,2017,AJ,154,220
Förster F., et al., 2021, AJ, 161, 242
Fraga B. M. O., et al., 2024, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2404.08798
Fraikin A., Bennetot A., Allassonnière S., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2310.04486
GaglianoA.,ContardoG.,Foreman-MackeyD.,MalzA.I.,AleoP.D.,2023,
ApJ, 954, 6
Gaia Collaboration et al., 2016, A&A, 595, A1
Gal-Yam A., 2012, Science, 337, 927
Graziani R., et al., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2001.09095
Guillochon J., Nicholl M., Villar V. A., Mockler B., Narayan G., Mandel
K. S., Berger E., Williams P. K. G., 2018, ApJS, 236, 6
Ishida E. E. O., de Souza R. S., 2013, MNRAS, 430, 509
Ivezić Ž., et al., 2019, ApJ, 873, 111
KellyB.C.,BeckerA.C.,SobolewskaM.,SiemiginowskaA.,UttleyP.,2014,
ApJ, 788, 33
Kim D.-W., Protopapas P., Byun Y.-I., Alcock C., Khardon R., Trichas M.,
2011, ApJ, 735, 68
KisleyM.,QinY.-J.,ZabludoffA.,BarnardK.,KoC.-L.,2023,ApJ,942,29
Leoni M., Ishida E. E. O., Peloton J., Möller A., 2022, A&A, 663, A13
LlamasLanzaM.,KarpovS.,RusseilE.,QuintinE.,IshidaE.E.O.,Peloton
J., Pruzhinskaya M. V., Möller A., 2026, A&A, 705, A144
Lochner M., McEwen J. D., Peiris H. V., Lahav O., Winter M. K., 2016,
ApJS, 225, 31
MacLeod C. L., et al., 2011, ApJ, 728, 26
McInnes L., Healy J., Saul N., Grossberger L., 2018, The Journal of Open
Source Software, 3, 861
Mistry D., Copperwheat C. M., Darnley M. J., Olier I., 2024, MNRAS, 527,
8633
Möller A., de Boissière T., 2020, MNRAS, 491, 4277
Möller A., et al., 2016, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2016, 008
Möller A., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 501, 3272
Möller A., et al., 2022, MNRAS
Möller A., et al., 2024, MNRAS, 533, 2073
Möller A., et al., 2025, Publ. Astron. Soc. Australia, 42, e057
Muthukrishna D., Narayan G., Mandel K. S., Biswas R., Hložek R., 2019,
PASP, 131, 118002
Muthukrishna D., Mandel K. S., Lochner M., Webb S., Narayan G., 2022,
MNRAS, 517, 393
Narayan Shukla S., Marlin B. M., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1909.07782
NarayanShuklaS.,MarlinB.M.,2021a,arXive-prints,p.arXiv:2101.10318
NarayanShuklaS.,MarlinB.M.,2021b,arXive-prints,p.arXiv:2107.11350
Pasquet J., Pasquet J., Chaumont M., Fouchez D., 2019, A&A, 627, A21
Pimentel Ó., Estévez P. A., Förster F., 2023, AJ, 165, 18
Pruzhinskaya M. V., et al., 2026, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2603.29511
Rigault M., et al., 2025, A&A, 694, A1
Rose B. M., et al., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2111.03081
Sako M., et al., 2011, ApJ, 738, 162
Sako M., et al., 2018, PASP, 130, 064002
Sánchez-Sáez P., et al., 2021a, AJ, 161, 141
Sánchez-Sáez P., et al., 2021b, AJ, 162, 206
ScovacricchiD.,NicholR.C.,BaconD.,SullivanM.,PrajsS.,2016,MNRAS,
456, 1700
Sheng X., et al., 2024, MNRAS, 531, 2474
Sravan N., Milisavljevic D., Reynolds J. M., Lentner G., Linvill M., 2020,
ApJ, 893, 127
TanA.,ProtopapasP.,Cádiz-LeytonM.,Cabrera-VivesG.,Donoso-OlivaC.,
Becker I., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2509.24134
Tonry J. L., et al., 2018, PASP, 130, 064505
Vaswani A., Shazeer N., Parmar N., Uszkoreit J., Jones L., Gomez A. N.,
Kaiser L., Polosukhin I., 2017, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1706.03762
Villar V. A., Berger E., Metzger B. D., Guillochon J., 2017, ApJ, 849, 70
Villar V. A., Nicholl M., Berger E., 2018, ApJ, 869, 166
Villar V. A., et al., 2019, ApJ, 884, 83
Vincenzi M., et al., 2024, ApJ, 975, 86
de Soto K., et al., 2024a, Superphot+: Real-Time Fitting and Classification
of Supernova Light Curves, doi:10.5281/zenodo.12519870,https://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.12519870
de Soto K. M., et al., 2024b, ApJ, 974, 169
APPENDIX A: LATENT SPACE CORRELATION
PATTERNS WITH EXTRANEOUS LIGHT CURVE
FEATURES
As mentioned in Section 3.2, the model is not expected to encode
the peak magnitude (calculated across all bands) because it is sub-
tracted from light curve magnitudes before training (Section 2.2.4),
and the total number of observations across all bands, because the
traininglossfunctionwasnormalisedusingthisterm(Section2.2.2).
Inaddition,weexpectthemodel’slatentspacenottolearnthemean
magnitude. Like peak magnitude, being robust to mean magnitude
is important, as this can be a misleading feature for classifying tran-
sients. Figure A1 shows the visualisation of the latent space, similar
to Figure 4, but colored with these extraneous features.
The peak and mean magnitudes do not show obvious correlations
apart from some preference seen for very bright peak magnitudes.
The average number of observations indicates that light curves to-
wards the left in the projection have fewer observations, which can
be viewed as a surrogate for duration.
APPENDIX B: SN LATENT SPACE CORRELATIONS
WITH REMAINING PROPERTIES
Figure 5 showed the SN latent space colored by duration, decline
rate, and colour at peak. Here in Figure B1, we show correlations
with time of peak and amplitude.
Thepeaktimecorrelatesspatiallyinthelatentspace,butnotethat
our individual band peak times are sensitive to sampling and inac-
curate in cases of light curves showing flatter peaks. The amplitude
showssmoothcorrelation,andthesepatternsarequalitativelysimilar
to the duration plot. The fact that the duration and amplitude plots
show similar patterns is not unexpected, as the longer the SN evolu-
tion is observed, the more the variation can be captured. Although
not shown, the standard deviation of colour (𝜎g−r) and the standard
deviation of magnitudes show qualitatively similar patterns to the
amplitude plot shown here, where the former may be capturing the
tendency of SNe to redden during decline.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN21
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
6
8
10
12UMAP 2
17.5 18.0 18.5 19.0
mpeak (g, r)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
6
8
10
12UMAP 2
10 20 30
⟨L⟩
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
6
8
10
12UMAP 2
18 18.5 19 19.5
µ (g, r)
Figure A1.Same as Figure 4 but colored with different set of features. See Figure 4 caption for details. The features used to colour the latent space are: peak
magnitude irrespective of the band (𝑚peak (𝑔, 𝑟); left; this is used for normalising magnitudes before training), average no. of observations in each band (⟨𝐿⟩;
middle; also used in Figure 1, and the average of mean magnitude across both bands (𝜇(𝑔, 𝑟); bottom)).
4 6 8
UMAP 1
6
8UMAP 2
2 10
tpeak (g, r) (days)
(a)
4 6 8
UMAP 1
6
8UMAP 2
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Amplitude ( g, r) (b)
Figure B1.Same as Figure 5 but colored with two other properties: peak time and amplitude.
APPENDIX C: STANDARD DEVIATION OF FEATURES IN
LATENT SPACE
Figure C1 shows the latent space of SN using the same features as
in Figure 5 (except the magnitude decline rate), but instead of mean
features in each bin, it denotes their1𝜎standard deviation. This
allows us to understand the model’s ‘confidence’ in clustering light
curves based on these features. When compared with Figure 5, we
observethatwithrespecttothemeanvaluesinthebins,thestandard
deviationsarenotlarge.Inparticular,whilethestandarddeviationof
colourislargeatlocationsofthereddestSNe,itissmallformildlyred
and blue SNe, which means that they are separated with reasonable
certainty. Thus, the model indeed clusters light curves with similar
features with good confidence, and the mean trends in the main text
are generally reliable.
Figure C2 shows the standard deviation in each bin of the AGN
latent space. Comparing it with Figure 8, we see that some bins
defined by relatively low-duration AGN light curves (duration≲
200days) have comparable or larger standard deviation than their
duration, whereas the bins defined by the longest-duration AGN
light curves have lower relative scatter. The standard deviation in
the variability is generally of similar scale to the variability for both
high and low variability regions (Figure 8b). Similarly, the standard
deviationintheaveragecolourisnotsmall,particularlyforthereddest
and the bluest bins, and the standard deviation in the peak color,
faintest color, and their difference are all considerable. There are
followingpossiblereasonsforthisnon-negligiblescatter:(a)itmight
occur because our model is trained to perform interpolations which
tryto‘fit’asmanypointsaspossible,ratherthansmoothermodeling,
which can lead to this behaviour for (stochastic) AGNs unlike for
(non-stochastic) SNe, (b) the hyperparameter setting in the UMAP
projection: in particular, the tradeoff between the local and global
structure can be controlled when performing the UMAP projection
and a smaller neighbourhood size could also reduce the scatter, (c)
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

22Gondhalekar et al.
it might also reflect data characteristics: for example, high𝜎/𝜇can
arise due to changing mean trend, high variation around the mean,
or both, since𝜇here is the overall mean magnitude rather than a
running mean. Thus, although these features may not individually
be good descriptive features to understand the ‘local’ clustering of
AGN light curves, the mean trends in Figure 8 it is representative of
what the model has learned generally on a ‘global’ level.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

Light curve characterisation with mTAN23
4 6 8
UMAP 1
6
8UMAP 2
10 20
σDuration ( g,r)
(a)
4 6 8
UMAP 1
6
8UMAP 2
2 4 6
σtpeak (g,r) (b)
4 6 8
UMAP 1
6
8UMAP 2
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
σAmplitude ( g,r) (c)
4 6 8
UMAP 1
6
8UMAP 2
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
σ(g□r)peak
(d)
Figure C1.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

24Gondhalekar et al.
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
50 100 150
σDuration ( g,r)
(a)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
1 2 3
σσ/µ (g,r) ( ×100) (b)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
0.2 0.4
σµg□r (c)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
0.2 0.4 0.6
σ(g□r)peak
(d)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
σ(g□r)faint (e)
4 6 8 10 12 14
UMAP 1
5
7
9
11
13UMAP 2
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
σ(g□r)peak□(g□r)faint (f)
Figure C2.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)