Title: Prospect of Measuring the Cosmic Dipole by Strongly Lensed Gravitational Waves Associated with Galaxy Surveys
Authors: Anson Chen, Jun Zhang
Published: 2026-05-19
Categories: astro-ph.CO, gr-qc

Prospect of Measuring the Cosmic Dipole by Strongly Lensed Gravitational Waves
Associated with Galaxy Surveys
Anson Chen 1, a and Jun Zhang 1, 2
1International Center for Theoretical Physics Asia-Pacific,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100190 Beijing, China
2Taiji Laboratory for Gravitational Wave Universe,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049 Beijing, China
(Dated: May 20, 2026)
The cosmic dipole observed in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) is traditionally inter-
preted as being caused by the observer’s motion relative to the background. However, tensions with
dipole measurements from radio galaxy counts motivate the need for independent probes. This
work investigates the feasibility of using strongly lensed gravitational wave (GW) events to mea-
sure the cosmic dipole. Strongly lensed GWs produce multiple time-delayed images, which can be
used to infer the distances to both the lens and the source. These distances, associated with the
observed redshifts of the lens and the source from galaxy catalogues, encode information about the
background cosmology and cosmic dipole effects. By reconstructing a statistical sample of doubly
lensed GW events based on the singular isothermal sphere lens model, the cosmic dipole can be
estimated jointly with background cosmological parameters. Using realistic simulations for Einstein
Telescope and Cosmic Explorer, we forecast that a dipole magnitudegconsistent with both the
CMB and number count measurement could be detected with 10 years of observation. Furthermore,
constraints ongare greatly improved by combining constraints from doubly lensed events with
those from triply or quadruply lensed events. In the most optimistic scenario, where we measure
the number count dipole magnitude with 10 years of observation, we obtaing= (2.45 +1.53
−1.28)×10 −3
from the combined constraint, provided that systematic uncertainties are mitigated. Although chal-
lenging, strongly lensed GWs offer a novel approach to measuring the cosmic dipole, providing an
independent consistency test with different systematics from electromagnetic probes.
I. INTRODUCTION
The cosmic dipole tension is one of the challenges to
the Lambda Cold Dark Matter (ΛCDM) standard cos-
mology model. Both kinetic motion of the solar sys-
tem with respect to the background and the intrinsic
anisotropy of the universe could cause the observed cos-
mic dipole due to Doppler effects. An accurate measure-
ment of the cosmic dipole is essential to the test of the
cosmology principle of homogeneity and isotropy, and the
tests of dark energy theories arising from back reaction
of cosmological perturbations [1, 2]. However, two cur-
rent major methods to estimate the cosmic dipole yield
results in tension with each other.
On one hand, the Cosmic Microwave Background
(CMB) temperature map observed by the Planck satel-
lite indicates that the cosmic dipole has an amplitude of
|⃗ vo/c|= (1.23±0.00036)×10 −3, corresponding to an
observer’s velocity ofv o ∼370 km s −1 with respect to
the CMB rest frame (cis the speed of light), towards a
direction of (264.02 ◦ ±0.01 ◦,48.253 ◦ ±0.005 ◦) [3]. On
the other hand, one can measure the cosmic dipole by
number count of the observed galaxies, because of the
observed magnitude changes from the Doppler effect, as
well as the angular aberration effect. The amplitude of
the number count dipole is proposed by Ellis and Bald-
a chena@ucas.ac.cn
win [4] to be
D= [2 +x(1 +α)]|⃗ vo/c|,(1.1)
wherexis called the magnification bias parameter de-
fined by the slope of the integral source count at the flux
limit, which is usually close to 1, andαis the source pop-
ulation spectral index. For radio sources and quasars,
the luminosity spectrum obeysL∝ν −α, withνbeing
the emission frequency of the source. However, multi-
ple observations of the number count dipole from vari-
ous sources yield|⃗ vo|about twice of the value measured
from CMB, ranging from 600 to 1000 km s −1, towards
the same direction as the CMB dipole. For instance, Se-
crest et al. reports a number count dipole of 1.5×10 −2
with quasars in the CatWISE2020 catalogue, correspond-
ing to a 4.9σtension with the CMB dipole [5]. It is later
increased to over 5σwhen including more quasar samples
[6]. In addition, the number count dipole inferred from
supernova (SNIa) surveys gives (5±1.6)×10−3, which has
a 3.3σtension between the CMB result [7]. Furthermore,
radio source catalogues like the TIFR GMRT Sky Sur-
vey (TGSS), the NRAO VLA Sky Survey (NVSS), and
the Westerbork Northern Sky Survey (WENSS), yield a
number count dipole from 0.010 to 0.070 with an un-
certainty in the order of 10 −3 [8–15], significantly larger
than the dipole from CMB. In spite of some explanations
to alleviate the cosmic dipole tension, for example the lo-
cal structure impact on the local dipole [16, 17], or the
existence of cosmic void in the local universe [18], the
tension is not fully reconciled. In addition, the possible
arXiv:2605.19476v1  [astro-ph.CO]  19 May 2026

2
impact from time evolution of the radio source popula-
tion on the Ellis-Baldwin equation has been debated, yet
the Ellis-Baldwin equation remains valid [19–21]. How-
ever, a novel tomographic approach finds a cosmic dipole
aligned with the CMB measurement from eBOSS data
[22]. Moreover, there are also efforts to measure the in-
trinsic dipole directly [23, 24]. Nevertheless, more ob-
servations on different aspects are required to obtain a
better understanding on the cosmic dipole tension.
Meanwhile, the rapid development of gravitational
wave (GW) detection in recent years has opened a new
window to study cosmology. For compact binary co-
alescence (CBC) events without electromagnetic (EM)
counterparts,H 0 can be measured using the standard
siren approach, which breaks the mass-redshift degener-
acy of GW events with features in source mass distri-
bution, and associates GW events with redshifts from
galaxy catalogues [25–35]. The latest GWTC-4 data
yieldsH 0 = 76.6+13.0
−9.5 km s−1 Mpc−1 by combining bright
siren constraint from GW170817 and the standard siren
measurement with 141 events [36]. It is predicted that
the precision of standard siren measurement ofH 0 will
reduce to<1% with next-generation ground-based de-
tectors [37], such as Einstein Telescope (ET) [38] and
Cosmic Explorer (CE) [39]. In addition, the standard
siren method can also constrain modified gravity theories
of dark energy via GW propagation effects [36, 40–48].
In addition, GW events are also powerful tools in mea-
suring the cosmic dipole in various frequency bands.
First attempts have been made to probe the cosmic
anisotropy with LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA (LVK) data via
number count or source mass distribution [49–51], though
the current data shows no evidence of anisotropy. How-
ever, with∼10 6 GW events detected by ET and CE per
year in the future, the cosmic dipole can be measured
precisely by number count of CBCs [52, 53]. Apart from
the number count method, the cosmic dipole can also
be probed accurately by its modification effects on the
luminosity distances and redshifts of the events in the
era of ET and CE, using 10 3 bright sirens [54, 55], or
about 35 golden dark sirens [56]. Moreover, massive bi-
nary black hole (BBH) mergers as bright sirens will also
provide measurements on the cosmic dipole with space-
based GW detectors in the millihertz band [57]. Further-
more, by probing anisotropy in the stochastic GW back-
ground, the pulsar timing array can provide constraint on
the cosmic dipole as well [58–61]. What’s more, the cos-
mic dipole could potentially be probed by modification
to the GW waveform [62].
On the other hand, gravitational lensing of GWs has
great potential in studying cosmology as well. The
strongly lensed GW events will be able to constrain cos-
mological parameters precisely when associated with EM
counterparts [63], or galaxy catalogues [64–67]. These
events could also constrain modified gravity theories via
GW propagation effects [67–70]. In addition, the popula-
tion and time-delay distribution of strongly lensed GWs
could provide tight constraints on cosmology and grav-
ity as well [71–74]. Moreover, cross-correlation between
weak-lensing of GWs and galaxy catalogues could also
measure cosmological parameters [75, 76]. With ET and
CE deployed, and deeper galaxy surveys by the Dark
Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) [77], the Eu-
clid Mission [78], and Legacy Survey of Space and Time
(LSST) with the Vera C. Rubin Observatory [79] in the
near future, the association between strongly leansed
GWs and galaxy catalogues will be powerful in testing
our cosmology model.
In this work, we forecast the prospect to constrain the
cosmic dipole by strongly lensed GW events detected by
ET and CE associated with galaxy surveys like LSST.
By reconstructing the lens model of strongly lensed GW
events, we can pin down their host galaxies in the galaxy
catalogue. Then we estimate the magnitude and the ori-
entation of the cosmic dipole through the modification
in GW luminosity distance and redshift of host galaxies,
jointly withH 0 and matter energy density today Ω m,0
in the ΛCDM model. The cosmic dipole will also mod-
ify the angular diameter distance and the Einstein radius
in the lens system, which are also considered in our lens
reconstruction. We also separate doubly lensed events
that take up 70% of the total strongly lensed events
[80], and the rest of lensed events with more than two
images. While the lens model of doubly lensed events
can be approximated by the Singular Isothermal Sphere
(SIS) model, the lens model of triply or quadruply lensed
events can be more precisely reconstructed using tools
likelenstronomy[81].
The contents of this work are given as the following.
First, the strong lensing of GWs is reviewed in Section
II, and then the cosmic dipole effects in strong lensing
of GWs are introduced in Section III. Later, we describe
our method to probe the cosmic dipole with GW lensing
in Section IV, and our data simulation in Section V. The
results of our forecasts with our method are then given
in Section VI, followed by the conclusions in VII at the
end.
II. GRA VIT A TIONAL W A VE STRONG
LENSING
A. Geometric Optics Approximation
In this work, we study GWs from CBCs lensed by
galaxies on their line-of-sights, in a frequency range of
10−10 3 Hz for ground-based detectors. In this condi-
tion, the wavelength of GWs is much smaller than the
size of the lens galaxy, so that we can use the geomet-
ric optics approximation for strongly lensed GWs. In
the frequency domain, the lensed GW waveform ˜hL(f) is
given by
˜hL(f) =F(ω) ˜h(f),(2.1)

3
FIG. 1: Schematic figure for strong-lensing with the
thin-lens approximation.
whereF(ω) is the amplification factor, andω= 2πf. In
the geometric optics regime,F(ω) is given by [82, 83]
F(ω)≃
X
j
q
|µj|exp

iωtd,j −isign(ω)n j
π
2

,(2.2)
whereµ j is the magnification factor for thej-th image
of lensed GW signals,t d,j is the time delay of the arrival
of thej-th image due to lensing, andn j = 0,1,2 corre-
sponds to the Morse phase for the type I, II, III image
respectively. The time delay of each image of a strongly
lensed signal is given by
td,j(⃗θj, ⃗β) = 1 +z L
c
DLDS
DLS
1
2(⃗θj − ⃗β)2 −ψ( ⃗θj)

.(2.3)
Equation (2.3) is constructed in two parts. The first part
is caused by the changes in the geometric paths of lensed
signal images, where ⃗θj denotes the angle between the
images and the lens on the line-of-sight, and ⃗βdenotes
the true source angular position (see Fig. 1). The sec-
ond part is called the Shapiro time delay, which is caused
by the effective gravitational potential of the lensψ( ⃗θj).
In the pre-factor,z L denotes the lens redshift, andD L,
DS, andD LS are the angular diameter distances between
the lens and the observer, between the source and the ob-
server, and between the lens and the source, respectively.
Equation (2.3) can be further rewritten in dimension-
less unit. By scaling the angular position of the image
and the source by the Einstein radiusθ E, we have two
dimensionless positions,⃗ x= ⃗θ/θE and⃗ y= ⃗β/θE. The
time delay of lensed signals is then given by
td(⃗ x, ⃗ y) =1 +z L
c
DLDS
DLS
θ2
ET(⃗ x, ⃗ y),(2.4)
whereT(⃗ x, ⃗ y) is the dimensionless time delay defined by
T(⃗ x, ⃗ y) =1
2(⃗ x−⃗ y)2 −Ψ(⃗ x).(2.5)
By choosing a specific spherical symmetric thin-lens
model, one can input a specific form of the effective
potential Ψ(⃗ x), and thus obtain an analytical form of
T(⃗ x, ⃗ y).
B. Doubly lensed GWs with the SIS lens model
Following previous works [67, 84], the lens model of the
doubly lensed GW events can be approximated by the
SIS model without bringing significant impacts on lens
statistic [85–87]. Although the ellipticity of lens galaxies
could lead to biases in cosmological implications using the
SIS model, here we want to investigate the detectability
of the cosmic dipole by strongly lensed GWs in an ideal
condition where lens galaxies have negligible ellipticity.
The SIS model approximates the mass components of
the galaxy as ideal gas particles in an adiabatic system
[88], so that the mass distribution density profile of the
SIS model is given by
ρ(r) = σ2
v
2πG
1
r2 ,(2.6)
whereσ v is the velocity dispersion of stars in the galaxy.
One can further infer the Einstein radius of the SIS model
to be [82]
θE = 4π σ2
v
c2
DLS
DS
.(2.7)
On the other hand, the lens mass for the SIS model can
be given by [82]
ML = 4π σ4
v
Gc2
DLDLS
DS
,(2.8)
Therefore we have a connection between the Einstein ra-
dius and the mass for the SIS model,
θ2
E = 4π GML
c2
DLS
DLDS
.(2.9)
More importantly, the SIS model results in a special lens
equation. In general, the lens equation describes the rela-
tion among the image position, the source position, and
the reduced deflection angle by ⃗β= ⃗θ−⃗ α(⃗θ), whereα
is defined byα= ˆαD LS/DS (ˆαis the deflection angle
shown in Fig. 1). In the SIS model,α(θ) =θ E, so that
the lens equation yields
θ± =β±θ E,(2.10)
whereθ ± represents the two image position angles in the
case ofβ < θ E. Otherwise, ifβ≥θ E, only one image
may exist. Hence, for doubly lensed galaxy images, one
can infer the Einstein radius for the SIS lens model by
θE = (θ+ −θ −)/2 with the image angular positions from
observations.
In addition, the dimensionless time delay and the mag-
nification factor of the SIS model are given by [89]
T± =∓y− 1
2 ,(2.11)
µ± = 1± 1
y .(2.12)

4
By jointly analyze the two images of strongly lensed GW
signals with the SIS model, we can jointly estimate the
true luminosity distance of GW events and the impact
parametery[67]. Then we can infer the analytical time
delay withyfrom GW parameter estimation (PE) and
θE from lensed galaxy images, and constrain cosmological
parameters by comparing the analytical time delay with
the observed time delay. Compared to the time delay
measurement for strongly lensed EM sources [90], the
time delay measurement for strongly lensed GW signals
would be much more precise due to small uncertainty in
the arrival time of GW signals. The main uncertainty of
the analytical time delay will come from the estimation
ofy.
C. Lensed GWs with more than two images
Apart from doubly lensed events, strongly lensed GW
events with 3 to 5 images are also expected to be observed
in the near future [64–66, 91]. More complex lens mod-
els are required to perform lens reconstruction for such
events, such as the Singular Isothermal Ellipsoid model
[92], using specific software packages likelenstronomy
[81]. The effective potential in strong-lensing time delay
can be precisely constructed for these events, so that the
time delay between any images is given by [63, 66]
∆tij = 1 +z L
c D∆t∆ϕij,(2.13)
whereD ∆t =D LDS/DLS, and ∆ϕ ij is the difference be-
tween the effective potential of images. With observed
∆tij and reconstructed ∆ϕij, one can then constrain cos-
mological parameters by constructingD ∆t withz L,z S
from galaxy catalogues.
III. COSMIC DIPOLE MODIFICA TION
The cosmic dipole induced by the kinetic motion of the
observer with velocity⃗ vo in the CMB rest frame can be
denoted byg·ˆn=−⃗ v o/c, wheregand ˆnrepresent the
magnitude and the direction of the dipole. The dipole
direction in the sky coordinate can be further written by
ˆn= (cosϕdip sinθ dip,sinϕ dip sinθ dip,cosθ dip),(3.1)
whereϕ dip andθ dip are the right ascension and the dec-
lination of the dipole direction. Given a line-of-sight an-
gular position of a source on the sky, denoted by ˆz(ϕ, θ),
the corresponding magnitude of the cosmic dipole effect
is given byg(ˆn·ˆz). As a consequence, the observed lu-
minosity distance of the source is modified by the cosmic
dipole effects as [93]
d′
L =d L(z)[1 +g(ˆn·ˆz)],(3.2)
and the observed redshift of the source is also modified
as
1 +z ′ = (1 +z)[1 +g(ˆn·ˆz)],(3.3)
whered L andzare the luminosity distance and the red-
shift in the CMB rest frame. In the late universe within
the ΛCDM framework, we have
dL(z) = (1 +z)r(z),(3.4)
whereris the comoving distance given by
r(z) =
Z z
0
c
H(˜z)d˜z.(3.5)
The Hubble parameter is given by
H(z) =H 0
q
Ωm,0(1 +z) 3 + ΩΛ,0.(3.6)
Here Ω m,0 and Ω Λ,0 are energy density of matter and
dark energy today. Meanwhile, the observed component
masses of CBC GW sourcesm obs are redshifted from the
source massesm s, and are thus modified by the cosmic
dipole effects as
m′ =m s(1 +z ′) =m s(1 +z)[1 +g(ˆn·ˆz)].(3.7)
In terms of observation, the relation between the ob-
served luminosity distance and the observed redshift is
given by [19]
d′
L =d L(z′)

1− c(1 +z ′)g(ˆn·ˆz)
r(z ′)H(z ′)

.(3.8)
This is the equation we should use for the standard siren
analysis in the presence of the cosmic dipole.
On the other hand, to correctly reconstruct the lens
model in strong lensing, we need to construct the true an-
gular diameter distance in the CMB rest frame with the
observed redshift of galaxies. As derived in [94], the rest-
frame angular diameter distance of the source is given
by
DS = c
1 +z S(z′
S)
Z zS(z′
S)
0
d˜z
H(˜z)
= c
1 +z S(z′
S)
Z z′
S −(1+z′
S)g(ˆn·ˆz)
0
d˜z
H(˜z)
≃D A(0, z′
S)[1 +g(ˆn·ˆz)]− c
H(z ′
S) g(ˆn·ˆz).(3.9)
HereD A is the rest-frame formalism for angular diameter
distance between two redshifts, defined by
DA(z1, z2) = c
(1 +z 2)
Z z2
z1
c
H(˜z)d˜z.(3.10)
Similarly, we have
DL ≃D A(0, z′
L)[1 +g(ˆn·ˆz)]− c
H(z ′
L) g(ˆn·ˆz),(3.11)
DLS ≃D A(z′
L, z′
S)[1 +g(ˆn·ˆz)]
− c
H(z ′
S) g(ˆn·ˆz) +1 +z ′
L
1 +z ′
S
c
H(z ′
L) g(ˆn·ˆz).(3.12)

5
Equation (3.9)-(3.12) will be used to compute angular
diameter distances in lens model reconstruction with the
observed redshift of the lens and the source galaxy.
On the other hand, the time dilation effects due to the
observer’s velocity on the strong lensing time delay is in
the order ofv 2
o/c2, so that it can be negligible compared
to other effects [94]. In addition, due to the angular aber-
ration effect of the cosmic dipole, the EM image position
angles are also modified. However, the changes in the an-
gle depends on both the line-of-sight direction of the lens
and the rotation of the image around the line-of-sight
axis [94]. Accounting for such an effect requires more
complex simulation of the image positions relative to the
lens on the sky, which is beyond the scope of this work.
In our simulation, we only create random values of the
impact parameteryfor lensed events without specifying
the rotation angle relative to the line-of-sight axis of the
lens. Therefore we didn’t include the angular aberration
effect in our measurement of the cosmic dipole, but it
will need to be studied specifically in future’s work.
IV. METHOD
Following our previous work [67], we assume that in
the XG-detector era, the precise localization of strongly
lensed GWs by three XG detectors will allow us to iden-
tify their host galaxies. Especially, for triply lensed or
quadruply lensed events, the localization area can be nar-
row down to ∆Ω∼0.01 deg 2, and only 1 strong lens-
ing system is expected in the area. For doubly lensed
events, the localization would be less accurate, but the
true host galaxies can be found by comparing the Bayes
factor of the likelihood between different strong lensing
systems in the galaxy catalogue within the localization
area [64, 95]. In our simulation, we consider the opti-
mistic scenario in which true strongly lensed systems are
identified for GW lensed events. In this case, the systems
must lie within the footprints of galaxy surveys, and the
angular positions of the lensed images must be resolvable
by electromagnetic telescopes (see Section V B for details
on lensed event selection). Otherwise, lensed GW events
whose host galaxy EM images fall outside existing galaxy
catalogues cannot be analyzed using our method.
Since the cosmic dipole effect changes the observed lu-
minosity distancesd obs
L of GWs and observed redshift
zobs of galaxies, the dipole magnitude can be measured
with the standard siren method, along with other cos-
mological parameters such asH 0 and Ωm,0 in the ΛCDM
background. However, we need to remove the magnifica-
tion by strong lensing of GWs first to obtain trued obs
L .
Thus, a re-analysis of the lensed GWs is required once
the lensed signal pairs are confirmed. Through a joint
re-analysis of both GW images of a doubly lensed event,
we can obtain posterior samples for trued obs
L and the
impact parameterywith the SIS model [67]. For fur-
ther details on the re-analysis of waveform parameters,
see Section V C. While the doubly lensed events take up
∼70% of the total lensed events, the rest of the events
contain more than two images, allowing more precise lens
reconstruction and thus de-magnification of the signals.
Here we assume that the uncertainty ofd obs
L for triply or
quadruply lensed events is at the same level as doubly
lensed events after joint analysis of the images.
On the other hand, the cosmic dipole effect also needs
to be considered in angular diameter distances for time
delay cosmography with strong lensing, from which we
can also constrain the cosmic dipole. For the doubly
lensed events, using the observed time delay between GW
signal images, ∆t=t d,2 −t d,1, along with the redshifts
of the lens galaxy and the source galaxy, the Einstein
radiusθ E, and the impact parametery, we can esti-
mate cosmological parameters via equations (2.4) and
(2.12) under the SIS model. For a resolved image of
a strong-lensing system in galaxy surveys, the angular
separation between the two images of the source can be
measured. From the lens equation (2.10), the Einstein
radiusθ E of the SIS lensing system can then be obtained
asθ E = (θ+ −θ −)/2 = ∆θ/2. We therefore construct the
log-likelihood for the cosmological parametersλusingχ 2
statistics overNlensed events combining the standard
siren and the time delay measurement:
logL(λ) =− 1
2
NX
i=1
χ2(λ,∆t obs
i ,∆θ i, z′
L,i, z′
S,i, yi),(4.1)
where
χ2(λ,∆tobs
i ,∆θ i, z′
L,i, z′
S,i, yi) =
"
dobs
L,i −d ′
L(λ, z′
S,i)
σ(dobs
L,i )
#2
+
"
∆tobs
i −∆t(λ,∆θ i, z′
L,i, z′
S,i, yi)
σ(∆t)
#2
.(4.2)
Note that the angular diameter distancesD S,D L and
DLS used in analytical time delay construction are com-
puted with equations (3.9), (3.11) and (3.12) respectively
using observed redshiftz ′
S andz ′
L. Because of the negligi-
ble uncertainty in GW arrival time, which is on the order
of milliseconds, compared to strong-lensing time delays of
days, the uncertaintyσ(∆t) comes from analytical time
delay reconstruction. In particular, it is dominated byσ y
from the GW re-analysis, which typically yields a relative
error of 5%–10%. The uncertainties in galaxy redshift,
z′
L andz ′
S, is in the order of 1%−3% in photometric
surveys like LSST [79], and it can be further lower to or-
der of 0.1% with follow-up spectroscopic measurements,
e.g. Euclid [78] and MegaMapper [96], so we assume that
the uncertainty in redshift is negligible in ideal measure-
ments. Therefore, we can simply useσ(∆t)/∆t≃σ y/y.
Furthermore, we are assuming a perfectly smooth lens
model, so we don’t consider the time delay changes from
sub-structures of galaxies. Finally, the posterior forλ
can be obtained by Bayesian inference with the log like-
lihood and a flat prior onλusing Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) sampling.

6
However, unlike doubly lensed events, the effective po-
tential ∆ϕcan be obtained from lens reconstruction with
EM images more accurately for triply or quadruply lensed
events. Therefore, from equation (2.13), the time delay
part in the log likelihood in equation (4.2) simply be-
comes
χ2
∆t =
"
∆tobs
i /∆ϕi −(1 +z ′
L,i)D∆t(λ, z′
L,i, z′
S,i)/c
σ(∆ϕi, z′
L,i, z′
S,i)
#2
,
(4.3)
where the total uncertaintyσconsists of error from ∆ϕ
and galaxy redshifts, which is computed by
σ2(∆ϕi, z′
L,i, z′
S,i) =
∆tobs
i
∆ϕi
2 σ∆ϕi
∆ϕi
2
+
1 +z ′
L,i
c
∂D∆t
∂z ′
L,i
+ D∆t
c
2
σ2
z′
L
+
1 +z ′
L,i
c
∂D∆t
∂z ′
S,i
2
σ2
z′
S
.(4.4)
The relative error of the effective potentialσ ∆ϕ/∆ϕcan
be reasonably taken as 2%, accounting for uncertainties
from lens reconstruction and line-of-sight mass distribu-
tion [63, 66, 97]. We also assume galaxy redshift error to
beσ z′ = 0.001(1 +z ′) for ideal spectroscopic measure-
ment.
V. SIMULA TION
In this work, we forecast the constraint on the cosmic
dipole from mock strongly lensed GW data based on re-
alistic models of GW source population, merger rate, and
lensing rate. We select the events that can be associated
with EM strong-lensing systems, taking into account the
angular resolution, sky coverage, and depth of LSST, and
estimate the joint posterior of cosmological parameters
over all events by MCMC sampling.
A. Mock GW events
We target GW events detected by the XG detector
network that consists of an ET with the triangular con-
figuration and two CEs. We adopt the orientation and
the location of ET implemented inBilby 1, with a sensi-
tivity curve for the 10 km arm length design 2. We also
assume that the two CE detectors locate at the LIGO
Livingston site and the Hanford site with the same ori-
entation as LIGO detectors, and a sensitivity curve for
1 https://git.ligo.org/lscsoft/bilby/-/blob/
d37609ccc9a878750c841b4b93da990e63acffb2/bilby/gw/
detector/detectors/ET.interferometer
2 https://apps.et-gw.eu/tds/ql/?c=16492/ET10kmcolumns.txt
the 40 km arm length design 3. We implement this in the
Python toolGWSim[98] for mock GW generation.
We first create unlensed GW catalogues for 5-year ob-
servation and 10-year observation respectively, assum-
ing a duty cycle of 75% for each detector (it applies to
three ET detectors as a whole). We simulate both bi-
nary black hole (BBH) merger and neutron-star-black-
hole (NSBH) merger events. For black hole mass distri-
bution, we use the ”Powerlaw + Double Peak” model
adopted in the GWTC-4 cosmology paper [36], while
for neutron star we assume a uniform mass distribution
model between 1.0 and 2.5 solar masses. We also adopt
the Madau–Dickinson model as the merger rate redshift
evolution model [36, 99]. We only simulate BBHs and
NSBHs, because the event rate for binary neutron stars
(BNSs) remains highly uncertain (7.6−250 Gpc −3 yr−1
from GWTC-4 [100]). A detailed description of these
models and the injection values used is provided in Ap-
pendix A.
The luminosity distances of the GW events in the CMB
rest frame are first derived from redshift assuming the
fiducial ΛCDM model withH 0 = 67.7 km s −1 Mpc−1
and Ω m,0 = 0.308, based on the Planck 2018 TT, TE,
EE+lowE+lensing+BAO results [101]. Next, we add
the cosmic dipole effect to the observed luminosity dis-
tancesd obs
L and observed masses of GW events based on
the measurements from the CMB and the number count
method respectively. In the first scenario, we adopt the
observer’s velocity asv o = 370 km s −1 measured from
the CMB, which corresponds to a cosmic dipole magni-
tude ofg= 1.23×10 −3, with a direction of (264◦,48 ◦) in
the galactic coordinate. As for the second scenario, we
assume the observer’s velocity to bev o = 800 km s −1,
since the number count measurements yield roughly 600-
1000 km s −1 in different studies. It corresponds to a
cosmic dipole magnitude ofg= 2.67×10 −3. We also
assume the same cosmic dipole direction as the CMB
measurement. In summary:
•Scenario 1: CMB measurement.g= 1.23×10 −3,
(ldip, bdip) = (264◦,48 ◦).
•Scenario 2: Number count measurement.g=
2.67×10 −3, (ldip, bdip) = (264◦,48 ◦).
B. Lensed event selection
We then simulate lensed events with the optical depth
for mock GW sources following [67, 84]. The optical
depth describes how the probability of a GW event be-
ing lensed and detected varies with redshift. (see detailed
derivation in Appendix B). The optical depthτis given
3 https://dcc.cosmicexplorer.org/CE-T2000017/public/
cosmic explorer strain.txt

7
by
τ= F∗
30 [DS(1 +z S)]3y2
max

1− 1
7
Γ[(8 +α)/β]
Γ[(4 +α)/β]
∆t∗
Tobs

,
(5.1)
where
F∗ = 16π3n∗,0
 σ∗,0
c
4 Γ[(4 +α)/β]
Γ[α/β] ; (5.2)
∆t∗ = 32π2
 σ∗,0
c
4 DS
c (1 +z S)ymax.(5.3)
Here Γ is the Euler gamma function, andT obs is the ob-
servation time of GW detectors. The modified Schechter
function parameters take the values ofn ∗,0 = 8.0×
10−3 h3Mpc−3,σ ∗,0 = 144 km s −1,α= 2.49, and
β= 2.29, following previous study in [67, 84] (also consis-
tent with recent studies, e.g. in [102–104]). The maximal
impact parametery max depends on the network SNR de-
tection thresholdρ th of the lensed GW images and the
network SNR of the unlensed GW signalρ UL:
ymax =
 ρth
ρUL
2
+ 1
−1
.(5.4)
This choice ofy max ensures that all simulated lensed
events satisfyy⩽y max, meaning that their second im-
ages are above the detection threshold. For events with
y→1, the second image is suppressed and has a lower
SNR. However, the sub-threshold search techniques en-
able the recovery of lensed signals with SNRs as low as
6, and occasionally down to 4 [105–109], significantly en-
hancing the prospects for detecting strongly lensed sig-
nal pairs. Therefore, in our simulation, we computey max
for each event using its unlensed network SNRρ UL, and
adopt a network SNR threshold ofρ th = 6 for sub-
threshold searches. Lensed events are then randomly
selected from the mock GW catalogs with probability
weighted by the optical depth in equation (5.1) using the
correspondingy max for each event, and the exact value of
yfor each lensed event is then drawn from a linear prob-
ability distributionP(y) =yover the interval (0, y max).
For the selected lensed events, we generate foreground
galaxy lenses following the stellar mass distribution of
galaxies. The galaxy number density as a function of
stellar mass is described by a double-Schechter function:
Φ(M) = exp

− M
M ∗

Φ∗
1
 M
M ∗
α1+1
+Φ∗
2
 M
M ∗
α2+1
.
(5.5)
We adopt the parameter values from [110]:
log(M ∗/M⊙) = 10.79, log(Φ ∗
1/h3Mpc−3) =−3.31,
log(Φ∗
2/h3Mpc−3) =−2.01,α 1 =−1.69, and
α2 =−0.79. Stellar masses for lens galaxies are
randomly drawn with probabilities weighted by equation
(5.5). Given that the baryon-to-dark matter ratio in the
universe is approximately 1:5, and that baryonic matter
FIG. 2: Skymap masked by LSST footprint for
simulated lensed GW events (marked by×) from 5-year
observation of ET+CE whose host EM lensed images
are resolvable by LSST, in a cosmic dipole background
measured by the CMB.
in galaxies includes both stars and interstellar medium,
we adopt a representative stellar mass fraction of 10% of
the total galaxy mass (including the dark matter halo).
The total lens galaxy massM L is therefore taken to be
ten times the drawn stellar mass. Lens redshiftsz L are
drawn with probabilities proportional to the differential
comoving volumedV c/dz.
Our method requires resolved images of lensed host
galaxies, so we only select events whose sky locations
are within galaxy survey’s footprint and host galaxy im-
ages are resolvable by telescopes. Specifically, we con-
sider the LSST survey, which will reach redshifts up to
z= 3 over 18,000 deg 2 [79, 111], covering most of the
southern hemisphere of the sky. As shown in Fig. 2, We
assume that the LSST footprint will cover the area within
−65◦ <RA<5 ◦, excluding the Milky Way bar in the
center of the galactic coordinate with length of 160 ◦ and
width of 10 ◦ [79]. In addition, the LSST camera has a
resolvable angular resolution of 0.2 arc seconds [112]. For
each selected lensed event, we computeθ E from equation
(2.9) usingM L and the distancesD L,D S,D LS, which
are obtained fromz L andz S in the CMB rest frame.
Events are considered resolvable ifθ± = (y±1)θ E >0.2 ′′.
The time delay between images is then calculated using
equations (2.4), (2.9), and (2.12) with lens model param-
eters.
Applying the selection criteria described above, we
identify 159 qualified lensed events within the LSST foot-
print for a simulated 5-year observation with the ET+CE
network, including 95 BBHs and 64 NSBHs. Fig. 2
presents the sky map of these events, masked by LSST
coverage and plotted against the CMB-measured cos-
mic dipole background. Meanwhile, extending the ob-
servation to 10 years yields 363 qualified events. Among
all events, we randomly select 70% to be doubly lensed
events and 30% to be triply/quadruply lensed events [80].

8
C. W aveform parameter estimation
For the selected doubly lensed events, we perform joint
waveform parameter estimation (PE) for the two signal
images in order to find the trued obs
L and the impact pa-
rametery, as shown in our previous work [67]. For the in-
dividual image, the magnification effect of lensing would
lead to biases in the estimation of masses and luminos-
ity distance. Using the SIS model, we can estimatey
from the magnification ratio of the two images of a lensed
event, and thus find the true masses anddobs
L in joint PE.
For simplicity, we generate spin-free waveforms with the
IMRPhenomXPHMwaveform model [113], and assume pre-
cise localization for the lensed events. So we perform joint
PE for 5 parameters: observed chirp massM obs
c , mass
ratioq, observed luminosity distanced obs
L , inclination an-
gleι, and the impact parametery. The higher modes in
theIMRPhenomXPHMwaveform would help break the de-
generacy betweend obs
L andι. Furthermore, we assume
that the Morse phase difference between the two image
signals can be measured from the individual PE of the
images prior to the joint PE, so we simply use a fixed
Morse phase ofπ/2 between the images.
In our joint PE, the posterior of waveform parameters
{ϕ}given image datax j=1,2 is given by
P(ϕ|x 1, x2) =
Z
P(x 1, x2|ϕ)Π(ϕ)dϕ,(5.6)
where Π(ϕ) is the prior, and the joint log likelihood is
given by
logP(x 1, x2|ϕ) =− 1
2
2X
j=1
⟨˜h(xj)− ˜h(ϕ)|˜h(xj)− ˜h(ϕ)⟩.
(5.7)
Herefis the frequency, ˜h(f) is the detector response to
GW signals, given by
˜h(f) =
X
k
[F k
+˜h+(f) +F k
×˜h×(f)],(5.8)
whereF k
+ andF k
× are the antenna pattern functions of
thekdetector for the plus and cross GW polarization.
The scalar product⟨ ˜h(f)|˜g(f)⟩is defined as
⟨˜h(f)|˜g(f)⟩ ≡2 Re
Z
df
˜h(f)˜g∗(f) + ˜h∗(f)˜g(f)
Sn(f)

,
(5.9)
where Sn(f) is the detector noise power spectral density
(PSD). We adopt priors Π(dobs
L )∝(d obs
L )2 and Π(y)∝y,
while uniform priors are used for all other parameters.
Finally, posterior samples are obtained usingnessai
[114, 115], which implements normalizing flows within
nested sampling as part of theBilbypackage [116].
Fig. 3 presents an example of the posterior samples
obtained from joint PE for a pair of lensed GW signals
with SNR of 52.1 and 30.0 respectively. Despite moder-
ate degeneracies, the true values ofd obs
L andyare well re-
covered, and their marginalized posteriors approximately
Mobs
c = 42 .02+0.03
−0.03
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
q
q = 0 .90+0.04
−0.04
19
20
21
22
23
dobs
L
dobs
L = 20 .36+0.67
−0.56
1.80
1.84
1.88
1.92
ι
ι = 1 .83+0.02
−0.02
41.92
41.96
42.00
42.04
42.08
Mobs
c
0.40
0.48
0.56
0.64
y
0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95
q
19 20 21 22 23
dobs
L
1.80 1.84 1.88 1.92
ι
0.40 0.48 0.56 0.64
y
y = 0 .50+0.04
−0.04
FIG. 3: Posterior samples from joint re-analysis of one
of the mock doubly lensed BBHs detected by ET+CE
network usingnessainested sampling inBilby. The
estimated parameters include chirp massM c[M⊙],
mass ratioq, GW luminosity distanced obs
L [Gpc],
inclination angleι, and impact parametery. The
orange lines show the injected values for parameters.
follow Gaussian distributions. Accordingly, we can ex-
tract the observables and their uncertainties from the
mean and standard deviation of the posterior samples,
respectively.
VI. RESUL TS
We use theemceepackage [117] to infer the poste-
rior distributions of cosmological parameters by maxi-
mizing the log likelihood given in equation (4.1), adopt-
ing uniform priors on all parameters. We perform the
inference in both scenarios where the cosmic dipole is
injected based on CMB measurements and the number
count measurements respectively. For each scenario, we
forecast the constraints expected from the ET+CE net-
work after 5 years and 10 years of observation. The re-
sults are presented below.
A. Double systems
We first forecast joint posteriors onH 0, Ωm,0, and the
dipole magnitudeg, with fixed dipole direction using sim-
ulated doubly lensed events in both cosmic dipole scenar-
ios, as well as a null test whereg= 0. The prior ong
is uniform within (10 −5,1). The inferred joint likelihood

9
0.270
0.285
0.300
0.315
0.330
Ωm,0
66.6
67.2
67.8
68.4
69.0
H0 [km s −1Mpc−1]
−4.8−4.2−3.6−3.0−2.4
log g
0.2700.2850.3000.3150.330
Ωm,0
−4.8
−4.2
−3.6
−3.0
−2.4
log g
Null test
Tobs = 5 yrs
Tobs = 10 yrs
FIG. 4: Joint likelihood forecast forH 0, Ωm,0 and logg
in the null test whereg= 0, assuming 5-year and
10-year observation by ET+CE respectively. The
orange lines show the injected parameter values.
for the null test with 5-year and 10-year observation are
shown in Fig. 4. For clearer visualization, we plot the
likelihood of logginstead ofg. As shown in the corner
plot, the marginalized likelihood of logghas a clear up-
per bound, and the likelihood extends to lower value of
logg. In addition, the upper bound for 10-year observa-
tion is lower than that for 5-year observation, indicating
a stronger constraint on logg. The results are in good
agreement with the injection in which no cosmic dipole
is present.
Next, we present the inferred joint likelihood for 5-year
and 10-year observation in the CMB dipole scenario in
Fig. 5. We can see that the upper bound of loggis also
well constrained, while the lower bound of loggis still
unconstrained. Considering the 90% confidence interval
with the lower bound fixed at the prior lower bound,
the upper bound of the marginalized likelihood of logg
corresponds tog= 1.94×10 −3 for 5 years of observation,
which is∼58% larger than the true vale. For 10 years
of observation, there exists a peak in the marginalized
likelihood distribution of logg, where the peak and the
1σconfidence interval around it gives logg=−2.73 +0.75
−1.18.
The peak, the upper bound and the lower bound of the
posterior ofgcorrespond tog= 1.86×10 −3,g= 1.04×
10−2, andg= 1.24×10 −4, but the lower bound is mainly
driven by the prior range.
In addition,H 0 and Ωm,0 are tightly constrained, with
an uncertainty of∼0.43% and∼2.8% respectively for 5
years of observation, which are consistent with our fore-
casts for the ΛCDM model in [67]. The mean value
0.270
0.285
0.300
0.315
0.330
Ωm,0
66.6
67.2
67.8
68.4
H0 [km s −1Mpc−1]
−4.8
−4.0
−3.2
−2.4
log g
0.2700.2850.3000.3150.330
Ωm,0
−4.8
−4.0
−3.2
−2.4
log g
CMB dipole
Tobs = 5 yrs
Tobs = 10 yrs
FIG. 5: Joint likelihood forecast forH 0, Ωm,0 and logg
with fixed dipole direction in the CMB dipole scenario,
assuming 5-year and 10-year observation by ET+CE
respectively. The orange lines show the injected
parameter values.
slightly shifts away from the injected value, likely due
to degeneracy, but is within the 2σcontour. In partic-
ular, they have little correlation withg. For 10 years
of observation, the uncertainty ofH 0 and Ω m,0 slightly
decrease to∼0.41% and∼2.3% respectively.
On the other hand, in the number count dipole sce-
nario, the constraint ongis generally stronger than the
CMB dipole scenario, because the number count dipole
magnitude is about twice larger. As shown in Fig. 6, the
marginalized likelihood of loggresults in a peak around
the injected value for both 5-year and 10-year observa-
tion periods. Whereas, similar to the CMB dipole sce-
nario, the likelihood is bounded only at the upper limit,
while the lower limit remains unbounded. Quantitively,
the peak and the 1σconfidence interval centered at the
peak yield logg=−2.75 +0.78
−1.15 for 5-year observation, and
logg=−2.55 +0.66
−0.90 for 10-year observation, respectively.
While the constraint for 5-year observation is less accu-
rate, for 10-year observation, the peak of the posterior of
ggiven a flat prior corresponds tog= 2.79×10 −3, with
the upper and lower bound to beg= 1.27×10 −2 and
g= 3.53×10 −4.
These results show that doubly lensed GWs + galaxy
catalogue with the SIS model could potentially measure
the cosmic dipole given a longer period of observation,
and the true value is recovered better for the number
count dipole scenario. But the uncertainty ongleads
to an upper bound nearly an order of magnitude larger
than the true value, and it couldn’t rule out the scenario

10
0.270
0.285
0.300
0.315
0.330
Ωm,0
66.6
67.2
67.8
68.4
H0 [km s −1Mpc−1]
−4.8
−4.0
−3.2
−2.4
log g
0.2700.2850.3000.3150.330
Ωm,0
−4.8
−4.0
−3.2
−2.4
log g
Number count dipole
Tobs = 5 yrs
Tobs = 10 yrs
FIG. 6: Joint likelihood forecast forH 0, Ωm,0 and logg
with fixed dipole direction in the number count dipole
scenario, assuming 5-year and 10-year observation by
ET+CE respectively. The orange lines show the
injected parameter values.
forg→0. On one hand, the error ind obs
L estimated
from GWs for distant lensed events could be up to∼
10%, making it difficult to probe the tiny modification
ind obs
L from the cosmic dipole. On the other hand, the
time-delay constraint relies on accurate measurement on
y, which is also estimated from joint GW analysis with
uncertainty of∼5−10%. Thus, the cosmic dipole effect
is hard to measured from time delay constraint with the
SIS model as well.
B. Combining triples and quadruples
Apart from doubly lensed events, there are also 30%
of the total lensed events with more than two im-
ages, mainly triples and quadruples, which can provide
more accurate lens reconstruction, and hence tighter cos-
mological constraint by time delay measurement with
equation (4.3), replacing the second part in equation
(4.2). Performing the same inference withemceefor
triple/quadruple events randomly selected from our mock
lensed event pool, we obtain joint likelihood ofH 0, Ωm,0,
and loggas for the double events. Then we combine the
joint likelihood for double events and triple/quadruple
events by multiplying the multidimensional likelihood
from the two analyses, and obtain the marginalized like-
lihood of loggfrom the combined likelihood.
Fig. 7 shows the posterior ofgfrom analysis for double
events and triple/quadruple events respectively, as well
FIG. 7: Posterior distribution ofgfrom individual
likelihood for doubly lensed events (blue) and
triply/quadruply lensed events (orange) respectively,
and from combined likelihood (green), for 10-year
observation in both dipole scenarios. The injected
values ofgare shown in gray dashed lines.
as the combined posterior for them, in both the CMB
dipole scenario and the number count dipole scenario for
10 years of observation. Firstly, we find that the con-
straint ongby triple/quadruple events is slightly stronger
than that by double events in both scenarios, despite
the fact that the number of triple/quadruple events are
more than a half lower. Such improvement is driven by
smaller uncertainty in lens reconstruction for time-delay
cosmography. Secondly, the combined constraint ong
for double events and triple/quadruple events is signifi-
cantly improved. For the CMB dipole scenario, the peak
of the combined posterior and the 1σconfidence interval
around it gives logg=−2.95 +0.28
−1.18. The peak corresponds
tog= 1.12×10 −3, which is closer to the injected value.
The 1σupper bound corresponds tog= 2.14×10 −3,
which is about 74% larger than the injected value. How-
ever, the lower bound is still not able to be constrained.
Meanwhile, for the number count dipole scenario, the
peak of the combined posterior and the 1σconfidence in-
terval gives logg=−2.61 +0.21
−0.32. The peak corresponds to
g= 2.45×10 −3, and the 1σupper bound corresponds to
g= 3.98×10 −3, which is 62% larger than the injected

11
FIG. 8: Joint likelihood of dipole magnitudegand
dipole direction (l dip, bdip) by combining likelihood for
double and triple/quadruple events in the number count
dipole scenario with 10 years of observation.
value. More importantly, although the posterior is still
unbounded at lowerg, the tail of the posterior at lower
gbecomes much smaller. The 1σlower bound yields
g= 1.17×10 −3, which is 56% smaller than the injected
value.
In addition to the dipole magnitude, we also investi-
gate the constraint on the dipole direction in the galactic
coordinate,l dip andb dip, with the combined likelihood of
double and triple/quadruple events for 10 years of obser-
vation. The constraints onH 0 and Ωm,0 are only weakly
affected whenl dip andb dip are included in the inference,
whereasgis strongly affected by it. For the CMB dipole
scenario, the peak in the posterior ofgfrom the combined
likelihood disappears, and the distribution is generally
flat starting from the prior lower bound and drop sharply
at logg≲−3. Moreover,l dip andb dip are very weakly
constrained. On the other hand, constraints on the dipole
are significantly stronger for the number count dipole sce-
nario, as shown in Fig. 8. The peak and the 1σconfi-
dence interval of the marginalized likelihood ofgyield
logg=−2.57 +0.24
−1.17, which has a larger uncertainty com-
pared to the case when fixing the dipole direction. Mean-
while, there exists a moderate constraint onl dip, with
the peak and the 1σbound to bel dip = (264.2+66.7
−107.6)◦.
Whereas, the posterior ofb dip peaks at the prior upper
bound ofb dip = 90 ◦, with the 1σlower bound to be
bdip = 16.9◦. Therefore, even in the most optimistic case
of 10-year observation on the number count dipole, the
joint constraint on cosmic dipole magnitude and direc-
tion is weaker than the number count measurement with
traditional EM probes.
C. Discussion
In summary, our forecast shows that associating
strongly lensed GWs with the LSST galaxy catalogue can
potentially measure the cosmic dipole magnitude given a
long observation period of ET+CE like 10 years, but it
is more difficult to constrain the dipole direction at the
same time. In particular, the constraint of the dipole
is stronger if the true dipole magnitude is larger, as in
our number count dipole scenario compared to the CMB
dipole scenario. In the most optimistic case of 10-year ob-
servation in the number count dipole scenario, our fore-
casted constraint givesg= (2.45 +1.53
−1.28)×10 −3 while fixing
the dipole direction, corresponding to∼57% uncertainty.
Such uncertainty is larger than the forecast with number
count of 10 5 GW events by ET and CE within 1 year
of observation [53]. Given the same 10-year observation
period by ET and CE, the number count method can
measuregwith∼10% uncertainty. The same precision
could also be achieved by 1000 BNS bright sirens in the
era of next-generation detectors [54, 55]. Moreover, using
the golden dark siren detected by ET+CE,gcan be con-
strained with 6% uncertainty in joint measurement with
the dipole direction. While the constraint from combin-
ing strongly lensed GWs and a galaxy catalogue is not
the tightest, it nevertheless offers an independent mea-
surement of the cosmic dipole as a cross-check, and could
provide a unique insight into the cosmic dipole tension.
On the other hand, the limitation of our method also
lies in the redshift range of galaxy catalogues. ET and CE
are expected to detect GW events up toz= 10−20. Since
strong lensing can magnify GW signals, events with red-
shift beyond the detector horizon could also potentially
be observed if the lensed images are magnified. More
importantly, the lensing probability of events is signif-
icantly increased at higher redshift. Therefore, future
large-scale galaxy survey is the key to increase the num-
ber of galaxy-catalogue associated strongly lensed GWs,
and thus to enhance our constraint on the cosmic dipole.
For example, assuming a galaxy catalogue with redshift
range up toz= 5 and a sky coverage of 90% to be
achieved by multiple observatories like the MegaMapper,
we repeat our simulation and obtain 1496 lensed GW
events that can be associated with galaxy catalogues for
10 years of observation. Considering ∆gto be scaled by
1/
√
N, based on the constraint with 363 events associ-
ated with LSST, we expect to reduce the uncertainty to
∼28%. In addition, we could obtain stronger constraint
on the dipole direction as well.
Compared to other GW measurement methods, the
core innovation of our method is to probe the cosmic
dipole along with other cosmological constants by com-
bining the dipole modification to GW luminosity dis-
tance, galaxy redshift, and the time-delay distance in
strong lensing for the first time. Given the impact of
the cosmic dipole to strong-lensing cosmography with
quasars [94], it is also important to avoid biases by
the cosmic dipole effect in time delay cosmography with

12
strongly lensed GWs. Our forecast explicitly shows that
H0 and Ω m,0, and potentially more parameters in alter-
native cosmology models, can be measured precisely in
joint estimation with the cosmic dipole without strong
correlation. However, since we use the SIS model to
approximate the doubly lensed system, systematics in-
herent to the lens model would degrade the precision of
cosmological constraints, as discussed in [67], so a more
comprehensive lens model will be required to obtain more
robust constraints. Furthermore, the distortion of the
EM lensed images by the angular aberration effect would
also contribute to probing the cosmic dipole through Ein-
stein radius modification [118]. Integrating such effect in
our method in future works could potentially strengthen
the constraint of the cosmic dipole.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
The primary challenge for GW cosmology is measuring
redshifts of GW events. Strong lensing not only enables
time-delay cosmography, but also greatly enhances GW
localization, allowing host galaxy redshifts to be deter-
mined by cross-matching with lensed galaxy catalogues.
Our work demonstrates the potential of measuring the
cosmic dipole by associating strongly lensed GW events
with galaxy catalogues. We forecast the constraint on
the dipole magnitudegjointly withH 0 and Ω m,0 in the
ΛCDM model using mock strongly lensed GW events in-
cluding BBHs and NSBHs that are within the LSST foot-
print and resolvable by the LSST camera, but no real or
mock galaxy catalogue is used. Given the cosmic dipole
tension, we forecast the constraint in the CMB dipole
scenario and the number count dipole scenario respec-
tively.
We find that using doubly lensed events with the SIS
model alone, the CMB dipole magnitude can only be
probed with 10 years of observation, while the num-
ber count dipole magnitude can be measured for both
5-year and 10-year observation when fixing dipole direc-
tion, but with large uncertainty. Then we enhance the
constraints ongfor 10 years of observation by combining
the joint likelihood from doubly lensed events and that
from triply/quadruply lensed events assuming a precise
lens potential reconstruction. For the CMB dipole sce-
nario, the posterior ofgpeaks atg= 1.12×10 −3, with
1σupper uncertainty of 74% but no lower bound. For
the number count dipole scenario, the tail of the poste-
riorP(g) extending toward lower values is substantially
reduced, and we obtaing= (2.45 +1.53
−1.28)×10 −3. However,
when jointly measure the dipole direction, the constraint
ongis weakened, and the dipole direction is poorly con-
strained.
While not reaching the accuracy of cosmic dipole mea-
surements obtained with other EM probes, our method
provides a complementary and independent means of
measurement. The dipole constrained by our method
will be a tracer of late-time Universe properties, which
is expected to be consistent with the number count mea-
surements. In this case, our method would support the
possibility of new physics operating between the early
and late universe that leads to the cosmic dipole tension.
But if our method yields a more consistent result with
the CMB, the tension would then be more likely to arise
from unknown systematics inherent to the number count
approach. Therefore, our method could offer a potential
path toward resolving the cosmic dipole tension.
On the other hand, several challenges remain in our
method for achieving a precise measurement of the cos-
mic dipole. First, this work presents merely an idealized
forecast, serving as a proof of principle for the measure-
ment of the cosmic dipole via the association of strongly
lensed GWs with galaxy catalogues. We imply observa-
tion conditions of LSST on mock strongly lensed GWs
without generating a mock galaxy catalogue, and as-
sume that we identify the true EM lens images associated
with GWs. But in reality, one may need to marginalize
likelihood of lens parameters over different lens systems
within the GW localization area, and compare Bayes fac-
tors for different lenses. In addition, a more concrete
Bayesian inference also needs to consider selection ef-
fects in terms of event SNR, galaxy survey magnitude
threshold, magnification bias, etc. A more comprehen-
sive study with an actual mock galaxy catalogue needs to
be done to include all the mentioned effects in our next
step. Second, the precision of time-delay cosmography
depends on the accuracy of the lens model we adopt for
lens reconstruction. For doubly lensed events, the lens
galaxy ellipticity and the mass-sheet degeneracy would
result in biases in time-delay cosmography with the SIS
model. While a more careful choice would be to adopt
a lens model more complex than the SIS model for dou-
bly lensed events, such as the singular isothermal ellip-
soid model, this would increase degeneracies between lens
model parameters and cosmology, ultimately leading to
weaker cosmological constraints. Moreover, the lens im-
ages in EM observations can display irregular morpholo-
gies (e.g., arcs), which complicates the extraction of a
well-defined image position angle, and thus degrades the
cosmological constraints. Last but not least, we have ne-
glected the peculiar velocity of the lens and the source
galaxies in our simulation, which would lead to system-
atic biases in our cosmic dipole measurement. Future
study is necessary to eliminate the effects introduced by
peculiar velocities in a realistic galaxy catalogue.
Nevertheless, future studies aimed at improving the
robustness of lens reconstruction from GW signal im-
ages are essential for obtaining accurate cosmological
constraints with our method. Furthermore, the cos-
mic dipole constraint derived from our approach can be
strengthened by next-generation galaxy surveys that of-
fer a larger redshift range, broader sky coverage, and en-
hanced resolution. By providing an independent cross-
check of the number count method, our approach will
contribute to resolving the cosmic dipole tension—one of
modern cosmology’s most intriguing anomalies—over the

13
coming decades.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A.C. is supported by the China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation under Grant No. 2025M773325, and the Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) un-
der Grant No. E414660101 and 12147103. J.Z. is sup-
ported by the NSFC under Grants No. E414660101 and
No. 12147103, and the Fundamental Research Funds for
the Central Universities under Grants No. E4EQ6604X2
and No. E3ER6601A2. We are grateful to the High Per-
formance Computing Center (HPCC) of ICTP-AP for
performing the numerical computations in this paper.
Appendix A: GW population model
In our simulation, BBH events are generated with a
population model in mass and redshift space given by
ppop(ms
1, ms
2, z|Λm,Λ r)∝p(m s
1, ms
2|Λm)prate(z|Λr)dVc
dz ,
(A1)
wherem s
1, ms
2 are the source-frame mass. For the black
hole mass distribution model, we use the Power-law +
Double Peak phenomenological model that provides a
good fit to the GWTC-4 data [36]. This model is charac-
terized by 10 parameters: the minimum and maximum
massM min andM max; the power-law slopeαof the pri-
mary mass distribution; the fractionλ g of the two Gaus-
sian components; the fractionλ g,low of the lower Gaus-
sian component; the meansµ g,low andµ g,high of the lower
and higher Gaussian component; their widthsσ g,low and
σg,high; and the tapering rangeδ m at the lower end of
the mass distribution. The primary mass prior for this
population model is thus given by
p(ms
1|Λm) = (1−λ g)B(ms
1|Mmin, Mmax, α)
+λ gλg,lowG(ms
1|µg,low, σg,low)
+λ g(1−λ g,low)G(ms
1|µg,high, σg,high),(A2)
whereBdenotes the broken power-law distribution, and
Gthe Gaussian distribution. The secondary mass is then
drawn from a power-law mass ratio distribution with
slopeβ.
We also incorporate the Madau–Dickinson merger
rate redshift evolution model, inspired by the
Madau–Dickinson star formation rate [99], into our
simulation. This model is also used in the GWTC-4
cosmology study [36]. The merger rate as a function of
redshift is given by
prate(z|Λr) =R 0[1+(1+z p)−γ−k] (1 +z) γ
1 +

1+z
1+zp
γ+k ,(A3)
whereR 0 is the merger rate atz= 0, andγandkare
the power-law slopes of the rate evolution at redshift
FIG. 9: Mock detected event number of ET+CE for 5
years with SNR threshold of 6. Upper panel: primary
source mass distribution with the power-law +
double-peak model. Lower panel: redshift distribution
combing uniform-in-comoving-volume density and
Madau-Dickinson merger rate evolution model.
below and above the turning pointz p, respectively. In
our simulation, we adopt the parameter values from the
GWTC-4 cosmology analysis [36], as listed in Table I. We
show the corresponding primary source mass distribution
and redshift distribution for our mock detected events by
ET+CE with an SNR threshold of 6 in Fig. 9.
Appendix B: Optical depth of sources
The probability that a background source is gravita-
tionally lensed by a foreground galaxy is referred to as
the optical depth. Its differential form with respect to
the lens redshift and velocity dispersion is given by [84]
d2τ
dzLdσ = dn
dσ (zL, σ)scr(zL, σ) cdt
dzL
(zL),(B1)

14
TABLE I: Parameters for the Power-law + Double Peak black hole mass distribution model and the
Madau-Dickinson merger rate redshift evolution model used in our mock event simulation.
Mmin[M⊙] Mmax[M⊙] α β µg,low[M⊙] σg,low[M⊙] λg,low µg,high[M⊙] σg,high[M⊙] λg,high δm[M⊙] γ k zp
4.72 84.28 2.97 0.83 9.91 0.83 0.86 32.31 4.24 0.28 4.71 3.46 2.90 2.77
FIG. 10: Optical depth of background sources
computed using equation (B6) with parameters
n∗,0 = 8.0×10 −3 h3Mpc−3,σ ∗,0 = 144 km s −1,
α= 2.49, andβ= 2.29.
wheres cr denotes the cross section for signal deflection
in the lens system. The number density distribution of
lenses as a function of velocity dispersionσcan be mod-
eled by a modified Schechter function [119]:
dn
dσ =n ∗
 σ
σ∗
α
exp

−
 σ
σ∗
β β
Γ[α/β]
1
σ ,(B2)
whereαis the faint-end slope,βcontrols the high-
velocity cut-off, andn ∗ andσ ∗ are the characteristic
number density and velocity dispersion. These can be pa-
rameterized to evolve with redshift asn ∗(z) =n ∗,0(1 +
z)3−νn∗ andσ ∗(z) =σ ∗,0(1 +z) νσ∗ . In this work, we
assume a constant comoving lens number density, i.e.,
νn∗ =ν σ∗ = 0.
For a finite-duration transient observation, the lensing
statistic must account for missing events due to time de-
lays between lensed signals [120]. The cross-section for
a singular isothermal sphere (SIS) model in a transient
survey is
scr(zL, σ) =πD 2
Lθ2
E
Z ymax
ymin
f(∆t(y;σ, z L))ydy,(B3)
wheref(∆t) is the observable fraction of lensed events
with time delay ∆t. Assuming a uniform arrival time
distribution of lensed signals over the continuous obser-
vation periodT obs, we have
f(∆t) = 1− ∆t
Tobs
(B4)
for ∆t < T obs, andf(∆t) = 0 otherwise. Equation (B3)
then yields
scr =πD 2
Lθ2
E

(y2
max−y2
min)− 2
3
∆tz
Tobs
(y3
max−y3
min)

.(B5)
For the SIS model,y min = 0. Substituting the above
expression into equation (B1) and integrating overσfrom
0 to∞, we obtain
τ= F∗
30 [DS(1 +z S)]3y2
max

1− 1
7
Γ[(8 +α)/β]
Γ[(4 +α)/β]
∆t∗
Tobs

,
(B6)
where
F∗ = 16π3n∗,0
 σ∗,0
c
4 Γ[(4 +α)/β]
Γ[α/β] ; (B7)
∆t∗ = 32π2
 σ∗,0
c
4 DS
c (1 +z S)ymax.(B8)
Figure 10 displays the optical depth computed using the
parameters from Section V B.
[1] E. W. Kolb, S. Matarrese, and A. Riotto, New J. Phys.
8, 322 (2006), arXiv:astro-ph/0506534.
[2] K. Bolejko and M. Korzy´ nski, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D26,
1730011 (2017), arXiv:1612.08222 [gr-qc].
[3] N. Aghanimet al.(Planck), Astron. Astrophys.641, A1
(2020), arXiv:1807.06205 [astro-ph.CO].
[4] G. F. R. Ellis and J. E. Baldwin, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron.
Soc.206, 377 (1984).
[5] N. J. Secrest, S. von Hausegger, M. Rameez, R. Mo-
hayaee, S. Sarkar, and J. Colin, Astrophys. J. Lett.908,
L51 (2021), arXiv:2009.14826 [astro-ph.CO].
[6] N. J. Secrest, S. von Hausegger, M. Rameez, R. Mo-
hayaee, and S. Sarkar, Astrophys. J. Lett.937, L31
(2022), arXiv:2206.05624 [astro-ph.CO].
[7] A. K. Singal, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.515, 5969
(2022), arXiv:2106.11968 [astro-ph.CO].
[8] C. Blake and J. Wall, Nature416, 150 (2002),
arXiv:astro-ph/0203385.

15
[9] A. K. Singal, Astrophys. J. Lett.742, L23 (2011),
arXiv:1110.6260 [astro-ph.CO].
[10] C. Gibelyou and D. Huterer, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron.
Soc.427, 1994 (2012), arXiv:1205.6476 [astro-ph.CO].
[11] P. Tiwari, R. Kothari, A. Naskar, S. Nadkarni-
Ghosh, and P. Jain, Astropart. Phys.61, 1 (2014),
arXiv:1307.1947 [astro-ph.CO].
[12] R. Fern´ andez-Cobos, P. Vielva, D. Pietrobon, A. Balbi,
E. Mart´ ınez-Gonz´ alez, and R. B. Barreiro, Mon. Not.
Roy. Astron. Soc.441, 2392 (2014), arXiv:1312.0275
[astro-ph.CO].
[13] P. Tiwari and P. Jain, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.447,
2658 (2015), arXiv:1308.3970 [astro-ph.CO].
[14] C. A. P. Bengaly, R. Maartens, and M. G. Santos, JCAP
04, 031, arXiv:1710.08804 [astro-ph.CO].
[15] T. M. Siewert, M. Schmidt-Rubart, and D. J. Schwarz,
Astron. Astrophys.653, A9 (2021), arXiv:2010.08366
[astro-ph.CO].
[16] P. Tiwari and A. Nusser, JCAP03, 062,
arXiv:1509.02532 [astro-ph.CO].
[17] J. Colin, R. Mohayaee, M. Rameez, and S. Sarkar,
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.471, 1045 (2017),
arXiv:1703.09376 [astro-ph.CO].
[18] M. Rubart, D. Bacon, and D. J. Schwarz, Astron. Astro-
phys.565, A111 (2014), arXiv:1402.0376 [astro-ph.CO].
[19] C. Dalang and C. Bonvin, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.
512, 3895 (2022), arXiv:2111.03616 [astro-ph.CO].
[20] S. von Hausegger, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.535, L49
(2024), arXiv:2404.07929 [astro-ph.CO].
[21] S. von Hausegger and C. Dalang, Phys. Rev. D111,
123547 (2025), arXiv:2412.13162 [astro-ph.CO].
[22] P. da Silveira Ferreira and V. Marra, JCAP09, 077,
arXiv:2403.14580 [astro-ph.CO].
[23] P. d. S. Ferreira and M. Quartin, Phys. Rev. Lett.127,
101301 (2021), arXiv:2011.08385 [astro-ph.CO].
[24] P. d. S. Ferreira and M. Quartin, Phys. Rev. D104,
063503 (2021), arXiv:2107.10846 [astro-ph.CO].
[25] B. Schutz, Nature323, 310 (1986).
[26] R. Grayet al., Phys. Rev. D101, 122001 (2020),
arXiv:1908.06050 [gr-qc].
[27] R. Gray, C. Messenger, and J. Veitch, Mon. Not. Roy.
Astron. Soc.512, 1127 (2022), arXiv:2111.04629 [astro-
ph.CO].
[28] R. Abbottet al.(LIGO Scientific, Virgo, KAGRA),
Astrophys. J.949, 76 (2023), arXiv:2111.03604 [astro-
ph.CO].
[29] S. Mastrogiovanni, K. Leyde, C. Karathanasis,
E. Chassande-Mottin, D. A. Steer, J. Gair, A. Ghosh,
R. Gray, S. Mukherjee, and S. Rinaldi, Phys. Rev. D
104, 062009 (2021), arXiv:2103.14663 [gr-qc].
[30] S. Mastrogiovanni, D. Laghi, R. Gray, G. C. Santoro,
A. Ghosh, C. Karathanasis, K. Leyde, D. A. Steer,
S. Perries, and G. Pierra, Phys. Rev. D108, 042002
(2023), arXiv:2305.10488 [astro-ph.CO].
[31] S. Mastrogiovanni, G. Pierra, S. Perri` es, D. Laghi,
G. Caneva Santoro, A. Ghosh, R. Gray, C. Karathana-
sis, and K. Leyde, Astron. Astrophys.682, A167 (2024),
arXiv:2305.17973 [astro-ph.CO].
[32] R. Grayet al., JCAP12, 023, arXiv:2308.02281 [astro-
ph.CO].
[33] N. Borghi, M. Mancarella, M. Moresco, M. Tagliazucchi,
F. Iacovelli, A. Cimatti, and M. Maggiore, Astrophys.
J.964, 191 (2024), arXiv:2312.05302 [astro-ph.CO].
[34] S.-J. Jin, R.-Q. Zhu, J.-Y. Song, T. Han, J.-F. Zhang,
and X. Zhang, JCAP08, 050, arXiv:2309.11900 [astro-
ph.CO].
[35] S.-J. Jin, J.-Y. Song, T.-Y. Sun, S.-R. Xiao,
H. Wang, L.-F. Wang, J.-F. Zhang, and X. Zhang,
Sci. China Phys. Mech. Astron.69, 220401 (2026),
arXiv:2507.12965 [astro-ph.CO].
[36] A. G. Abacet al.(LIGO Scientific, VIRGO, KA-
GRA), arXiv:2509.04348 (2025), arXiv:2509.04348
[astro-ph.CO].
[37] H.-Y. Chen, J. M. Ezquiaga, and I. Gupta, Class.
Quant. Grav.41, 125004 (2024), arXiv:2402.03120 [gr-
qc].
[38] M. Branchesiet al., J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys.07,
068, arXiv:2303.15923 [gr-qc].
[39] M. Evanset al., A Horizon Study for Cosmic Ex-
plorer: Science, Observatories, and Community (2021),
arXiv:2109.09882 [astro-ph.IM].
[40] S. Mukherjee, B. D. Wandelt, and J. Silk, Mon. Not.
Roy. Astron. Soc.502, 1136 (2021), arXiv:2012.15316
[astro-ph.CO].
[41] A. Finke, S. Foffa, F. Iacovelli, M. Maggiore, and
M. Mancarella, JCAP08, 026, arXiv:2101.12660 [astro-
ph.CO].
[42] M. Mancarella, E. Genoud-Prachex, and M. Maggiore,
Phys. Rev. D105, 064030 (2022), arXiv:2112.05728 [gr-
qc].
[43] J. M. Ezquiaga, Phys. Lett. B822, 136665 (2021),
arXiv:2104.05139 [astro-ph.CO].
[44] K. Leyde, S. Mastrogiovanni, D. A. Steer, E. Chassande-
Mottin, and C. Karathanasis, JCAP09, 012,
arXiv:2202.00025 [gr-qc].
[45] A. Chen, R. Gray, and T. Baker, JCAP02, 035,
arXiv:2309.03833 [gr-qc].
[46] T. Zhu, W. Zhao, J.-M. Yan, Y.-Z. Wang, C. Gong,
and A. Wang, Phys. Rev. D110, 064044 (2024),
arXiv:2304.09025 [gr-qc].
[47] B.-Y. Zhang, T. Zhu, J.-F. Zhang, and X. Zhang, Phys.
Rev. D109, 104022 (2024), arXiv:2402.08240 [gr-qc].
[48] M. Tagliazucchi, M. Moresco, N. Borghi, and M. Fiebig,
Astron. Astrophys.702, A244 (2025), arXiv:2504.02034
[astro-ph.CO].
[49] R. Stiskalek, J. Veitch, and C. Messenger, Mon. Not.
Roy. Astron. Soc.501, 970 (2021), arXiv:2003.02919
[astro-ph.HE].
[50] R. Essick, W. M. Farr, M. Fishbach, D. E. Holz, and
E. Katsavounidis, Phys. Rev. D107, 043016 (2023),
arXiv:2207.05792 [astro-ph.HE].
[51] G. Kashyap, N. K. Singh, K. S. Phukon, S. Caudill, and
P. Jain, JCAP06, 042, arXiv:2204.07472 [astro-ph.CO].
[52] S. Mastrogiovanni, C. Bonvin, G. Cusin, and S. Foffa,
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.521, 984 (2023),
arXiv:2209.11658 [astro-ph.CO].
[53] N. Grimm, M. Pijnenburg, S. Mastrogiovanni, C. Bon-
vin, S. Foffa, and G. Cusin, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.
526, 4673 (2023), arXiv:2309.00336 [astro-ph.CO].
[54] R.-G. Cai, T.-B. Liu, S.-J. Wang, and W.-T. Xu, JCAP
09, 016, arXiv:1905.01803 [astro-ph.CO].
[55] B. Cousins, A. Dhani, B. S. Sathyaprakash, and
N. Yunes, Phys. Rev. D111, 103530 (2025),
arXiv:2406.15550 [gr-qc].
[56] A. Chen, JCAP07, 076, arXiv:2505.12678 [gr-qc].
[57] R.-G. Cai, T.-B. Liu, X.-W. Liu, S.-J. Wang,
and T. Yang, Phys. Rev. D97, 103005 (2018),
arXiv:1712.00952 [astro-ph.CO].

16
[58] G. Cusin and G. Tasinato, JCAP08(08), 036,
arXiv:2201.10464 [astro-ph.CO].
[59] G. Tasinato, Phys. Rev. D108, 103521 (2023),
arXiv:2309.00403 [gr-qc].
[60] N. M. J. Cruz, A. Malhotra, G. Tasinato, and I. Zavala,
Phys. Rev. D110, 063526 (2024), arXiv:2402.17312 [gr-
qc].
[61] N. M. J. Cruz, A. Malhotra, G. Tasinato, and I. Zavala,
Phys. Rev. D112, 083558 (2025), arXiv:2412.14010
[astro-ph.CO].
[62] G. Cusin, C. Pitrou, C. Bonvin, A. Barrau, and
K. Martineau, Class. Quant. Grav.41, 225006 (2024),
arXiv:2405.01297 [gr-qc].
[63] K. Liao, X.-L. Fan, X.-H. Ding, M. Biesiada, and Z.-H.
Zhu, Nature Commun.8, 1148 (2017), [Erratum: Na-
ture Commun. 8, 2136 (2017)], arXiv:1703.04151 [astro-
ph.CO].
[64] O. A. Hannuksela, T. E. Collett, M. C ¸ alı¸ skan, and
T. G. F. Li, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.498, 3395
(2020), arXiv:2004.13811 [astro-ph.HE].
[65] J. S. C. Poon, S. Rinaldi, J. Janquart, H. Narola, and
O. A. Hannuksela, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.536,
2212 (2024), arXiv:2406.06463 [astro-ph.HE].
[66] Z. Chen, Q. Yu, Y. Lu, and X. Guo, Astrophys. J. Lett.
993, L57 (2025), arXiv:2510.12470 [astro-ph.CO].
[67] A. Chen and J. Zhang, Forecasting Constraints on Cos-
mology and Modified Gravitational-wave Propagation
by Strongly Lensed Gravitational Waves Associating
with Galaxy Surveys (2026), arXiv:2601.21820 [astro-
ph.CO].
[68] A. Finke, S. Foffa, F. Iacovelli, M. Maggiore, and
M. Mancarella, Phys. Rev. D104, 084057 (2021),
arXiv:2107.05046 [gr-qc].
[69] H. Narola, J. Janquart, L. Haegel, K. Haris, O. A. Han-
nuksela, and C. Van Den Broeck, Phys. Rev. D109,
084064 (2024), arXiv:2308.01709 [gr-qc].
[70] E. Colangeli, C. Dalang, and T. Baker, Phys. Rev. D
113, 024067 (2026), arXiv:2509.03196 [gr-qc].
[71] S. Jana, S. J. Kapadia, T. Venumadhav, and P. Ajith,
Phys. Rev. Lett.130, 261401 (2023), arXiv:2211.12212
[astro-ph.CO].
[72] S. Jana, S. J. Kapadia, T. Venumadhav, S. More,
and P. Ajith, Class. Quant. Grav.41, 245010 (2024),
arXiv:2405.17805 [gr-qc].
[73] K. N. Maity, S. Jana, T. Venumadhav, A. Barsode,
and P. Ajith, Strong lensing cosmography using binary-
black-hole mergers: Prospects for the near future
(2025), arXiv:2512.15168 [gr-qc].
[74] X. Ying and T. Yang, Precision Joint Constraints on
Cosmology and Gravity Using Strongly Lensed Gravi-
tational Wave Populations (2025), arXiv:2505.09507 [gr-
qc].
[75] S. Mukherjee, B. D. Wandelt, and J. Silk, Mon. Not.
Roy. Astron. Soc.494, 1956 (2020), arXiv:1908.08951
[astro-ph.CO].
[76] A. Balaudo, A. Garoffolo, M. Martinelli, S. Mukher-
jee, and A. Silvestri, JCAP06, 050, arXiv:2210.06398
[astro-ph.CO].
[77] M. Abdul Karimet al.(DESI), Data Release 1 of
the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (2025),
arXiv:2503.14745 [astro-ph.CO].
[78] Y. Mellieret al.(Euclid), Astron. Astrophys.697, A1
(2025), arXiv:2405.13491 [astro-ph.CO].
[79] LSST Science Collaboration, P. A. Abell,et al., arXiv e-
prints , arXiv:0912.0201 (2009), arXiv:0912.0201 [astro-
ph.IM].
[80] S.-S. Li, S. Mao, Y. Zhao, and Y. Lu, Mon. Not. Roy.
Astron. Soc.476, 2220 (2018), arXiv:1802.05089 [astro-
ph.CO].
[81] S. Birrer, A. Amara, and A. Refregier, Astrophys. J.
813, 102 (2015), arXiv:1504.07629 [astro-ph.CO].
[82] R. Takahashi and T. Nakamura, The Astrophysical
Journal595, 1039 (2003).
[83] J. M. Ezquiaga, D. E. Holz, W. Hu, M. Lagos,
and R. M. Wald, Phys. Rev. D103, 064047 (2021),
arXiv:2008.12814 [gr-qc].
[84] M. Sereno, P. Jetzer, A. Sesana, and M. Volon-
teri, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.415, 2773 (2011),
arXiv:1104.1977 [astro-ph.CO].
[85] D. Maoz and H.-W. Rix, Astrophys. J.416, 425 (1993).
[86] C. S. Kochanek, Astrophys. J.466, 638 (1996),
arXiv:astro-ph/9510077.
[87] J. L. Mitchell, C. R. Keeton, J. A. Frieman, and
R. K. Sheth, Astrophys. J.622, 81 (2005), arXiv:astro-
ph/0401138.
[88] J. Binney and S. Tremaine,Galactic dynamics(1987).
[89] R. Takahashi, Astrophys. J.835, 103 (2017),
arXiv:1606.00458 [astro-ph.CO].
[90] K. C. Wonget al.(H0LiCOW), Mon. Not. Roy. Astron.
Soc.498, 1420 (2020), arXiv:1907.04869 [astro-ph.CO].
[91] L. E. Uronen, T. Li, J. Janquart, H. Phurailatpam,
J. S. C. Poon, E. Wempe, L. V. E. Koopmans, and
O. A. Hannuksela, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A383,
20240152 (2025), arXiv:2406.14257 [astro-ph.HE].
[92] R. Kormann, P. Schneider, and M. Bartelmann, Astron.
Astrophys.284, 285 (1994).
[93] C. Bonvin, R. Durrer, and M. A. Gasparini, Phys. Rev.
D73, 023523 (2006), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 85, 029901
(2012)], arXiv:astro-ph/0511183.
[94] C. Dalang, M. Millon, and T. Baker, Phys. Rev. D107,
123528 (2023), arXiv:2301.05574 [astro-ph.CO].
[95] E. Wempe, L. V. E. Koopmans, A. R. A. C. Wierda,
O. A. Hannuksela, and C. van den Broeck, Mon. Not.
Roy. Astron. Soc.530, 3368 (2024), arXiv:2204.08732
[astro-ph.HE].
[96] D. J. Schlegelet al., The MegaMapper: A Stage-5 Spec-
troscopic Instrument Concept for the Study of Infla-
tion and Dark Energy (2022), arXiv:2209.04322 [astro-
ph.IM].
[97] S. H. Suyuet al.(H0LiCOW), Mon. Not. Roy. Astron.
Soc.468, 2590 (2017), arXiv:1607.00017 [astro-ph.CO].
[98] C. Karathanasis, B. Revenu, S. Mukherjee, and
F. Stachurski, Astron. Astrophys.677, A124 (2023),
[Erratum: Astron.Astrophys. 682, C1 (2024)],
arXiv:2210.05724 [astro-ph.CO].
[99] P. Madau and M. Dickinson, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astro-
phys.52, 415 (2014), arXiv:1403.0007 [astro-ph.CO].
[100] A. G. Abacet al.(LIGO Scientific, VIRGO, KAGRA),
GWTC-4.0: Population Properties of Merging Compact
Binaries (2025), arXiv:2508.18083 [astro-ph.HE].
[101] N. Aghanimet al.(Planck), Astron. Astrophys.641, A6
(2020), [Erratum: Astron.Astrophys. 652, C4 (2021)],
arXiv:1807.06209 [astro-ph.CO].
[102] Y.-Y. Choi, C. Park, and M. S. Vogeley, Astrophys. J.
658, 884 (2007), arXiv:astro-ph/0611607.
[103] S. Geng, S. Cao, Y. Liu, T. Liu, M. Biesiada, and
Y. Lian, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.503, 1319 (2021),
arXiv:2102.12140 [astro-ph.GA].

17
[104] G. Ferrami and J. S. B. Wyithe, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron.
Soc.537, 779 (2025), arXiv:2410.20892 [astro-ph.GA].
[105] C. McIsaac, D. Keitel, T. Collett, I. Harry, S. Mozzon,
O. Edy, and D. Bacon, Phys. Rev. D102, 084031 (2020),
arXiv:1912.05389 [gr-qc].
[106] A. K. Y. Li, R. K. L. Lo, S. Sachdev, J. C. L. Chan,
E. T. Lin, T. G. F. Li, and A. J. Weinstein (LIGO
Scientific, Virgo), Phys. Rev. D107, 123014 (2023),
arXiv:1904.06020 [gr-qc].
[107] R. Abbottet al.(LIGO Scientific, KAGRA, VIRGO),
Astrophys. J.970, 191 (2024), arXiv:2304.08393 [gr-qc].
[108] A. K. Y. Li, J. C. L. Chan, H. Fong, A. H. Y. Chong,
A. J. Weinstein, and J. M. Ezquiaga, Mon. Not. Roy.
Astron. Soc.998, 1010 (2025), arXiv:2311.06416 [gr-qc].
[109] A. G. Abacet al.(LIGO Scientific, VIRGO, KAGRA),
GWTC-4.0: Searches for Gravitational-Wave Lensing
Signatures (2025), arXiv:2512.16347 [gr-qc].
[110] A. K. Weigel, K. Schawinski, and C. Bruderer,
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.459, 2150 (2016),
arXiv:1604.00008 [astro-ph.GA].
[111] A. Abateet al.(LSST Dark Energy Science), Large Syn-
optic Survey Telescope: Dark Energy Science Collabo-
ration (2012), arXiv:1211.0310 [astro-ph.CO].
[112] K. Gilmore, S. Kahn, M. Nordby, D. Burke, P. OCon-
nor, J. Oliver, V. Radeka, T. Schalk, and R. Schindler,
The lsst camera overview (2006).
[113] G. Prattenet al., Phys. Rev. D103, 104056 (2021),
arXiv:2004.06503 [gr-qc].
[114] M. J. Williams, J. Veitch, and C. Messenger, Phys. Rev.
D103, 103006 (2021), arXiv:2102.11056 [gr-qc].
[115] M. J. Williams, J. Veitch, and C. Messenger, Mach.
Learn. Sci. Tech.4, 035011 (2023), arXiv:2302.08526
[astro-ph.IM].
[116] G. Ashtonet al., Astrophys. J. Suppl.241, 27 (2019),
arXiv:1811.02042 [astro-ph.IM].
[117] D. Foreman-Mackey, D. W. Hogg, D. Lang, and
J. Goodman, Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac.125, 306 (2013),
arXiv:1202.3665 [astro-ph.IM].
[118] M. Millon, C. Dalang, T. Collett, and C. Bonvin, Kine-
matic cosmic dipole from a large sample of strong lenses
(2026), arXiv:2603.11152 [astro-ph.CO].
[119] R. K. Shethet al.(SDSS), Astrophys. J.594, 225
(2003), arXiv:astro-ph/0303092.
[120] M. Oguri, Y. Suto, and E. L. Turner, Astrophys. J.583,
584 (2003), arXiv:astro-ph/0210107.