Title: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks: Star Formation, Cosmic Ray Transport, and Multiphase Outflows in TIGRESS++ Simulations
Authors: Chang-Goo Kim, Lucia Armillotta, Eve C. Ostriker, Sanghyuk Moon, Lachlan Lancaster, Jeong-Gyu Kim, Nora B. Linzer, Ronan N. Hix
Published: 2026-05-25
Categories: astro-ph.GA

Draft version June 2, 2026
Typeset using LATEXtwocolumnstyle in AASTeX7.0.1
Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks: Star Formation, Cosmic Ray Transport, and Multiphase
Outflows inTigress++Simulations
Chang-Goo Kim
 ,1 Lucia Armillotta
 ,2, 1 Eve C. Ostriker
 ,1 Sanghyuk Moon
 ,3, 1 Lachlan Lancaster
 ,4, 5
Jeong-Gyu Kim
 ,6, 7 Nora B. Linzer
 ,1 and Ronan N. Hix
 1
1Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, 4 Ivy Lane, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
2University of Florence, Department of Physics and Astronomy, via G. Sansone 1, 50019, Sesto Fiorentino, Firenze, Italy
3Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, 776 Daedeok-daero, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34055, Republic of Korea
4Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA
5Department of Astronomy, Columbia University, 550 W 120th St, New York, NY 10025, USA
6Quantum Universe Center, Korea Institute for Advanced Study, Hoegiro 85, Seoul 02455, Republic of Korea
7Division of Science, National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-0015, Japan
ABSTRACT
We present new simulations of local star-forming disks that self-consistently evolve cosmic rays (CRs)
and multiphase gas usingTigress++. To isolate the role of CRs, we conduct paired simulations
under solar-neighborhood conditions: a magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) model following the standard
Tigress-classicframework with FUV heating and supernova (SN) feedback from star clusters formed
via gravitational collapse; and a CRMHD model in which an additional 10% of each SN’s energy is
injected as CRs. These CRs are transported anisotropically along magnetic field lines via a two-moment
solver, with the CR scattering rate set by balancing Alfv´ en-wave growth and damping based on the
self-confinement paradigm. The CRMHD model develops a characteristic two-zone vertical CR profile:
uniform pressure in the diffusion-dominated, high-density midplane gas, and an exponential atmosphere
shaped primarily by advection and streaming in low-density extraplanar gas. The CR pressure is
comparable to the total thermal gas pressure in the midplane, but is too uniform to affect gas dynamics,
leaving SFRs unchanged. In contrast, the vertical CR pressure gradient at|z|≳1 kpc accelerates
warm outflowing gas, resulting in an approximately 4 times higher mass loading factor than in the
MHD model. CR–gas interactions increase CR energy near the midplane through compressional work,
while CR streaming heats low-density warm-hot gas.Tigress++opens a path toward investigating
CR transport and CR-regulated ISM and outflow dynamics at high resolution across diverse galactic
environments.
Keywords:Stellar feedback (1602) — Cosmic rays (329) — Magnetohydrodynamics (1964) — Inter-
stellar medium (847) — Star formation (1569) — Galaxy winds (626)
1.INTRODUCTION
Understanding the mechanisms that regulate star for-
mation and drive galactic outflows remains one of the
central challenges in galaxy formation (R. S. Somerville
& R. Dav´ e 2015; T. Naab & J. P. Ostriker 2017). The
interstellar medium (ISM) is a complex, multiphase
gaseous system governed by gravity, turbulence, and
magnetic fields that requires sophisticated numerical
methods to model. A realistic treatment of stellar feed-
back is an essential component of contemporary studies
Email: changgoo@princeton.edu
(e.g. C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker 2017; C.-G. Kim et al.
2023; T.-E. Rathjen et al. 2023; C.-Y. Hu et al. 2021;
A. Gurman et al. 2025). In addition to thermal gas,
the ISM is permeated by a relativistic component, cos-
mic rays (CRs). Observations suggest that the energy
density of CRs in the Milky Way is roughly in equipar-
tition with the thermal gas and magnetic fields, at ap-
proximately 1 eV cm−3 (e.g., A. Boulares & D. P. Cox
1990; I. A. Grenier et al. 2015; R. Beck 2001). CR pres-
sure may contribute to maintaining vertical hydrostatic
balance in the ISM disk and to driving galactic winds,
depending on how CRs are transported away from the
arXiv:2605.26238v2  [astro-ph.GA]  1 Jun 2026

2C.-G. Kim et al.
regions where they are accelerated (e.g., E. G. Zweibel
2017; M. Ruszkowski & C. Pfrommer 2023).
Based on recent magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) sim-
ulations with resolved supernova (SN) feedback, multi-
phase galactic outflows driven by clustered SNe are char-
acterized by energy-loaded hot (T∼10 6 −10 7 K) winds
and mass-loaded warm-cold (T <10 4 K) fountains (e.g.,
C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker 2018; A. Vijayan et al.
2020). This general conclusion holds in self-consistent
local simulations with varying environments (e.g., C.-G.
Kim et al. 2020a; T.-E. Rathjen et al. 2023) and global
simulations of dwarf galaxies (e.g., C.-Y. Hu 2019; U. P.
Steinwandel et al. 2023, 2024).
Multiphase outflows can therefore regulate the growth
of galaxies in two different ways: energy-loaded hot out-
flows heat the circumgalactic medium and may prevent
it from cooling and flowing inward (preventative feed-
back), while mass-loaded cool outflows remove material
from the disk that could otherwise form stars (ejective
feedback). However, the ability of ejective feedback to
limit the stellar-to-halo mass in galaxy formation models
often demands unrealistically high mass loading factors,
inconsistent with recent observations (e.g., K. B. W. Mc-
Quinn et al. 2019; E. Kado-Fong et al. 2024) and with
simulations resolving the emergence of outflows (e.g., C.-
G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker 2018; C.-G. Kim et al. 2020a; V.
Pandya et al. 2021). At the same time, resolved simula-
tions find it difficult to launch hot wind with sufficiently
high specific energy (energy loading/mass loading>0.1,
; e.g., C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker 2018; C.-G. Kim et al.
2020a; U. P. Steinwandel et al. 2024; C.-Y. Hu 2019;
M. C. Smith et al. 2021) for preventative feedback to be
solely responsible for star formation regulation (C. Carr
et al. 2023; M. C. Smith et al. 2024; J. S. Bennett et al.
2025). Energy loading factors this high are typically
only achieved in idealized starbursts with strongly clus-
tered SNe (e.g., D. Fielding et al. 2018; E. E. Schneider
et al. 2020). These shortcomings highlight the need to
quantify effects of additional feedback mechanisms be-
yond “thermal” SN feedback alone, pointing to a careful
study of the role of CRs.
Incorporating CR feedback into ISM and galaxy sim-
ulations has traditionally relied on simplified transport
models (e.g., CR streaming is often neglected; but see
M. Ruszkowski et al. 2017; T. K. Chan et al. 2019).
The most common approach assumes CRs propagate
via isotropic (e.g., M. Uhlig et al. 2012; C. M. Simpson
et al. 2016) or anisotropic diffusion (e.g., T. K. Chan
et al. 2019; P. F. Hopkins et al. 2020; C. M. Simpson
et al. 2023) with a constant diffusion coefficient, typi-
callyκ ∥ ∼10 28−29 cm2 s−1. While these models demon-
strate that CRs can thicken galactic disks and launch
winds, the results depend sensitively on the chosen value
ofκ ∥ (e.g., M. Salem & G. L. Bryan 2014; T. K. Chan
et al. 2019; G. Dashyan & Y. Dubois 2020; P. F. Hop-
kins et al. 2021b). This sensitivity is useful in empiri-
cally constraining the effective diffusion coefficient (P. F.
Hopkins et al. 2021b), but the predictive power of such
simulations for the role of CR feedback is limited. Fur-
thermore, the adoption of constantκ ∥ neglects the role
of local plasma conditions in setting the rate at which
CR particles scatter, which may result in an inaccurate
local coupling between CRs and thermal gas. In particu-
lar, because ion-neutral damping of the waves that scat-
ter CRs is much stronger in dense, neutral midplane gas
than elsewhere in the ISM (see below), a constant diffu-
sion coefficient risks overestimating CR-gas coupling in
this region, which might have serious consequences for
dynamics.
In this work, we use a scattering rate determined by
the self-confinement paradigm (L. Armillotta et al. 2021,
see also P. F. Hopkins et al. 2022c; T. Thomas et al.
2025a). In this picture, CRs are scattered by Alfv´ en
waves that they themselves generate via the streaming
instability (R. Kulsrud & W. P. Pearce 1969). The scat-
tering rate is set by a local steady-state balance between
the wave growth rate (driven by the streaming insta-
bility) and wave damping rates. We explicitly account
for non-linear Landau damping (dominant in low den-
sity, ionized gas) and ion-neutral damping (dominant
in high density, neutral gas). By coupling these micro-
physical processes to the macrophysical cosmic ray +
magnetohydrodynamic (CRMHD) fluid model, our sim-
ulation naturally captures the (huge) variations inκ ∥
and other quantities that affect CR transport in multi-
phase galactic gas. The multiphase, star-forming ISM is
itself modeled by theTigressframework (C.-G. Kim &
E. C. Ostriker 2017). To evolve the CR fluid, we employ
a two-moment method to solve the CR transport equa-
tions (Y.-F. Jiang & S. P. Oh 2018), evolving both CR
energy density and flux, coupled with the MHD equa-
tions (see also T. Thomas & C. Pfrommer 2019; T. K.
Chan et al. 2019; P. F. Hopkins et al. 2022b; X. Zhao
et al. 2026).
We have previously applied the model of two-moment
CR transport with self-consistent scattering toTigress
simulations of the multiphase ISM, investigating CR
transport in a “post-processing” mode (L. Armillotta
et al. 2021, 2022, 2025; R. N. Hix et al. 2025). These
studies consider a wide range of galactic environments,
and demonstrate that CR transport coefficients vary by
many orders of magnitude depending on the local ISM
phase. CR pressure in the neutral gas near the midplane
is nearly uniform due to ion-neutral damping efficiently

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks3
suppressing wave growth and CR scattering. In the ex-
traplanar region, where wave damping is much weaker,
CR transport along field lines is no longer fully diffusive.
Rather, dynamical processes — advection at the bulk
gas velocity and streaming at the Alfv´ en wave speed —
combine with diffusive processes set by the scattering
rate to control the effective transport velocity of the CR
fluid along the magnetic field. While the scattering rate
is large enough that the CR scale height and effective
transport speed out of the disk are mainly set by dy-
namical processes for GeV CRs, diffusion is increasingly
important for higher-energy CRs (L. Armillotta et al.
2025).
In L. Armillotta et al. (2024), we transitioned from
post-processing to time-dependent CRMHD simulations
in studying the dynamics of the multiphase gas and out-
flow acceleration in extraplanar regions. These simu-
lations employed the upper extraplanar cutouts (z >
500 pc) ofTigressoutputs for initial conditions, but
did not include ongoing star formation and feedback;
rather, in these controlled models, fixed fluxes of gas
and CRs into the extraplanar region were prescribed.
In this paper, we present our first results from fully
integrating CRs within theTigressnumerical frame-
work, for the whole ISM including both the midplane
region with star formation and feedback, and the ex-
traplanar region where outflows are accelerated. Al-
though we have the capability of modeling multiple CR
energy groups simultaneously (see L. Armillotta et al.
2025; N. B. Linzer et al. 2025), this adds to the numer-
ical expense, and results presented in this work focus
on∼GeV CRs because this is the most dynamically im-
portant component. We compare our new self-consistent
CRMHD simulation against an otherwise identical MHD
simulation without CRs. Our results reveal a nuanced
role for CRs. As uniform CR pressure in the neutral
gas does not contribute to vertical support, the self-
regulation of the global SFR remains largely governed
by the balance of total pressure of the thermal gas and
weight, similar to the MHD case (E. C. Ostriker & C.-G.
Kim 2022). In the CRMHD simulation, the CR pressure
gradient in the extraplanar region drives outflows that
are cooler, slower, and more mass-loaded than those in
the MHD simulation, in qualitative agreement with pre-
vious work either with a simplified CR transport (e.g.,
P. Girichidis et al. 2016, 2018; C. M. Simpson et al. 2016;
T.-E. Rathjen et al. 2021) or with a more self-consistent
transport model similar to this work (e.g., B. Sike et al.
2025; T. Thomas et al. 2025a).
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Sec-
tion 2 describes our numerical methods, which we use
to run two models with and without CRs (Section 2.6).
We compare results from these simulations, focusing on
the effects of CR feedback on star formation rates (Sec-
tion 3), multiphase ISM and CR transport within it
(Section 4), and multiphase outflows (Section 5). We
discuss our results in comparison to our previous post-
processing models (Section 6.1) and other simulations
(Section 6.2). Section 7 closes with a summary and fu-
ture perspectives.
2.METHODS
Tigress++is an extension of theTigressnumerical
framework8 implemented within the C++ version of the
Athenacode, calledAthena++(J. M. Stone et al. 2020).
In addition to overall performance improvement using
task-based parallelization, and to new capabilities such
as adaptive-mesh refinement, the migration ofTigress
toAthena++enables us to couple evolution of CRs with
the MHD solver, using a two-moment method for CR
fluids (Y.-F. Jiang & S. P. Oh 2018). The version of the
CR solver used inTigress++adopts a CR scattering
coefficient parallel to the magnetic field direction based
on the self-confinement model (e.g., E. G. Zweibel 2013,
2017), as developed by L. Armillotta et al. (2021). This
CR transport model has been applied to theTigress-
classicoutputs in a post-processing mode with frozen
gas properties and magnetic fields (L. Armillotta et al.
2021, 2022) or for a brief dynamically coupled evolution
(L. Armillotta et al. 2024; R. N. Hix et al. 2025).
In this paper, we present the first results from ourTi-
gress++framework, which allows for fully coupled dy-
namical evolution of thermal gas with CR transport. For
the present simulations, we adopt theTigress-classic
approach for multiphase ISM thermodynamics imple-
mented inAthena++. In this section, we summarize the
governing equations and numerical algorithms, includ-
ing describing key modifications toTigress-classic
relative to C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker (2017), and our
new algorithm for injection of CR energy from SN feed-
back. In a companion paper, we will present a com-
prehensive description of theTigress++methods, in-
cluding the updated version ofTigress-ncrand the
multi-energy group CR transport model (N. B. Linzer
et al. 2025; L. Armillotta et al. 2025).
8 The originalTigressframework referred to here is broadly
defined including a version with a simpler cooling and heating,
calledTigress-classic(C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker 2017), and
a version with explicit radiation transfer and photochemistry
solutions, calledTigress-ncr(C.-G. Kim et al. 2023; J.-G.
Kim et al. 2023). Both are implemented within the C version
of theAthenacode (J. M. Stone et al. 2008; J. M. Stone & T.
Gardiner 2009).

4C.-G. Kim et al.
2.1.Governing Equations
The governing equations for the CRMHD evolution
model consist of three main parts: the gas conservation
equations with gravitational, radiative, and CR source
terms; the magnetic induction equation; and the two-
moment CR transport equations including source terms.
The conservation equations for gas mass, momentum,
and total energy including source terms are, respectively,
∂ρ
∂t +∇ ·(ρv) = 0,(1)
∂(ρv)
∂t +∇ ·

ρvv+ (P th +P mag)I
↔
− BB
4π

=−ρ∇Φ +σ↔
tot ·
h
Fc −v·
↔
P c +e c I
↔i
,(2)
and
∂Etot
∂t +∇ ·

v(Etot +P th +P mag)− B(B·v)
4π

=G − L −(ρv)· ∇Φ
+ (v+v s)·σ↔
tot ·
h
Fc −v·
↔
P c +e c I
↔i
.(3)
Equation 2 and Equation 3 do not explicitly include the
momentum and energy injected in the gas from SNe as
we adopt a prescription that changes from energy to
momentum injection depending on the condition of the
feedback region; this is discussed in Section 2.4.2 below.
The magnetic field evolution is governed by the induc-
tion equation without explicit resistivity (ideal MHD):
∂B
∂t =∇ ×(v×B),(4)
with the divergence-free constraint
∇ ·B= 0.(5)
The transport of CR fluid is described by the two-
moment formalism (Y.-F. Jiang & S. P. Oh 2018; L.
Armillotta et al. 2021):
∂ec
∂t +∇ ·F c =−(v+v s)·σ↔
tot ·
h
Fc −v·
↔
P c +e c I
↔i
−Λ collnHec + ˙ec,SN,(6)
1
V 2m
∂Fc
∂t +∇ ·
↔
P c =−σ↔
tot ·
h
Fc −v·
↔
P c +e c I
↔i
− ΛcollnH
v2p
Fc (7)
where the tensorσ↔
tot includes both explicit scattering
terms and a term that captures the effect of streaming
at the Alfv´ en speed when the scattering rate is large
(see Section 2.3). Equation 6 includes as ˙e c,SN the term
representing CR energy injection by SNe; this is accom-
plished via a passive scalar variable as detailed in Sec-
tion 2.5.
In the above,ρ=µ HmHnH is the gas density,n H
the number density of hydrogen nuclei,µ H the mean
molecular weight per H nucleus, andm H the mass of
a hydrogen atom;vandBare velocity and magnetic
field vectors, respectively;P th andP mag =B·B/(8π)
are thermal and magnetic pressure, respectively;E tot =
ρv·v/2 +P th/(γ−1) +P mag is the total energy den-
sity of thermal gas, whereγ= 5/3 is the adiabatic in-
dex of the thermal gas.e c is the CR energy density,
Fc is the CR energy flux, and
↔
P c is the CR pressure
tensor. We assume approximately isotropic pressure in
the CR streaming frame, such that
↔
P c ≡P c I
↔
, with
Pc = (γ c −1)e c =e c/3 andγ c = 4/3 is the adiabatic
index of the CR fluid, assumed to be relativistic.I
↔
is
the identity tensor. The speedV m is the maximum CR
transport speed, which in principle is close to the speed
of light but is reduced here for computational efficiency.
The collisional CR loss terms Λcoll on the RHS of Equa-
tion 6 and Equation 7 will be detailed in Section 2.3,
along with the terms inσ↔
tot that represent effects of in-
teractions of CRs with Alfv´ en waves.v p is the proton
velocity. Strictly speaking, these collisional loss terms
would appear as source terms for gas on the RHS of
Equation 2 and Equation 3, but these collisional source
terms are generally quite small compared to other MHD
source terms.
The total gravitational potential Φ = Φ sg + Φext(z)
includes the self-gravitational potential obtained as the
solution of Poisson’s equation (including contributions
from both gas and young star clusters, represented nu-
merically as sink/star particles),
∇2Φsg = 4πG(ρ+ρ sp),(8)
and the fixed external gravitational potential in the ver-
tical direction. We adopt an identical functional form to
that inTigress-classic(C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker
2017),
Φext(z) = 2πGΣ ∗z∗
"
1 + z2
z2∗
1/2
−1
#
+ 2πGρdmR2
0 ln

1 + z2
R2
0

,
(9)
where Σ∗ = 42 M⊙ pc−2,z ∗ = 245 pc,ρ dm = 0.0064 M⊙
pc−3 andR 0 = 8 kpc represent solar neighborhood-like
conditions (the “R8” model inTigress-classicand
Tigress-ncr) and are held fixed throughout this paper.

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks5
The radiative heating (G) and cooling (L) terms are
also identical to those ofTigress-classic. We adopt
a tabulated cooling coefficient that depends only on gas
temperature,L=n 2
HΛ(T). Our table combines a sim-
ple fitting formula from H. Koyama & S.-i. Inutsuka
(2002) and a table from R. S. Sutherland & M. A. Do-
pita (1993) for collisional ionization equilibrium at so-
lar metallicity. We adoptµ H = 1.4271 consistent with
R. S. Sutherland & M. A. Dopita (1993). The heat-
ing rateG=n HΓ represents the photoelectric effect on
small grains which scales with the far-ultraviolet (FUV)
radiation field. Adopting a simple plane-parallel global
attenuation model for FUV radiation emitted from star
particles, the heating rate per hydrogen nucleon can be
written as
Γ = Γ0
 ΣFUV
4πJFUV,0
fτ + 0.0024

,(10)
where the reference values of Γ0 = 2×10 −26 erg s−1 H−1
andJ FUV,0 = 2.1×10 −4 erg s−1 cm−2sr−1 are for solar
neighborhood conditions. The unattenuated FUV lu-
minosity per unit area Σ FUV is calculated by summing
over all star particles’ contribution (see Section 2.4.2).
Here we adopt the same attenuation function,f τ =
(1−E 2(τ⊥/2))/τ⊥ withτ ⊥ =κ FUVΣgas andκ FUV =
103 cm2 g−1, as in our previous set ofTigress-classic
simulations (C.-G. Kim et al. 2020a), which derives from
a uniform slab model (E. C. Ostriker et al. 2010); N. B.
Linzer et al. (2024) show that this is a reasonable ap-
proximation to theTigress-ncrfull radiative transfer
results. The temporal variation of Γ is mainly driven by
the time dependence of Σ FUV, as the number and ages
of star particles vary in time. The heating rate is floored
by the second term in Equation 10, which represents the
minimum heating from meta-galactic UV (A. Sternberg
et al. 2002).
As we shall explain in Section 2.3, we consider locally
varying CR ionization rate scaled toe c in calculating
the ionization fraction of gas atT <2×10 4 K, which
affects the CR scattering coefficient calculation. How-
ever, we do not explicitly include heating from CR ion-
ization in the current simulations. We defer fully consis-
tent coupling of the CR fluid with both thermodynamic
and chemical state evolution of the gas to future devel-
opment within theTigress-ncrframework, in which
CR ionization enters into both heating and ionization of
hydrogen and other species (J.-G. Kim et al. 2023).
Note that all our code implementations are compat-
ible with the shearing-box formalism implemented in
Athena++, but in this paper we focus on results from
non-shearing-box simulations. Thus, unlikeTigress-
classicandTigress-ncr, we do not include Coriolis
or tidal gravity terms in Equation 2, and boundary con-
ditions are periodic in both horizontal directions.
2.2.MHD and Gravity Solvers
Athena++solves the ideal MHD equations using a
high-order Godunov method with a constrained trans-
port scheme. This evolves the volume-averaged density,
momentum, and total energy using the corresponding
area and time averaged fluxes computed by a Riemann
solver. To calculate fluxes, we use piece-wise linear
(second order) reconstruction and the HLLD Riemann
solver.
To update the area-averaged magnetic fields defined
on cell faces, we need to evaluate the line-averaged elec-
tro motive force−v×Bat cell corners. Rather than the
originalAthena++constrained transport method based
on T. A. Gardiner & J. M. Stone (2008), we adopt the
UCT-HLLD algorithm proposed by P. Londrillo & L.
del Zanna (2004) and extended in A. Mignone & L.
Del Zanna (2021). The time integration is done with a
second-order Runge-Kutta (RK2) time integrator con-
sisting of two sub-steps (J. M. Stone et al. 2020).
The gravitational force and work terms are included
as source terms at each sub-step within the time in-
tegrator. Poisson’s equation is solved by using a fast
Fourier transform method identically to C.-G. Kim &
E. C. Ostriker (2017), which allows for open boundary
conditions in the vertical direction. In our usual MHD
simulations, we solve Poisson’s equation at every sub
step. For CRMHD simulations with the time step con-
strained byV m, we sparsely update the gravitational
potential by solving Poisson’s equation at every MHD
time step determined by the maximum speed of MHD
waves, which is typically∼5−10 times smaller than
Vm.
For the combined radiative cooling and heating en-
ergy source term, we update only temperature (keeping
density fixed) with subcycling at the end of the time
integrator (i.e., the cooling solver is called after the
MHD integrator). Each subcycle evolves the internal
energye int for 10% of the instantaneous cooling time
|tcool| ≡e int/|L − G|until the accumulated evolution
time reaches the time step of the main integrator.
After the transport step (applying flux divergence), if
the high-order fluxes yield density or pressure smaller
than the preset floors, we recalculate the fluxes of the
problematic cells using first-order reconstruction and
the local Lax-Friedrich (LLF) Riemann solver. At the
end of every integration step (after applying source
terms), we check the density and pressure again and
correct the problematic cells by taking an average from
a local 6-cell stencil. We additionally check the flow,

6C.-G. Kim et al.
Alfv´ en, and sound speeds and raise the cell density
if any speed exceeds a velocity ceiling. We use the
density floorn H,floor = 7×10 −6 cm−3, pressure floor
Pfloor = 10 −4kB cm−3 K, and velocity ceilingv ceil =
5×10 3 km s−1.
2.3.CR transport
The two-moment CR transport method implemented
by Y.-F. Jiang & S. P. Oh (2018) advances Equation 6
and Equation 7 in time using a finite-volume solver sim-
ilar to the MHD solver, splitting transport (LHS) and
source (RHS) terms. An HLLE Riemann solver with a
second-order piecewise linear reconstruction scheme is
used for the flux calculations.
The source term is calculated in the frame where the
x-direction is parallel toBwith rotated flow velocityv
and CR fluxF c. In this rotated frame, the CR-wave in-
teraction coefficient is a diagonal tensorσ↔
tot consisting
of one componentσ tot,∥ parallel and two components
σtot,⊥ =σ ⊥ perpendicular to the direction of the mag-
netic field. For the parallel component, there are two
terms,
σ−1
tot,∥ =σ −1
∥ + vA,i
| ˆB· ∇P c|
(Pc +e c).(11)
The first is the inverse of the explicit wave scatter-
ing term parallel to the magnetic field,σ ∥, and in this
work, we always include the perpendicular scattering as
σ⊥ = 10σ ∥. The parallel component of the scattering
coefficientσ ∥ is derived based on the self-confinement
picture as detailed in Section 2.2.3 of L. Armillotta et al.
(2021). In this approach, the scattering rate is computed
by assuming that the growth rate of the streaming insta-
bility balances the Alfv´ en wave damping rate, including
terms for both ion-neutral damping and nonlinear Lan-
dau damping. The former is more important in denser,
low-ionization gas, while the latter is more important in
more diffuse, high-ionization gas.
The local Alfv´ en speed of ions isv A,i ≡B/(4πρ i)1/2,
forρ i the ion density, so that the CR streaming velocity
is defined by
vs =−v A,i
ˆB· ∇P c
| ˆB· ∇P c|
ˆB; (12)
i.e.v s points along the magnetic field down the CR pres-
sure gradient. With Equation 11, in the limit of largeVm
(i.e. steady state for the CRs) and for our assumption of
nearly-isotropic, relativistic CRs, with small collisional
losses, it is straightforward to show that Equation 7 be-
comes
∇Pc ≈ −σ↔ ·[F c −(v+v s)(4Pc)].(13)
Physically, this means that scattering of individual CRs
occurs at a ratec 2σin the frame moving at the sum
of the gas velocity and the streaming velocity, i.e. the
frame of Alfv´ en waves. In the steady-state limit, the
first source term on the RHS of Equation 6 becomes
(v+v s)· ∇P c.(14)
It is evident from Equation 13 that in regions where
the scattering rate is large, the flux will beF c →(v+
vs)(4Pc), such that the effective transport speed of the
CR fluid will be the sum of the gas flow velocity and the
Alfv´ en speed.
The ion mass density isρ i =µ inimH, forn i =x inH
the number density andµ i the ion mean molecular
weight (see Eq. 28 in N. B. Linzer et al. 2025). In the
simulations, the ionization fractionx i atT <2×10 4 K
is obtained from the balance between ionization and
recombination processes, including CR ionization, col-
lisional ionization, radiative recombination, and grain-
assisted recombination for hydrogen. We also include
contribution of ions from metals with ionization poten-
tial<13.6 eV (mainly C +). This treatment follows L.
Armillotta et al. (2021), but additionally accounts for
collisional ionization to ensure a smooth transition of
xi andµ i atT∼2×10 4 K. The local CR ionization
rate is calculated by assuming a functional form for the
CR spectrum from M. Padovani et al. (2018) with the
high energy slope of−2.7 and the low energy slope of
δ=−0.35. AtT >2×10 4 K,x i is simply taken from
the tabulated values in R. S. Sutherland & M. A. Dopita
(1993).
The CR loss term consists of ionization and hadronic
losses Λcoll = Λcoll,ion + Λcoll,pion which we calculate us-
ing the expression derived in Eq. 9 of L. Armillotta et al.
(2021), with the loss functions taken from M. Padovani
et al. (2018). Evaluating at 1 GeV, we have Λ coll =
1.62×10 −16 cm3 s−1 with Λcoll,pion = 9×10 −17 cm3 s−1
and Λcoll,ion = 7.2×10 −17 cm3 s−1.
We apply bad cell mitigation steps similar to those
used in the MHD part. We recalculate the CR fluxes
using first-order reconstruction and the LLF Riemann
solver if the CR energy density is below a floor af-
ter applying the transport term. At the end of the
integration step, we apply the same neighbor averag-
ing for CR energy density. We use a floor value of
ec,floor = 10−20 eV cm−3.
2.4.Modifications fromTigress-classic
The star formation and stellar feedback models in this
paper are philosophically similar toTigress-classicas
detailed in C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker (2017); C.-G.
Kim et al. (2020a). Here, we summarize a few imple-
mentation details for sink particles and SN feedback.

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks7
2.4.1.Sink Particles
We utilize sink particles to model star cluster forma-
tion and stellar feedback. From a numerical point of
view, the introduction of sink particles is necessary to
avoid unresolved runaway gravitational collapse. The
main implementation follows H. Gong & E. C. Ostriker
(2013) with modifications introduced in subsequent pa-
pers (C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker 2017; C.-G. Kim et al.
2020a). Here, we summarize the key features that differ
from the original implementations.
Sink Creation—We first test the density threshold. We
use locally isothermal Larson-Penston density atr=
∆x/2
ρthr = 8.86
π
c2
s
G∆x ,(15)
where the isothermal sound speed is defined locally as
c2
s ≡P th/ρ. If the cell density exceedsρ thr, we sub-
sequently conduct a local potential minimum test and
a converging flow test. The gravitational potential of
the target cell should be the minimum in the control
volume, defined by the surrounding 3 3 cells. We then
check the strict converging flow condition; i.e., the mass
fluxes averaged over the control volume faces (each face
consists of 32 cell faces) should be convergent in all three
directions. The particle creation task is called after the
main integrator step in a separate task list. When the
creation condition is met, we introduce a zero-mass par-
ticle at the position of the target cell. We then apply
Sink Mergingto check any overlap with existing parti-
cles andSink Accretionto assign the actual mass and
other properties as described below.
Sink Merging—We check the overlap of the control vol-
umes of every pair of particles. If two overlapping par-
ticles are both new, zero mass particles introduced by
Sink Creation, we remove both particles and introduce a
new zero mass particle at the geometrical center of the
two. If one overlapping particle is new, we simply re-
move the new particle expecting that the corresponding
density peak shall be accreted into the existing particle
in the subsequentSink Accretionphase. If both over-
lapping particles are not new, we merge two particles at
the center of mass position. Since more than two parti-
cles can overlap,Sink Mergingis performed iteratively
until there are no overlapping particles.
Sink Accretion—For each particle, we again check the
strict converging flow condition. If this check returns
false, any existing sink does not accrete, and any new
particle is removed, i.e., creation is canceled. If the
condition is satisfied, all 3 3 control volume cells are re-
set using the average values of exterior adjacent cells
(face-sharing cells). This include the cell where the par-
ticle is contained, which is reset by an average over
6 face-sharing cells. This averaging is applied to gas
density, momentum, and internal energy. The mag-
netic field and CR variables are untouched. The mo-
mentum and total energy are recalculated based on the
reset primitive variables. For passive scalars (includ-
ing CR injection scalar, see below), we take averages of
their conservative variables (i.e., species density) rather
than the specific scalars (i.e., concentration). The mass
difference between before and after reset ∆M reset ≡
Mctrl,after −Mctrl,before is usually negative, implying that
the mass is removed from the control volume, which is
a defining property of accretion. The removed mass af-
ter reset is added to sink ∆M sink =−∆M reset. See
Sink Mass Partitioningfor partitioning of the added
mass into stars and gas within the sink. The sink’s mo-
mentum and metal mass is similarly updated. When
∆Mreset >0, we simply cancel the accretion and restore
the fluid variables in the control volume to their original
values before the reset. The accretion rate determined
by the above procedure is identical to the mass inflow
rate into the control volume, modulo the rate of change
in the remaining gas mass present in the control volume
(the latter is zero for steady accretion, see Equation (55)
in S. Moon & E. C. Ostriker 2025).
Sink Integration—Each particle experiences the same
gravitational field as the gas (i.e., both self and external
gravity described by the total potential). The force is
interpolated onto the particles’ positions. We use a kick-
drift-kick leapfrog integrator coupled within the RK2 in-
tegrator. We also have an option to use a drift-kick-drift
leap frog integrator for the van Leer predictor-corrector
integrator (J. M. Stone & T. Gardiner 2009). The two
different choices are made to guarantee the total (gas +
sink) momentum conservation.
Sink Mass Partitioning—In the originalTigress-
classicframework, all mass locked into sink particles
is treated as stars. In other words, it adopts an in-
stantaneous, 100% star formation model. To relax this
somewhat extreme assumption, we introduce a model
that treats a sink particle as a star cluster with a gas
reservoir. We anticipate the development of a more so-
phisticated sink subgrid model motivated by cloud scale
simulations including radiation and stellar wind feed-
back (e.g., J.-G. Kim et al. 2018, 2021; L. Lancaster
et al. 2021). In this work, we take a simple version
with an instantaneous partitioning with a constant gas
fractionf gas,0 = 0.7; i.e., ∆M sink,g = ∆Msinkfgas,0 and
∆Msink,∗ = ∆Msink(1−f gas,0).

8C.-G. Kim et al.
Sink Mass Return—Besides mass gain throughSink Ac-
cretionand mass loss through SN feedback, which we
shall discuss in Section 2.4.2, we implement an addi-
tional mass loss process, representing ionizing outflows
from GMCs by photo-evaporation or similar gas release
from sink gas reservoirs. We plan to implement a more
physically motivated model based on small-scale sim-
ulations in the future and investigate its impact more
deeply. In the present work, however, we adopt one sim-
ple choice, as we are primarily interested in the effects
of CRs while keeping other treatments fixed. We de-
termine the return mass ∆M ret =M sink,g(∆tret/tret) at
every ∆tret = 1 Myr for a fixed time scale oftret = 5 Myr
over 2tret (i.e., 10 mass return events per sink over 10
Myr). For each mass return event, we spread ∆M ret
uniformly into a spherical region centered at the sink
with a radius ofr ret = 100 pc. We then subtract ∆M ret
fromM sink,g. We adjust the return mass not to exceed
Msink,g.9
2.4.2.FUV and Supernova Feedback
For each sink particle, we keep track of its stellar mass
Msink,∗, age since birtht age, and mass-weighted mean
aget mage. Botht age andt mage increases in increments
of the simulation time step ∆t. When two sinks merge,
tage is taken from the older particle andt mage is set by
the mass weighted mean value. When accretion occurs
(i.e., adding zero age stars),t mage is adjusted by
tmage = Msink,∗
Msink,∗ + ∆Msink(1−f gas,0) tmage.(16)
We adopt the same population synthesis model from
STARBURST99as inTigress-classic. In particular, we
adopt Geneva non-rotating tracks, solar metallicity, and
a fully sampled Kroupa IMF. We tabulate a luminosity-
to-mass ratio Ψ FUV(t) for FUV radiation and calculate
the FUV luminosityL FUV = ΨFUV(tmage)Msink,∗. Each
star particle’s FUV luminosity is then summed up and
divided by the horizontal area of the simulation domain
to get Σ FUV, and then to set Γ using Equation 10.
We also tabulate the specific SN rateξ(t). We assign
a SN for the sink when the expectation value of SN
NSN =ξ SN(tage)Msink,∗∆texceeds a uniform random
number in [0,1). Note that in the present work we do
not include SNe from runaway OB stars nor type Ia SNe
(although these capabilities have been implemented).
When a SN event occurs, we assign a spherical re-
gion with radiusr inj = 3∆xaround the event site as
9 In R. Hix et al (2026, in prep), we explore effects of varying
parameters for sink mass return (f gas,0,r ret,t ret).
a feedback volume. We calculate the mean gas prop-
erties within the feedback volume. If the mass within
the feedback volumeM fb (including mass to be injected,
Minj; see below) is small enough to resolve the energy
conserving stage of SN remnant evolution, based on
the criterionM fb <0.1M sf, a total energyE SN is in-
jected within the feedback volume, with the thermal
to kinetic fraction consistent with that of the Sedov-
Taylor solution, i.e.,E th :E kin = 0.72 : 0.28. Here, we
use the shell formation mass in the two-phase medium
Msf = 1344M ⊙E0.87
SN,51n−0.26
H,0 as calibrated by C.-G. Kim
& E. C. Ostriker (2015), whereE SN,51 =E SN/1051 erg
andn H,0 =n H/1 cm−3. In future work, this pre-
scription can be updated with metallicity dependence
based on the results of J.-G. Kim et al. (2023). When
Mfb >0.1M sf, we instead inject terminal momentum
calibrated by C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker (2015):
pfinal = 2.8×10 5 M⊙ km s−1n−0.17
H,0 .(17)
Each feedback event injects a total energy ofE SN =
1051 erg (or the terminal momentum, which gives total
energy less than that) coupled with the injection mass
Minj and the mass in the feedback volume. The injec-
tion mass consists of the SN ejecta massM ej plus ad-
ditional mass representing swept-up material from the
unresolved gas reservoir. We subtractM ej fromM sink,∗
andM inj −M ej fromM sink,g. For the present work we
adoptM inj = 40M ⊙ andM ej = 10M ⊙.
Note that here we set the feedback volume differently
fromTigress-classic, where for resolved SN, we ad-
just the feedback volume so that the mass is close to
0.1Msf. TheTigress-classicapproach is somewhat
equivalent to the Lagrangian way of coupling SN en-
ergy (where the mass resolution is fixed), but the cur-
rent implementation is more natural for an Eulerian
code (where the volume resolution is fixed). Depend-
ing on the adopted value ofM inj and the parameters
of the mass return model described in Section 2.4.1,
we have found that the choice of the feedback volume
can strongly affect the driving of hot outflows. We will
present a comprehensive study of this in future work.
Our results suggest that it will be important to test
sensitivity of wind driving to mass resolution in simula-
tions using Lagrangian codes as well. For this work, we
choose feedback model parameters that produce results
for MHD-only simulations that are similar to those ob-
tained with ourTigress-classicimplementation, and
explore the role of CRs.
2.5.CR injection
In CRMHD simulations, we additionally inject a frac-
tionf c,inj of SN energy as CR energy. This means that

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks9
the total energy injected to the simulation from each
resolved SN event is (1 +f c,inj)Esn.10 Extensive test-
ing has shown that instantaneous CR injection within
the feedback volume causes numerical difficulties, espe-
cially when subsequent SNe explode within pre-cleared
interiors of superbubbles. Moreover, in reality CRs are
accelerated at SN shocks over the course of SN remnant
evolution rather than instantaneously at the moment of
explosion. Motivated by these numerical and physical
reasons, we first inject CR energy as a passive scalar
and convert it into actual CR energy over a scalar de-
cay time scale oft dec. This way, the expanding velocity
field within a superbubble interior quickly advects the
newly-injected CR scalar to the superbubble boundary,
such that most of CR energy is effectively deposited near
the interface.
In practice, at the time of each SN event, we add a
CR passive scalars c =f c,injESN/Vinj uniformly within
the feedback volume, whereV inj = 4πr3
inj/3, andf c,inj is
the fraction of the directly-injected SN energy that goes
into CRs. The CR scalar is passively transported by
solving a continuity equation with a gas velocity, while
at the same time the CR scalar is depleted over a time
scalet dec:
∂sc
∂t +∇ ·(s cv) =− sc
tdec
.(18)
The depletion of the CR scalar is compensated by ad-
ditions in every cell to the CR energy density variable
following ˙ec,SN∆t=s c(1−exp(−∆t/t dec)).
We adoptf c,inj = 0.1 (e.g., D. Caprioli & A.
Spitkovsky 2014) andt dec = 40 kyr, which is similar
to the shell formation time of a single SN remnant ex-
ploded in a uniform medium with densityn H = 1 cm−3
(C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker 2015). The tests for dif-
ferent injection parameters including varyingf c,inj and
tdec, as well as the case keeping the total SN energy
fixed, will be presented in a companion method paper.
2.6.Models
In this work, we present results from two models, with
and without CRs, which we namecrmhdandmhd, re-
spectively. They are identical in all aspects other than
inclusion of CR physics. Our simulation domain is a
vertically-elongated, uniform, Cartesian box with side
lengths ofL x = 1024 pc,L y = 1024 pc, andL z =
8192 pc and number of zones ofN x = 128,N y = 128,
andN z = 1024, yielding a cubic cell of resolution
10 In principle, one could keep the total injected energy fixed at
Esn and partition it into thermal ((1−f c,inj)Esn) and CR
(fc,injEsn) energy. We opt for the current approach and the
full exploration of the other choice with varyingf c,inj will be
presented in a companion paper.
∆x= 8 pc. We use periodic boundary conditions in
thexandydirections and outflow boundary conditions
for vertical gas and CR velocities, with zero gradient
extrapolation for other MHD variables, and logarithmic
extrapolation for CR energy density in thezdirection.
The details of the vertical boundary conditions are pre-
sented in Appendix A.
The initial gas surface density is Σ gas = 12M ⊙ pc−2.
The initial vertical density profile assumes a form of
ρ(z) =ρ1(z) +ρ 2(z)
=ρ0 exp(−˜Φtot(z)/σ2
1)+
10−5ρ0 exp(−˜Φtot(z)/σ2
2)
(19)
where for the approximate total gravitational poten-
tial we adopt ˜Φtot ≡Φ ext(z) + 2πGΣ gashln cosh(z/h)
withh= Σ gas/(2ρ0). The two terms on the RHS rep-
resent warm and hot gas in rough hydrostatic equilib-
rium withσ 1 = 10 km s−1 for warm andσ 2 = 10σ1 for
hot gas. The midplane density normalizationρ 0 is de-
termined by iteratively solving the constraint equation
Σgas =P ρ(z)∆zforρ 0. We findn 0 =ρ 0/(µHmH) =
1.48 cm−3. Given the density profile, the initial ther-
mal pressure is set toP th(z) =ρ 1(z)σ2
1 +ρ 2(z)σ2
2. The
azimuthal magnetic fieldB=B 0(z) ˆyis initialized as
B0(z) = (8πPth(z)/β0)1/2 with a constant initial plasma
beta ofβ 0 = 1. The velocity field is initialized as a
random realization of a turbulent velocity field with
a power spectrum ofP k(v)∝k −2 and an equal mix
of solenoidal and compressive power for a wavenumber
range 1< kL x/(2π)<8. The amplitude of the initial
turbulent velocity dispersion is set to have one dimen-
sional velocity dispersion of 10 km s−1.
For thecrmhdmodel, we initialize the CR energy den-
sity with a very small value, equal to the minimum ther-
mal pressure. We adopt the maximum CR transport
speedV m = 2×10 4 km s−1. This value ofV m is selected
as being large compared to the thermal and MHD signal
speeds, while not being so large as to make the simula-
tion timestep impractically small.
2.7.Definitions of Thermal Phases, Outflow and
Inflow, and Horizontal Averages
We adopt the temperature cuts for the thermal phase
definition identical toTigress-classic(C.-G. Kim &
E. C. Ostriker 2017):
•CNM–T <184 K
•UNM– 184 K≤T <5050 K
•WNM– 5050 K≤T <2×10 4 K
•WHIM– 2×10 4 K≤T <5×10 5 K

10C.-G. Kim et al.
0 100 200 300 400 500
t [Myr]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006ΣSFR [M ⊙ kpc−2 yr−1] (a) mhd
crmhd
0 100 200 300 400 500
t [Myr]
0
5
10
15Σ[M ⊙ pc−2]
(b) Σgas
Σout
Figure 1. (a)Time evolution of SFR surface density Σ SFR calculated using the 40 Myr time bin (see Equation 22). The
horizontal dotted lines with shaded area represent the time averaged SFR with the standard deviation aftert >200 Myr.
The downward and upward triangles respectively demark examples of quiescent (inflowing) and starburst (outflowing) epochs
depicted in Figure 3.(b)Time evolution of the total gas surface density Σ gas and mass loss per area Σ out. While mean SFRs
are similar (within∼10%) in the two models, thecrmhdmodel loses more mass (by a factor∼4) due to the CR driven winds.
•HIM–T≥5×10 5 K.
For most analysis, we mergeCNM,UNM, andWNMinto
a single “warm-cold” component (denoted bywc) and
WHIMandHIMinto a single hot component (denoted by
hot). We also separate gas into outflowing and inflow-
ing components using the outward vertical gas velocity
vout ≡v zsgn(z)
•Outflow –v out >0
•Inflow – otherwise.
A Heaviside step function selecting for a given phase
and flow direction, Θph,dir(T, vout), is defined to return 1
for each cell satisfying specific temperature and velocity
conditions, or return 0 otherwise.
The vertical profiles of interest are constructed using
a component-selected horizontal average, defined by
⟨q⟩ph,dir (z) =
P
x,y q(x, y, z)Θph,dir(T, vout)∆x∆y
LxLy
.
(20)
Note that this definition corresponds to the fractional
contribution of the selected combined thermal phase and
velocity direction component to the volume-weighted av-
erage⟨q⟩. The mean value (or typical value) ofqfor a
given component is denoted with an overline as
qph,dir(z) =
P
x,y q(x, y, z)Θph,dir(T)∆x∆yP
x,y Θph,dir(T)∆x∆y
= ⟨q⟩ph,dir
fph,dir
A
,
(21)
wheref ph,dir
A ≡ ⟨1⟩ ph,dir is the area filling factor of the
component.
3.STAR FORMATION RATES AND THE PRFM
THEORY
In this section, we first summarize the star forma-
tion rates (SFRs), which set the SN explosion rates and
hence energy and momentum injection rates for out-
flow driving. We analyze the vertical dynamical equilib-
rium and the vertical stress components in each model,
providing an explanation for the resulting SFRs in the
context of the pressure-regulated, feedback-modulated
(PRFM) star formation theory (E. C. Ostriker & C.-G.
Kim 2022).
Figure 1(a) plots the time evolution of the SFR sur-
face density in both models, for which we sum up all
stellar mass in sinks with mass-weighted mean age (see
Section 2.4.2) in a time bin younger than a given value
tbin to define
ΣSFR =
P Msink,∗(tmage < tbin)
LxLytbin
.(22)
Here, we chooset bin = 40 Myr, the time scale rele-
vant for SN feedback from a single cluster given a sin-
gle coeval stellar population (C. Leitherer et al. 1999).
The two models show very similar Σ SFR in terms of
both mean and standard deviation; Σ SFR = (3.6±
1.0)×10 −3 M⊙ kpc−2 yr−1 in thecrmhdmodel and
(3.9±1.7)×10 −3 M⊙ kpc−2 yr−1 in themhdmodel af-
tert >200 Myr. Despite the similar SFRs, Figure 1(b)
shows that the total integrated mass loss per area Σ out
in thecrmhdmodel is more than four times as large as
that in themhdmodel. With similar SFR in themhd
andcrmhdmodels, the effects of thermal SN feedback
on wind driving would also be similar, allowing us to
isolate the effect of CRs (non-thermal SN feedback) in
the wind analysis presented later.

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks11
T able 1.Summary of key quantities in the PRFM theory
Model Σ SFR Σgas tdep WP c Pth Pkin Πmag PMHD Υc Υth Υkin Υmag ΥMHD
mhd3.94×10 −3 10.3 2.61 21.0· · ·3.62 16.8 3.79 24.2· · ·1.92 8.90 2.01 12.8
crmhd3.62×10 −3 9.3 2.56 20.0 11.5 3.72 13.7 1.30 18.8 6.65 2.14 7.92 0.75 10.8
Note—All quantities are averaged overt= 200–500 Myr. Σ SFR is in units ofM ⊙ kpc−2 yr−1. Σ gas is in units of
M⊙ pc−2.t dep is in units of Gyr. Weight and pressures are in units of 10 3 kB cm−3 K. The weight is integrated
over the entire box and all phases. The pressures are the mean values (or typical values) averaged overwcgas at
the midplane. Feedback yields (Υ≡P/Σ SFR for each pressure component) are in units of 10 2 km s−1.
We can understand from PRFM theory why CRs do
not significantly alter SFRs. By taking the horizontal
average (as defined by Equation 20), the vertical compo-
nent of the momentum equation (Equation 2) in steady
state can be written as
d
dz

Pkin +P th +P mag − B2
z
4π

=−

ρ dΦ
dz

− d
dz ⟨Pc⟩,
(23)
whereP kin =ρv 2
z is thezzcomponent of the Reynolds
stress tensor andP mag =B·B/8πis the magnetic pres-
sure. The last term arises from Equation 7 in the limit
of steady-state and negligible collisional losses. We fur-
ther define thezzcomponent of the Maxwell stress ten-
sor Πmag ≡P mag −B 2
z /4πand the total vertical stress
PMHD ≡P kin +P th + Πmag.
Vertical integration of Equation 23 from the midplane
(z= 0) to a heightzand rearranging gives
∆PMHD(z) + ∆Pc(z) =
Z z
0

ρ dΦ
dz

dz≡ W(z) (24)
where ∆P MHD(z)≡ ⟨P MHD⟩(0)− ⟨P MHD⟩(z) and
∆Pc(z)≡ ⟨P c⟩(0)− ⟨P c⟩(z). Since a quasi-steady state
is established in both models, we expect vertical dynam-
ical equilibrium (i.e., Equation 24) to hold on average.
In Equation 24, the weight of the ISM (RHS) de-
mands a certain amount of total pressure support (LHS).
In our simulations (and in reality to a large degree),
this support is provided by stellar feedback to the gas
(through both SNe and FUV radiation in our models)
as well as CRs (through SNe), with individual pressure
terms inP MHD andP c all approximately linearly pro-
portional to Σ SFR. If the CR pressure support term
∆Pc(z) were non-negligible, the demand for support by
gas (∆P MHD(z)) would be reduced, such that the re-
quired SFRs could also be reduced. However, we find
that including CRs does not in fact affect Σ SFR in our
simulations (Figure 1), implying that the CR contri-
bution to vertical equilibrium within the disk must be
negligible. This does not, however, mean that the CR
pressure is negligible. Instead, the implication is that
∆Pc(zref)≪∆P MHD(zref) forz=z ref large enough to
encompass the majority of the ISM mass.
To understand the above finding in more detail, we
consider the vertical dynamical equilibrium of just the
wcgas component, which is both the relevant gas reser-
voir for star formation and the predominant contribu-
tor to the vertical ISM weight. To the extent that the
total pressure is comparable in all phases (which is ap-
proximately true), P
wc
MHD = P
hot
MHD, we have⟨P MHD⟩=P
ph ⟨PMHD⟩ph = P
wc
MHD
P
ph fph
A = P
wc
MHD.
The top row of Figure 2 presents the time evolution
of each stress component (including CR pressure) at the
midplane as a function of time for thewcphase.P c at
the midplane increases quickly and reaches a saturated
value as large as other terms, similar to what we have
found in post-processing CR simulations (see R. N. Hix
et al. 2025; N. B. Linzer et al. 2026).
The middle row of Figure 2 shows vertical profiles
of the individual stress components for thewcgas. In
our previous analyses (e.g., E. C. Ostriker & C.-G. Kim
2022; C.-G. Kim et al. 2024) for simulations that do not
include CRs, we often simplify Equation 24 by taking
∆PMHD(zref)→P MHD(0), given that all MHD stress
components are negligible at the top/bottom of the gas
layer. The middle row of Figure 2 shows that this as-
sumption is valid for both themhdandcrmhdsimula-
tions, with an order of magnitude (or more) reduction
inP th,P kin, and Π mag within∼1 kpc of the midplane.
However, the first panel in the middle row of Figure 2
shows that the CR pressure profile is much flatter, espe-
cially within|z|<1 kpc. The pressure scale heights for
thewcgas in thecrmhdmodel measured by an exponen-
tial fit to the time-averaged profiles within|z|<1 kpc
are 320, 482, and 175 pc for thermal, kinetic, and mag-
netic stresses, respectively, which are similar to the den-
sity scale height of 199 pc and to scale heights in themhd
model.
In the bottom row of Figure 2, we plot all of the terms
in Equation 24 forz ref = 1 kpc. Vertical dynamical equi-
librium is satisfied on average (with large temporal fluc-

12C.-G. Kim et al.
0 200 400
t [Myr]
103
104
105
P wc(z = 0)/kB [cm−3 K] Pc
0 200 400
t [Myr]
Pth
mhd
crmhd
0 200 400
t [Myr]
Pkin
0 200 400
t [Myr]
ΠB
2.5
 0.0 2.5
z [kpc]
101
102
103
104
105
P wc(z)/kB [cm−3 K]
Pc
2.5
 0.0 2.5
z [kpc]
Pth
mhd
crmhd
2.5
 0.0 2.5
z [kpc]
Pkin
2.5
 0.0 2.5
z [kpc]
ΠB
0 100 200 300 400 500
t [Myr]
0
2
4
6∆P(1kpc)[104kBcm−3 K] mhd
0 100 200 300 400 500
t [Myr]
crmhd
PMHD
W
Pc
Figure 2. T op:Time evolution of each stress component at the midplane. The evolution achieves a quasi-steady state
aftert= 200 Myr during which time-averaged profiles are constructed.Middle:Time-averaged vertical profiles of each stress
component. The solid lines represent the median aftert= 200 Myr, while the shaded areas denote the range between the 16th
and 84th percentiles. The vertical dashed lines demark|z|= 1 kpc. The exponential fit for each pressure (|z|>1 kpc forP c and
|z|<1 kpc otherwise) is shown as thin dashed lines.Bottom:Time evolution of each term in Equation 24 forz ref = 1 kpc.
AlthoughP c reaches a quasi-steady state value comparable to other stress terms at the midplane (top row), its vertical gradient
is so shallow (middle row) that the contribution in the offsetting the weight ∆P c(1 kpc) is negligible (bottom row)

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks13
tuations in ∆P MHD) in both models, and the CR con-
tribution ∆Pc (green) is always negligible for thecrmhd
model. Since ∆P c is negligible, Equation 24 implies that
∆PMHD ≈P MHD ≈ Wwill be similar incrmhdandmhd,
which is evident from the two bottom panels of Figure 2.
The very similarP MHD implies the feedback rate that
maintains the MHD pressure is similar, which explains
why global SFRs remain the same irrespective of the
presence of CRs. Fundamentally, this is because the CR
pressure within the warm-cold phase is uniform on large
scales. In detail, thecrmhdmodel experiences slightly
more secular decrease in the weight than themhdmodel
because of the enhanced mass loss (see Figure 1(b)) by
CR-driven winds, as we shall analyze further in Sec-
tion 5.
It is worth noting that the large-scale average SFR
is agnostic to potential effects of CRs. As delineated in
E. C. Ostriker & C.-G. Kim (2022, see their Section 2.4),
any change in the small scale star formation efficiency
primarily alters the time-averaged mass fraction of grav-
itationally bound clouds. Studying potential effects on
the mass fraction of dense gas due to changes induced
by CRs in the interiors of gravitationally bound clouds
(e.g., M. Fitz Axen et al. 2024) would require higher
resolution simulations than we have here (and proper
chemistry modeling), an interesting potential direction
for future research.
The above results may be summarized by comparing
the two models with respect to key quantities in the
PRFM theory. Table 1 includes the rate of star forma-
tion per unit area, the total weight integrated over the
entire box, the component pressures at the midplane,
and the ratios Υ≡P/Σ SFR, which are the feedback
yield parameters. The weight matches the total MHD
pressure in both models. The thermal, kinetic, and total
MHD feedback yields are quite similar in themhdand
crmhdsimulations. The value of Υ mag is lower incrmhd
than inmhd; while the reason for this is not certain, we
speculate that it is due to the greater outflow rate in
crmhd(see Section 5).
Finally, we note that the scale height of CR pressure
measured for 1 kpc<|z|<2 kpc is 4 kpc. This value is
much larger than that from the post-processing results
(∼0.5 kpc for R8, see L. Armillotta et al. 2022; R. N.
Hix et al. 2025), although in the most comparable warm-
wind CRMHD simulations of L. Armillotta et al. (2024)
(see WW-ID and WW-HD models in Fig. 18 there), we
also found thatP c dropped by only a factor∼2 within
|z|= 3 kpc. As we shall see in the next sections, even
with the large CR scale height, the dynamical impact of
CR pressure in the extraplanar region is quite substan-
tial. In the low-density extraplanar region, the thermo-
dynamic properties of the gas are strongly affected by
interactions with CRs, which in turn modify the result-
ing CR distribution and vertical profiles, leading to a
larger CR scale height.
4.VERTICAL PROFILES OF GAS AND CR
PROPERTIES
In this section, we shall make extensive use of
horizontally-averaged vertical profiles constructed with
phase separation as defined in Section 2.7. In local sim-
ulations adopting horizontally periodic boundary condi-
tions, flows of mass, momentum, and energy are mainly
vertical such that the vertical profiles capture key phys-
ical processes of outflows. It is still important, however,
to keep in mind the full complexity and the high degree
of inhomogeneity in the ISM. We thus begin this section
by examining example snapshots of physical quantities.
4.1.ISM Structure Comparison
The global SFRs examined in the previous section are
more or less the same in themhdandcrmhdmodels, while
here we can see that the ISM structure of the two models
is significantly different, with larger differences farther
from the midplane. Figure 3 displays the distribution of
the thermal gas properties including density, tempera-
ture, and vertical velocity. Sets of midplane (left) and
vertical slices (right) are compared. We choose snap-
shots from similar evolutionary stages when both mod-
els are in a quiescent, inflow-dominated phase (top row;
(a) and (b)) or in a starburst, outflow-dominated phase
(bottom row; (c) and (d)). Both epochs demonstrate
the similarities near the midplane and stark differences
in extraplanar regions.
For bothmhdandcrmhd, the surface density maps in
the quiescent epoch of Figure 3(a) show a much more
uniform gas distribution with fewer star clusters than
those in the starburst epoch of Figure 3(c). In mid-
plane slices of density and temperature, the quiescent
epoch shows more extended warm gas with pervasive
cold gas and patchy, isolated hot gas filling less volume
than in the starburst epoch. This is because the clus-
ters younger than 10 Myr (shown in magenta) are the
main contributors to FUV radiation and hence heating.
Also, only significantly clustered SN explosions (as seen
from the particle distribution in (c)) can create signif-
icant hot outflows that break out into the extraplanar
region. From the edge-on views, Figure 3(b) and (d),
it is evident that hot gas is almost completely missing
in the extraplanar region during the quiescent epoch,
while the hot outflow fills significant volume during the
starburst epoch in themhdmodel. Consequently, for the
mhdmodel the vertical gas flows are mainly inflowing in
(b) but outflowing in (d).

14C.-G. Kim et al.
(a) Quiescent Epoch, Face-on Views
 (b) Quiescent Epoch, Edge-on Views
(c) Starburst Epoch, Face-on Views
 (d) Starburst Epoch, Edge-on Views
Figure 3.Comparison of thermal gas properties for example quiescent (top row; (a) and (b)) and starburst (bottom row; (c)
and (d)) epochs as marked in Figure 1.Left column, (a) and (c):the face-on projection (along thezaxis) of gas surface
density and midplane slices of hydrogen number density and temperature. Colored circles in the top row represent star clusters
younger than 40 Myr.Right column, (b) and (d):the edge-on projection (along theyaxis) of gas surface density andy= 0
slices of hydrogen number density, temperature, and vertical velocity.

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks15
Figure 4.Physical quantities of interest for CR transport in slices throughy= 0 (top row) andz= 0 (bottom row) from
thecrmhdmodel att= 316 Myr (the starburst epoch shown in Figure 3). From left to right, we show the parallel scattering
rateσ ∥, gas velocity magnitude|v|with velocity streamlines, ion Alfv´ en velocity magnitude|v A,i|with its streamlines, effective
CR transport speed|v c|=|F c|/(ec +P c) with CR flux stream lines, CR pressureP c, vertical component of turbulent pressure
Pkin =ρv 2
z, thermal pressureP th, and magnetic pressureP mag =B 2/(8π) with magnetic field lines.
There are also significant differences between the
crmhdandmhdmodel. Two that are clearly evident in
Figure 3 are (1) during quiescent epochs, vertical flows
remain bi-directional (inflowing and outflowing) in the
crmhdmodel; and (2) during both epochs, the denser,
cooler gas fills a larger volume above|z| >
∼ 1 kpc incrmhd
compared tomhd. During starburst epochs, the hot, fast
winds reach all the way to the vertical boundaries in
themhdmodel, but this is not the case in thecrmhd
model. Clear hot “breakout” is lacking in thecrmhd
model. This is not due to lack of hot gas creation or
burstiness of star formation;crmhdandmhdare similar
in both respects (see Figure 1). Rather, incrmhdthe
hot gas experiences more interaction with the volume-
filling warm gas in the extraplanar region (Figure 5),
and quickly loses its energy through radiative cooling.

16C.-G. Kim et al.
Although the above visual impressions of differences are
drawn from a particular snapshot cutting through a spe-
cific slice of the full volume, we shall show that these
characteristics hold in general using the time series of
the horizontally averaged vertical profiles (Section 5.1).
We now turn our attention to the distributions of
additional physical quantities of interest for CR trans-
port, focusing on the outflowing epoch of thecrmhd
model. The first panel of Figure 4 shows the result of
self-consistent modeling of the CR scattering rate un-
der the assumption that the growth rate and damp-
ing rate of the streaming instability balance. Wher-
ever there is high-density gas near the midplane (as
seen in Figure 3(d)), strong ion-neutral damping results
in very low scattering rates,σ ∥ ≪10 −29 cm−2 s. Most
extraplanar regions where gas is low density (and also
the regions of hot gas near the midplane) have weaker
damping, and the scattering rate remains much higher,
σ∥ ∼10 −28 −10 −27 cm−2 s. As a consequence, CRs and
gas are only weakly coupled in thewcmidplane gas,
while in low-density warm extraplanar gas and hot gas,
CRs and gas are well coupled.
The effective CR transport speed|v c| ≡ |F c|/4Pc is
shown in the fourth column, and for GeV CRs is primar-
ily set by advection and streaming (with their character-
istic speeds,|v|and|v A,i|shown in the second and third
columns, respectively). In the hot gas (see temperature
slice in Figure 3(d)), the CR transport speed is domi-
nated by advection. The contribution of CR streaming
is more important in the warm, low-density gas, and es-
pecially notable forz <−2 kpc in the snapshot shown.
In the low scattering rate region near the midplane, CR
diffusion is efficient, resulting in especially uniform CR
pressure within the warm and cold gas. More gener-
ally, the efficient transport of CRs along magnetic fields
makes the CR pressure (shown in the fifth column of
Figure 4) quite smooth overall. This is in stark contrast
to all the other pressures, which have large fluctuations
at all scales, as shown in the sixth to eighth columns.
When measured across horizontal directions at a given
z, the quantitative level of pressure fluctuations with re-
spect to the mean,δP 2 ≡

P 2
− ⟨P⟩ 2, areδP/⟨P⟩ ∼
1−2 for turbulent, thermal, and magnetic pressures.
For CRs,δP cr/⟨P cr⟩≲0.1 in the extraplanar region,
while ranging up toδP cr/⟨P cr⟩ ∼0.5 in the midplane,
mainly due to CR pressure variations across gas phases.
In the extraplanar region, density fluctuation are present
within the warm gas of bothcrmhdandmhd, which are
inherent in the turbulent, supersonic, SN-driven multi-
phase outflows. At the same time, in the extraplanar
warm gas the magnetic pressure is generally larger than
thermal pressure (i.e.,β≡P th/Pmag <1) for thecrmhd
model (see Figure 4);β <1 for themhdmodel as well in
the extraplanar warm gas. This condition is favorable
for CR acoustic instability (M. C. Begelman & E. G.
Zweibel 1994; T. H. N. Tsung et al. 2022; E. Quataert
et al. 2022; X. Zhao et al. 2026) and the bottleneck ef-
fect (J. Wiener et al. 2017a; C. Bustard & E. G. Zweibel
2021) to develop. While space does not permit in the
present work, it is of great interest to investigate fur-
ther to what extent CR driven dynamical process may
contribute to observable structure in outflows.
4.2.Gas Phase
To provide a view of the change in the overall prop-
erties of the multiphase ISM from midplane to extra-
planar regions, Figure 5 plots vertical profiles of the
phase-separated area filling factorsf ph
A =⟨1⟩ ph and con-
tributions⟨n H⟩ph from each phase to the total density.
(Recall from Equation 21 that the typical value of the
densitywithina given phase is nph =⟨n H⟩ph /fph
A .) In
thecrmhdmodel, theWNMphase dominates in the extra-
planar regions|z|>500 pc in terms of both mass and
volume, while in themhdmodel, thehot(WHIM+HIM)
contribution to the volume is comparable to that of
WNM.11 These differences are amplified when comparing
the filling factor of the outflowing component. However,
thecrmhdmodel shows only a small difference between
fA andf out
A (higherhotphase filling factor in the out-
flows), while the majority of the outflow volume is filled
with thehotgas in themhdmodel. The temporal fluc-
tuations of the filling factors are also much smaller in
thecrmhdmodel. TheWNMdominates the density of ex-
traplanar gas in both models, with a steeper decrease of
the density profile in themhdmodel at large|z|. For the
crmhdmodel, density profiles ofWNMtaper off slowly at
large|z|due to CR-driven warm outflows. The density
profiles ofwcgas similarly drop off slowly with|z|in the
CRMHD simulations of L. Armillotta et al. (2024, see
Fig. 18 and 19 there), although the overall normaliza-
tion there is lower by a factor∼3−6, due to the lower
11 We note that the phase filling factors in themhdmodel are
somewhat different from what we obtained inTigress-classic
andTigress-ncr, shown in E. Kado-Fong et al. (2020) and
N. B. Linzer et al. (2024), respectively. Two major physics el-
ements not included in the currentmhdmodel compared to the
previous ones are runaway SNe and galactic differential rota-
tion; there are also numerical differences in the way gas mass
and energy are returned from star particles (see Section 2.4.1).
Tests show that including runaway SN does not significantly
changef hot
A formhd, while galactic differential rotation and
varying mass return parameters can make more of a differ-
ence tof hot
A ; this will be discussed in a future publication. We
find, however, that thecrmhdmodel is less sensitive to these
physical and numerical elements.

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks17
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0fA, f out
A
mhd
total
outflow
crmhd
4
 2
 0 2 4
z [kpc]
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
⟨
nH
⟩
[cm−3]
CNM+UNM
WNM
WHIM+HIM
4
 2
 0 2 4
z [kpc]
Figure 5. T op:Vertical profiles of the volume filling factor of each phase. The solid line denotes the mean aftert= 200 Myr,
while the shaded areas denote the range between the 16th and 84th percentiles. The dashed lines show the time-averaged
filling factor of the outflowing component.Bottom:Vertical profiles of the fractional density of each phase (i.e., the fractional
contribution of each phase to the volume-weighted average). At|z|>500 pc, the gas in thecrmhdmodel is predominantlyWNM
by volume and mass, even when selecting just the outflowing component. This is in contrast to themhdmodel, in which the hot
component dominates the outflowing gas volume.
CR momentum flux injection rate (see further discussion
in Section 5.3).
4.3.Vertical Velocities
Figure 6(a) shows the vertical velocity in thewcphase
for outflowing gas only (solid) and all gas (dotted). The
vertical gas velocity of outflowing gas is more-or-less the
same for both models, increasing withzin a similar
fashion. When considering the net velocity, the alter-
nating inflows and outflows in themhdmodel during the
chosen time window (t= 200−500 Myr) do not can-
cel out, leading to net negative velocity (dotted black)
and large temporal fluctuations in the outflowing veloc-
ity (shaded gray). In contrast, outflows are persistent
in thecrmhdmodel, leading to net positive velocity at
|z|≳0.5kpc (dotted orange) with modest temporal fluc-
tuations of the outflow (shaded orange). The net outflow
velocity profiles ofwcgas found in the most comparable
CRMHD simulations of L. Armillotta et al. (2024, see
models WW-ID and WW-HD in Figs. 18 and 19 there)
are similar to the net velocity profile in thecrmhdmodel
here.
Although the velocity profile of outflowing gas is sim-
ilar for both models, the physical reason for the velocity
increase is different, as we shall explain via quantitative
analysis in Section 5.3. The mean velocity increase in
themhdmodel is mainly due to dropout of the low veloc-
ity portion of the distribution, as has been shown in our
previous work (C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker 2018; C.-G.
Kim et al. 2020a; A. Vijayan et al. 2020). In thecrmhd
model, however, thewcoutflow is actually accelerated
(or deceleration by gravity is greatly reduced, as argued
in P. Girichidis et al. 2018). In Figure 6, additional ac-
celeration can be deduced from the reduced difference in
velocities between outflowing and all gas in thecrmhd
model.
Figure 6(b) shows the characteristic velocities for CR
transport. The steady state CR flux is obtained as the
solution of Equation 13, such thatF c is decomposed as
Fc ≈F a +F s +F d (25)

18C.-G. Kim et al.
0 1 2 3 4
|z|[kpc]
20
0
20
40
60
vwc
z [km/s]
(a)
0 1 2 3 4
|z|[kpc]
20
0
20
40
60
CR velocity [km/s]
(b)
Figure 6. Left:Vertical profiles of vertical gas velocities of thewcphase based on both the upper and lower halves of the disk;
the velocity in the lower half is multiplied by−1 before combining the distributions. We separately show the median velocities
of only outflowing gas (solid lines) and all gas (dotted lines).Right:Vertical profiles of vertical advection velocity (blue),
streaming velocity (red), diffusion speed (green), and the effective CR transport velocity (purple). The sum of advection and
streaming velocity is shown as vermilion. All horizontal averages are weighted by CR pressure and include all gas (without phase
or inflow/outflow separation). In both panels, shaded regions denote the 16th to 84th percentiles of the temporal variations.
where the advection, streaming, and diffusion fluxes are
Fa ≡(e c +P c)v,F s ≡(e c +P c)vs, andF d ≡(e c +P c)vd
with the diffusion velocity
vd ≡ − 1
ec +P c
σ↔−1 · ∇Pc,(26)
respectively;e c +P c = 4Pc = (4/3)ec for our relativis-
tic equation of state. The effective local CR transport
velocity can be defined as
vc ≡ Fc
ec +P c
,(27)
and we therefore havev c ≈v+v s +v d in regions close
to steady state. In regions out of steady state (with
very low scattering rates), the sum of the characteristic
velocities exceedsv c. For Figure 6(b), we locally cal-
culate the vertical component of each velocity and take
Pc-weighted averages in the horizontal direction. Note
that we take the average of the diffusion speed|v d,z|
rather than velocity.
For vertical CR transport out of the disk, a criti-
cal quantity is the effective velocity at the interface
where the CR-gas coupling is stronger (L. Armillotta
et al. 2025; R. N. Hix et al. 2025). For CRs with
∼GeV energy, a transition from diffusion-dominated to
dynamically-controlled transport occurs where the den-
sity drops enough that ion-neutral damping is signifi-
cantly reduced. With only nonlinear Landau damping,
wave amplitudes remain sufficiently high that diffusion
speeds (green) become smaller than dynamical speeds
(blue and red). In the present simulation, the transi-
tion to the strongly-coupled regime (with sub-dominant
vd) occurs atz∼0.5−1 kpc. The measured effec-
tive vertical transport velocity for CRs at|z|= 1kpc
isv c,z ∼35 km s−1 averaged over all gas (purple), which
is indeed comparable to the sum (vermillion) of advec-
tion (blue) and streaming (red),v z ∼25 km s −1 and
vs,z ∼10 km s−1.
While streaming is quite important to transport
withinwcgas, Figure 4 makes clear that the CR trans-
port in the hot gas is completely dominated by advection
(and CRs are always well coupled).
4.4.CR Diffusion Coefficients
The CR gradient weighted diffusion coefficient at a
givenzis defined by
κ∥,avg ≡

|Fd,∥|


|∇∥Pc|
 (28)
whereF d,∥ ≡ −∇ ∥Pc/σ∥ is the steady-state diffusive
flux with∇ ∥Pc ≡ ˆB· ∇P c. Figure 7 shows the pro-
files of the mean diffusion coefficient (top row) for three
different phasesCNM+UNM,WNM, andhot(WHIM+HIM)
along with the inverse of it (bottom row) to show the
mean scattering rate. The mean diffusivity is high-
est at the midplane in bothCNM+UNMandWNMbecause

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks19
1027
1028
1029
1030
, avg[cm2 s−1]
ph=CNM+UNM ph=WNM ph=WHIM+HIM
4
 2
 0 2 4
z [kpc]
10 30
10 29
10 28
10 27
σ , avg[cm−2 s1]
4
 2
 0 2 4
z [kpc]
4
 2
 0 2 4
z [kpc]
Figure 7. T op:The effective CR diffusion coefficient, defined by the CR pressure gradient weighted average (Equation 28).
Profiles represent horizontal averages, and we bin into three thermal components by separating thewcphase intoCNM+UNM(left)
andWNM(middle).Bottom:The effective scattering rate, obtained from the inverse ofκ ∥,avg.
this is where damping is strongest. The peak value
in theWNMisκ ∥,avg ∼10 29 cm2 s−1 and decreases out-
ward, approachingκ ∥,avg ≈10 28 cm2 s−1. In the colder
phase, the diffusion coefficient gets much larger, imply-
ing complete decoupling of CRs from the gas. In the
hotphase,κ ∥,avg slightly increases with altitude reach-
ing values of a few×10 27 cm2 s−1. Overall, values of
κ∥,avg ∼10 27 −10 28 cm2 s−1 in the extraplanar region
are consistent with the findings from our previous post-
processing simulations (e.g., L. Armillotta et al. 2022,
2025).
4.5.Energy Gain and Loss
We now investigate the spatial distribution of the in-
dividual energy source and sink terms appearing on the
RHS of Equation 3 and Equation 6. The term aris-
ing from the interaction between gas and CRs appears
with opposite signs in equations. Omitting the flux di-
vergence term on the LHS, while explicitly including a
term for CR energy injection from SNe, the gas and
CR energy equations with source and sink terms can be
written as
˙Etot +· · ·=G − L −W grav −W gas→cr +G st (29)
˙ec +· · ·= ˙ec,SN − Lc +W gas→cr − Gst.(30)
The sign of each term above is chosen so that each term
is mostly positive. That is, we find that the work of
gravity on the gas, as well as the gas-CR interaction,
results in net energy losses from the gas. The sign of the
streaming velocity is such that CR streaming represents
an energy gain for the gas. For the thermal gas, we have
radiative coolingL=n 2
HΛ and heatingG=n HΓ terms
as well as the work term due to gravity
Wgrav ≡ρv· ∇Φ.(31)
We explicitly include the CR gain term by SN injection
using the passive scalar
˙ec,SN ≡s c/tdec (32)
while the CR loss term is
Lc ≡Λ collnHec.(33)
The gas and CR interaction terms are separated into
the work done by gas on CRs (if positive, this means
loss for the gas and gain for the CR)
Wgas→cr ≡ −v·σ↔
tot ·(F c −4P cv),(34)
and the gas heating mediated by the damping of Alfv´ en
waves excited by streaming instability (if positive, this
means gain for the gas and loss for the CR)
Gst ≡v s ·σ↔
tot ·(F c −4P cv).(35)
We note that these work terms are calculated based on
the actual source terms implemented in the code, per
Equation 6. For reasons of numerical stability (see dis-
cussion in Y.-F. Jiang & S. P. Oh 2018),σ ↔
tot includes

20C.-G. Kim et al.
10 30
10 28
10 26
Loss/Gain for Gas
[ergs−1 cm−3]
ph=CNM+UNM+WNM
gas loss
L
Wgas → cr
gas gain
G
Gst
ph=WHIM
model
mhd
crmhd
ph=HIM
4
 2
 0 2 4
z [kpc]
10 30
10 28
10 26
Loss/Gain for CRs
[ergs−1 cm−3]
CR loss
Lc
Gst
CR gain
˙ec, SN
Wgas → cr
4
 2
 0 2 4
z [kpc]
4
 2
 0 2 4
z [kpc]
Figure 8.Decomposition of energy gain and loss terms in themhd(dotted) andcrmhd(solid) models. Profiles represent
horizontal averages, and we bin into three thermal components by separating thehotphase intoWHIM(middle) andHIM(right).
T op:Energy gain and loss terms for the gas. We show the radiative cooling and heating rate per volume in blue and red,
respectively, while the gravity work term is omitted (and is small). The CR streaming heating (Equation 35; gain for the gas, and
loss for the CR) and the gas work (Equation 34; loss for the gas, and gain for the CR) are shown in green and purple, respectively,
in both rows.Bottom:Energy gain and loss terms for the CRs. The CR energy injection rate by SNe ˙e c,SN ≡s c/tdec is shown
in coral, and the collisional CR loss term is shown in teal, which is only visible for thewcphase (CNM+UNM+WNM) in the left
column.
both a physical scattering term and a term that en-
sures that in steady state, Equation 13 holds. As a
result, the CR energy source term in steady state is
given by Equation 14, such thatW gas→cr →v· ∇P c
andG st → −v s · ∇Pc. In practice, we find that Equa-
tion 34 and Equation 35 agree with their steady-state
values to within∼10%.
Figure 8 plots vertical profiles of the energy gain and
loss terms for the gas (top) and CRs (bottom). Here,
we separate thehotphase into theWHIMandHIMphases
(middle and right columns, respectively), as radiative
cooling in thehotphase is completely dominated by the
WHIM. Terms for themhdmodel are shown with dotted
lines and only appear in the top row. For both models,
we omit the gravity work term as it is small compared
to the radiative cooling and heating term at all heights.
We first compare radiative cooling and heating terms
between the two models. The cooling rates inWHIMare
more-or-less the same in both models at|z|<2 kpc, but
higher at|z|>2 kpc in thecrmhdmodel, where it is
balanced by the CR heating. For thewcphase, cool-
ing is significantly enhanced in the extraplanar region
of thecrmhdmodel compared tomhd, mainly due to the
increased density of thewcphase. The enhanced cooling
in thecrmhdmodel is compensated by correspondingly
enhanced heating; heating details are discussed below.
For thecrmhdmodel, the two terms providing in-situ
gas heating are CR streaming heating (green) and radi-
ation heating (red). For thewc(CNM+UNM+WNM) compo-
nent, the radiation heating far exceeds streaming heat-
ing in the midplane region, while the two terms become
comparable at|z|>2 kpc. Radiative gas cooling (blue)
largely compensates these heating terms (especially at
large|z|), with the excess of cooling over heating ulti-
mately attributable to energy originally from SNe (see
C.-G. Kim et al. 2023). The cooling in theWHIMis com-
parable to the cooling in thewcphase, especially near
the midplane. In theWHIM, radiative heating is negligi-
ble, mainly because we assume that the photoelectric
heating is turned off in the fully ionized gas. Cool-
ing of theWHIMis comparable to streaming heating at
|z|>2 kpc; a similar result was found in L. Armillotta
et al. (2024, see Fig. 22 there). In the midplane region,
the excess of cooling over heating in theWHIMultimately
comes from energy deposited by SNe in the ISM, as in
thewcgas. In theHIMphase, radiative cooling is weak
due to the low density, while transfer of energy to the
CRs by work is quite significant. TheHIMgas loses en-
ergy via adiabatic expansion and mixing with lower tem-

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks21
perature gas, followed by radiative cooling (after phase
transition to the cooler phases); the result of this is seen
as net cooling inwcandWHIMgas.
In the bottom row, we show two gain and two loss
terms for CRs: the CR energy injection rate from SNe
(red; Equation 32) and the work done by gas on CRs
(purple; Equation 34); and the CR collisional (blue;
Equation 33) and streaming losses (green; Equation 35).
The majority of the CR energy injection by SNe oc-
curs in theHIMphase near the midplane (bottom right),
by design of our algorithm. Gas work adds to the CR
energy within|z|<2 kpc, again primarily within the
HIM. For bothHIMandWHIMthe CR energy loss is much
smaller than the gain. In thewcphase (bottom left),
on the contrary, the loss terms are much larger than the
gain terms. However, the total CR loss across all phases
is still much smaller than the total gains from work, lead-
ing to outward CR energy fluxes that are significantly
larger than what is injected by SNe.
Within the neutral gas layer|z|<500 pc, the total
work term contribution is about twice as large as the
direct SN injection energy to CRs. As we shall show
in the next section, this enhances the equilibrium CR
pressure at a given star formation rate (CR feedback
yield Υ c ≡P c/ΣSFR). Additional work at larger|z|
further enhances the CR energy loading factor (details
will be provided in Figure 11 and Figure 15). Integrating
over the whole computational volume, the total work
done by gas on the CRs exceeds the CR streaming losses
by a factor of 6. However, the flat profile of streaming
losses suggests that in reality CR energy and momentum
would continue to be transferred from CRs to gas at
scales exceeding our computational domain.
5.MULTIPHASE OUTFLOWS
Having established that CRs significantly impact the
state of the extraplanar gas, in this section we present
detailed analysis of multiphase outflows.
5.1.Outflow Fluxes
We define the vertical mass, momentum, and energy
fluxes for the thermal gas as
FM =⟨ρv z⟩,(36)
Fp,MHD =⟨P kin +P th + Πmag⟩=⟨P MHD⟩,(37)
FE,MHD =

(Etot +P th +P mag)vz − (B·v)B z
4π

.
(38)
For the CR fluid, the momentum and energy fluxes are
simply
Fp,c =⟨P c⟩(39)
FE,c =⟨F c,z⟩.(40)
All fluxes are separately calculated for each phase and
velocity component as in Section 2.7.
Figure 9 displays the space-time plots of selected MHD
fluxes; we show outward and inward mass fluxes of the
wcphase (top two rows), and outward energy fluxes of
thewcandhotphases (bottom two rows). On large
scales, the mass fluxes in themhdmodel are charac-
terized by alternating outflows and inflows, while the
crmhdmodel shows pervasive simultaneous outflows and
inflows of thewcphase. In both models, quasi-periodic
bursts of star formation (as shown in Figure 1(a)) in-
duce large outflow mass fluxes near the midplane, which
quickly decrease within the disk scale height. In themhd
model, only the stronger outflows break into the extra-
planar region above|z|>500 pc, followed by inflows
with returning flux comparable to the recent outflow
flux. In thecrmhdmodel, however, there are continu-
ous outflows with no distinct breakout events. Steady
inflows are established after∼150 Myr, but the mass
flux is smaller than that of the outflows. Overall, in the
crmhdmodel CR feedback results in steady outflows of
thewcphase, leading to the extended distributions of
wcgas consistently seen in the maps and profiles of the
previous section (e.g., Figure 3 and Figure 5).
In the two models, the energy fluxes injected near
the midplane are similar, due to the similar SFRs. In
themhdmodel, strong bursts of star formation create
episodes of hot outflows that break out into the extra-
planar region, with energy flux roughly constant with
z. Breakout events in thehotgas are accompanied by
periods of highwcenergy and mass outflows, followed
by mass inflows of thewcphase. Strong inflows of the
wcphase often suppress hot outflows before they reach
the boundaries. The situation is quite different in the
crmhdmodel: the energy flux of hot outflows gradually
decreases outward, mostly vanishing above|z|>2 kpc.
This is mainly due to the interaction betweenhotphase
outflows and the extraplanarwcgas populated by steady
outflows that fill significant extraplanar volume (Fig-
ure 5). For thecrmhdmodel, thewcphase continuously
delivers energy fluxes that only slowly decline with dis-
tance, dominating the energy flux from thehotphase
far away from the midplane.
Figure 10 plots the time-averaged vertical profiles of
outflow fluxes. We combine the fluxes through both the
upper and lower horizontal surfaces at a fixed height|z|
using the outward velocityv out =v zsgn(z) and outward
CR fluxF c,out =F c,zsgn(z) in the flux calculations. In
the top row, we show both outflow (solid lines) and in-
flow (dotted lines) mass fluxes. The middle and bottom

22C.-G. Kim et al.
Figure 9.Space-time plots of selected horizontally-averaged fluxes from themhd(left) andcrmhd(right) models. The top two
rows respectively show the outward and inward mass fluxes of thewcphase. The bottom two rows are the outflow energy fluxes
carried by thewcandhotphases, respectively. Thecrmhdmodel shows pervasive simultaneous outflows and inflows ofwcgas,
while themhdmodel is more stochastic, with alternating periods of outflow/inflow.
rows show the momentum and energy fluxes, respec-
tively, of only the outflowing gas.
Within the disk (z <500 pc), the outflow and inflow
mass fluxes of thewcgas are similar to each other in
both models; this reflects the turbulent cycling of gas
with a vertical crossing time of a few 10s of Myr. In the
mhdmodel the outflow mass flux keeps dropping at large
|z|, while in thecrmhdmodel the outflow mass flux flat-
tens out above|z| ∼1 kpc. The inflow mass flux profiles
are similar in both models, dropping sharply near the
boundaries due to the outflowing boundary condition
(see Appendix A). The net outgoing mass flux (the dif-
ference between outflow and inflow mass fluxes) is thus
much larger in thecrmhdmodel than in themhdmodel,

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks23
10 4
10 3
10 2
10 1
Fout
M [M ⊙ kpc−2 yr−1]
ph=wc
outflow
inflow
ph=hot
10 2
10 1
100
101
Fout
p, MHD [M ⊙ (km/s)kpc−2 yr−1]
mhd
crmhd
0 1 2 3 4
|z|[kpc]
1043
1044
1045
1046
1047
Fout
E, MHD [ergkpc−2 yr−1]
0 1 2 3 4
|z|[kpc]
Figure 10.Vertical profiles of outflow fluxes (through both upper and lower halves combined) in the simulation domain. The
solid lines denote the mean MHD fluxes (Equation 36-Equation 38) aftert= 200 Myr, while the shaded areas denote the range
between the 16th and 84th percentiles. In the top row, we also show the mean inflow mass fluxes with dotted lines.
with five times the rate of mass leaving the box. The
large, steady mass flux ofwcgas in thecrmhdmodel is
made possible by the continuous acceleration by CR mo-
mentum transfer in the extraplanar region, as we shall
discuss further in Section 5.3. The momentum and en-
ergy fluxes of thewcgas are also relatively flat above
|z| ∼1 kpc for thecrmhdmodel, while they drop off
slightly more rapidly for themhdmodel.
In themhdmodel, allhotoutflow MHD fluxes flatten
out above|z| ∼1 kpc, while in thecrmhdmodel they
continue to decrease with the same logarithmic slope up
to|z| ∼2 kpc. The decrease of thehotMHD fluxes in
thecrmhdmodel is due to the enhanced interaction with
the abundant extraplanarwcgas. It is also noteworthy
that the temporal variation represented by the shaded
area (the 16th to 84th percentile over 300 snapshots)
is smaller in thecrmhdmodel than themhdmodel, re-
flecting the steadier outflows seen in Figure 9. Similar
to mass fluxes below|z|<1 kpc, MHD momentum and
energy fluxes in this region are more-or-less the same for
both phases and both models.
5.2.Loading Factors
We define the outflow loading factors as the fluxes nor-
malized by the areal star formation rate and momentum
and energy injection rates (e.g., C.-G. Kim et al. 2020a).

24C.-G. Kim et al.
10 2
10 1
100
101
ηM
mhd
crmhd
10 2
10 1
100
ηp
0 1 2 3 4
|z|[kpc]
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
ηE
MHD flux
CR flux
Figure 11.Vertical profiles of loading factors summed up
over both upper and lower halves of the disk, all thermal
phases, and both inward and outward vertical velocities.
Solid lines denote mean values aftert= 200 Myr, while the
shaded areas denote the range between the 16th and 84th
percentiles. The dashed lines in the momentum and energy
loading factor panels (second and third rows) denote the cor-
responding CR loading factors.
The reference fluxes are defined using the SN rate
Fq,ref ≡q ref
˙NSN
LxLy
(41)
whereq ref is the reference value of mass, momen-
tum, and energy for each SN event. It is custom-
ary to useM ref =m ∗ = 95M ⊙, the total mass
of new stars formed per SN (determined from the
adopted IMF and population synthesis models), mak-
ingF M,ref = Σ SFR,40 for the reference mass flux. In
practice, we use Σ SFR,40/m∗ for the areal SN rate
˙NSN/LxLy rather than the actual measured SN rate;
the two are almost identical. The resulting reference
mass fluxes for themhdandcrmhdmodels are 3.9×
10−3 M⊙ kpc−2 yr−1 and 3.6×10 −3 M⊙ kpc−2 yr−1, re-
spectively. For the energy flux, the reference energy
is the adopted SN explosion energy,E ref =E SN =
1051 erg. The resulting reference energy fluxes for the
mhdandcrmhdmodels are 4.2×10 46 erg kpc −2 yr−1 and
3.8×10 46 erg kpc −2 yr−1, respectively. For the momen-
tum, we use a characteristic momentum at the end of
the energy conserving stage of a SN remnant evolution,
pref =E SN/vcool = 1.25×10 5 M⊙ km s−1 withv cool =
200 km s−1, which is close to the actual momentum in-
jected to the ISM (e.g., C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker
2015). The resulting reference momentum fluxes for
themhdandcrmhdmodels are 5.2M ⊙ km s−1 kpc−2 yr−1
(equivalent to 2.5×10 4kB cm−3 K in pressure units)
and 4.8M ⊙ km s−1 kpc−2 yr−1 (equivalent to 2.3×
104kB cm−3 K in pressure units), respectively. For the
CR loading factors, we use the same reference momen-
tum and energy fluxes as for the thermal gas.
We adopt the time averaged SFR with a 40 Myr time
bin to define the reference fluxes. In principle, one can
define the reference fluxes and loading factors in a fully
time dependent manner, but connecting the instanta-
neous injection (or star formation) rates with the re-
sulting fluxes is non-trivial due to time delays. 12 Since
our simulations are local, SFRs and associated injection
rates do not experience significant secular evolution, as
seen in Figure 1.
In Figure 11, we plot the net mass, momentum,
and energy loading factors using the combined fluxes
through both the upper and lower sides (without the
thermal phase and inflow/outflow distinctions of Fig-
ure 10). Thecrmhdmodel shows on averageη M ∼
1.5−2.2 beyond|z|= 1 kpc, dominated by thewcphase.
The mass loading factor in themhdmodel also shows net
outflows withη M ∼0.5. The MHD momentum loading
factors are almost the same for both models. The energy
loading factor isη E ∼0.1 at|z| ∼1 kpc in both models,
decreasing more slowly in themhdmodel toη E ∼0.026
12 To first order, the fluxes measured farther from the midplane
where star formation and feedback injection occur are more de-
layed, but there is no clear one-to-one correspondence as there
are multiple complications, e.g., failed outflow launching, in-
teraction with fountain flows, and extended star formation and
feedback that launches one big outflow. See the Appendix of
C.-G. Kim et al. 2020a. Given the large temporal fluctuations
in both measured and reference fluxes, taking ratios without
proper accounting of time delays sometimes causes erroneous
results.

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks25
at|z|= 4 kpc, and more steeply in thecrmhdmodel to
ηE ∼0.007 at|z|= 4 kpc.
In thecrmhdmodel, the CR momentum fluxF p,c =P c
has a local minimum at the midplane when averaged
over all phases, because of the low CR pressure within
the interiors of superbubbles, which are concentrated in
the midplane. When considering just thewcgas, the CR
pressure profile is essentially flat at|z|≲0.5 kpc (see the
Pc panel of Figure 2). Given the steady decline in the
MHD momentum flux, the CR momentum flux becomes
larger than that of the thermal gas abovez∼0.5 kpc,
with a maximum momentum loading factor ofη p,CR ∼
0.9, declining very slowly to∼0.5 at|z|= 4 kpc.
The CR energy flux increases at first steeply with|z|,
and then more gradually, surpassing the MHD energy
flux at|z| ∼0.5 kpc. As shown in Figure 8, the work
term appears as a gain for the CRs (and loss for the
thermal gas) within|z|<2 kpc; this is the origin of the
gradual increase inF E,c. Beyond|z| ∼1 kpc,F E,c is
quite flat, with a loading factorη E,CR ∼0.3. Thus,
even though only 10% of the SN energy is injected as
CRs, due to significant transfers from the thermal gas
as well as cooling of the gas, the majority of the outflow-
ing energy and momentum flux beyond|z|= 0.5 kpc is
carried by CRs.
5.3.Momentum Transfer
In this section, we analyze momentum transfer as a
function ofzto understand how thewcphase gains or
loses momentum flux by interacting with thehotgas,
with CRs, and with the gravitational potential. We de-
compose the momentum flux of the thermal gas (i.e., the
total vertical stressP MHD) into thewcandhotphases
and rearrange the integrated steady state momentum
equation (similar to Equation 24, but integrated from
zref toz) such that
∆zref P wc
MHD(z)+∆zref W(z) =−∆ zref P hot
MHD(z)−∆zref Pc(z)
(42)
Here, the pressure difference at a heightzwith re-
spect to a reference heightz ref is ∆ zref P ph
MHD(z)≡
⟨PMHD⟩ph (z)− ⟨P MHD⟩ph (zref); note the difference in
signs compared to Equation 24. The weight difference is
∆zref W(z) =W(z)− W(z ref) with the weight definition
in Equation 24. We adoptz ref =±1 kpc for the upper
and lower half of the disk, respectively. We confirm that
the steady state condition is satisfied on average at ev-
eryz(i.e., LHS is equal to RHS). Equation 42 explains
that in a steady state, any net momentum flux transfer
to thewcphase (includingwhat is used in climbing out
of the gravitational potential well) is at the expense of
momentum flux losses from thehotphase and CR fluid.
Figure 12 presents the flux difference profiles term-by-
term for both the lower and upper half of the disk. The
profiles are normalized by the mean of total stress of the
wcphase atz ref =±1 kpc,⟨P MHD⟩wc (zref) = 2.7×10 3
and 2.0×10 3kB cm−3 K formhdandcrmhd, respectively.
The results from themhdmodel (top row) are consistent
with our previous analysis in A. Vijayan et al. (2020).
The MHD momentum flux of thewcphase itself (the first
term of LHS; thin solid line) secularly decreases with
increasing|z|, mainly due to gravitational deceleration.
By adding in the gravitational weight contribution, the
netflux difference (the entirety of LHS; thick solid line)
increases outward, i.e., this shows the momentum flux
that thewcwould have gained in the absence of gravity.
The momentum flux loss from thehotphase (RHS in
the absence of the CR term), shown as the dotted line,
is consistent with the thick solid line; formhdthe net
momentum flux gain of thewcphase can be fully ex-
plained by momentum flux loss of thehotphase. For
themhdmodel, the majority of the transfer of momen-
tum flux out of thehotgas occurs at|z|≲0.5 kpc, since
this is where the interactions between phases is most ex-
treme. The level of the flux transfer between phases in
the extraplanar region|z|>1 kpc is about 30% of the
reference flux at|z ref |= 1 kpc.
For thecrmhdmodel, the cumulative net momentum
flux gain (thick solid line) for thewcgas in the extra-
planar region|z|> z ref is much larger than for themhd
model,∼3 times the flux atz ref. The extraplanar mo-
mentum transfer from thehotto thewcphase is simi-
larly larger than that of themhdmodel. Most notably,
the momentum transfer out of the CRs (dashed line) ex-
ceeds thehotMHD flux transfer above|z|= 2 kpc. Both
transfer channels are necessary to explain the net gain in
the MHD momentum flux of thewcphase. The rate of
momentum transfer from the CRs to the gas is roughly
constant as a function of|z|, leading to a roughly lin-
ear ∆zref Pc profile above|z|= 1 kpc. A similar roughly
linear profile of momentum flux transfer from CRs to
wcoutflows is evident in Fig. 16 of L. Armillotta et al.
(2024). In contrast, the transfer of momentum fromhot
towcin thecrmhdmodel occurs mainly at|z|= 1−2 kpc
(as seen in Figure 9), with very little hot gas present be-
yond this (see Figure 5). The result is an initial steep
rise and then flat profile for ∆ zref P hot
MHD in Figure 12.
Similar to the situation for themhdmodel, the ma-
jority of momentum flux transfer out of thehotphase
occurs in the disk region at|z|≲0.5 kpc. The net mo-
mentum transfer to thewcgas (heavy line) is very simi-
lar in thecrmhdandmhdmodel within this disk region,
and theP MHD profiles forwcgas (thin lines) are also
quite similar. For thecrmhdmodel, thehotMHD flux

26C.-G. Kim et al.
6
4
2
0
2
⟨
∆zref P
⟩
/
⟨
P wc
MHD(|zref|)
⟩
mhd
lower upper
∆zref P wc
MHD+Wwc
∆zref P wc
MHD
−∆zref P hot
MHD
4
 3
 2
 1
 0
z [kpc]
6
4
2
0
2
⟨
∆zref P
⟩
/
⟨
P wc
MHD(|zref|)
⟩
crmhd
0 1 2 3 4
z [kpc]
∆zref P wc
MHD+Wwc
∆zref P wc
MHD
−∆zref P hot
MHD
−∆zref Pc
Figure 12.Momentum flux difference profiles of the lower (left) and upper (right) half of the disk for both themhdandcrmhd
models (top and bottom, respectively). Thin solid lines show the MHD flux itself (i.e., total MHD stress), which decreases
at increasing|z|in both models. Thick solid lines show the net momentum gain of thewcphase obtained by adding the
weight contribution (LHS of Equation 42). Dotted lines show the transfer to thewcphase of MHD flux lost by thehotphase.
The momentum flux transfer from CRs is shown as dashed lines for thecrmhdmodel; this significantly boosts the momentum
added towcgas in the extraplanar region. All profiles are normalized by the mean MHD flux of thewcgas atz ref = 1 kpc,
⟨PMHD⟩wc (zref) = 2.7×10 3 and 2.0×10 3kB cm−3 K formhdandcrmhd, respectively.
loss at|z|≲1 kpc slightly exceeds the gain by thewc
gas; the excess goes into energizing CRs through adia-
batic work, as shown in Figure 8. This is also respon-
sible for the increase inP c fromz= 0 to∼1 kpc, as
seen in the momentum loading panel of Figure 11. The
shape of−∆ zref Pc in Figure 12, with a local minimum
at|z| ∼1 kpc, is the mirror image of the momentum
loading profile for CRs in Figure 11.
5.4.Joint PDFs
Galactic outflows are inherently multiphase, compris-
ing gas at a wide range of flow velocities. It is of
great interest to analyze how the presence of CRs al-
ters the thermo-kinetic distribution of the outflowing
gas. Figure 13 shows, for both themhdandcrmhd
model, the time-averaged joint distributions of outflow
velocity and sound speed weighted by the mass flux
in the extraplanar region. At each reference height
(|z|= 0.5, 1, 2, and 3 kpc; both sides of the disk are
summed up), we take a ∆z= 100 pc thick slab to cal-
culate the mean fluxes within the slab. The integral
of the distribution in each panel shows the total out-
ward mass flux at a given|z|. Both models exhibit
characteristic shapes similar to those seen in previous
works (e.g., C.-G. Kim et al. 2020b; U. P. Steinwandel
et al. 2024). The narrow, nearly horizontal portion at
aroundc s ∼10 km s −1 represents warm outflows that
carry the majority of mass flux. The hot outflows, es-
pecially abovec s >100 km s −1, show correlated distri-
butions in the outflow velocity and sound speed plane.
The mass flux distributions at|z|= 0.5 kpc are similar
inmhdandcrmhd, in both magnitude and shape. Both

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks27
Figure 13.Time averaged mass flux distributions (joint PDFs) of outflow velocity and sound speed, at different distances|z|
from the midplane. Top row showsmhdmodel and bottom row showscrmhdmodel.
models lose outflowing mass flux at higher|z|(as seen
in Figure 10), but thecrmhdmodel has much greater
reduction in thehotphase. The distribution of thewc
gas is similar in shape, but the magnitude is smaller in
themhdmodel at large|z|.
To visualize the evolution in the distribution more
quantitatively, Figure 14 presents the marginalized dis-
tributions for thewcandhotphases as a function of
height. We integrate the joint distribution along the
logc s axis with the boundary between the two phases
at logc s = 1.18. In the top row, the mass flux distribu-
tions of thewcphase (blue) show a gradual shift of the
most probable velocity (the peak of the distribution) to-
ward a higher velocity at larger|z|, while the maximum
velocity remains more or less the same. This shift cor-
responds to the increase in the vertical velocity shown
in Figure 6, which can be due either to acceleration or
to raining out of low velocity material as fountains. As
shown in A. Vijayan et al. (2020), a ballistic fountain
model explains the overall shift in the distribution for
themhdmodel, while still requiring some momentum
transfer fromhottowc(via mixing), as seen here in
Figure 12. In thecrmhdmodel, the distribution drops
less overall, and has little change in the peak from 2
to 3 kpc keeping the majority of the moderate velocity
componentv z >50 km s −1 from 1 kpc. This is possible
because in thecrmhdmodel the CR pressure gradient
provides additional acceleration, as shown in Figure 12.
Especially at|z|<2 kpc the characteristic outflow ve-
locities shown in Figure 6 are quite similar between the
two models, but the distribution reveals that the reasons
differ.
For thehotphase, the evolutionary trends are again
quite distinct in the two models. The mass flux distri-
bution in themhdmodel decreases from 0.5 to 2 kpc,
but the change from 2 to 3 kpc is less significant. In the
crmhdmodel, in contrast, the overall decrease in the dis-
tribution continues and is mainly driven by the highest
velocity component. As can be inferred from Figure 13,
the highest velocity component is fromHIM, while the
component nearv out = 100 km s−1 is fromWHIM. The
HIMphase in thecrmhdmodel cannot survive at higher
|z|, mainly because the increased filling factor of theWNM
phase enhances energy loss from theHIMphase through
mixing.
6.DISCUSSION
6.1.Comparison with Post-Processing Results
The present work confirms the major conclusions
reported on CR transport from our previous post-
processing simulations (L. Armillotta et al. 2021, 2022,
2024, 2025; R. N. Hix et al. 2025). In particular, we find
a characteristic two-zone vertical profile for CR pressure
inwcgas, with a flat region in the midplane where diffu-
sion dominates transport in the dense, neutral gas, and
an exponential region at high altitude where transport is
dynamical in the low-density gas where scattering rates
remain high.
Within the high-scattering region above|z| ∼1 kpc,
Figure 6 shows that the effective CR vertical veloc-

28C.-G. Kim et al.
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
10 1
dFM/dlogvout
[M ⊙ kpc−2 yr−1 dex−1]
mhd
0.5kpc
1.0kpc
2.0kpc
3.0kpc
crmhd
0 1 2 3
logvout [km/s]
1042
1043
1044
1045
1046
dFE, MHD/dlogvout
[ergkpc−2 yr−1 dex−1]
wc
hot
0 1 2 3
logvout [km/s]
Figure 14.Marginalizedmass (top)andenergy (bottom)flux distributions as a function of the outflow velocity for the
wc (blue)andhot (red)phases.
ityv c,z is nearly equal to the dynamical CR transport
speedv dyn,z =v z +v s,z. (Note that throughout this
subsection, we omit angle brackets⟨...⟩indicating hori-
zontal averages, to simplify notation.) In steady state,
the horizontally-averaged CR energy equation becomes
dFc,z/dz≈d(v dyn,z4Pc)/dz≈v dyn,zdPc/dz, such that
the CR pressure profile is expected to followPc ∝v −4/3
dyn,z.
Equivalently,H c = (3/4)Ha, whereH c ≡ |dlnP c/dz|−1
is the CR scale height, andH a ≡ |dlnv dyn,z/dz|−1 is
the acceleration length scale.
The normalization of the relation is set at the interface
where there is a transition from diffusion-dominated to
dynamically-controlled CR transport. At the interface
|z| ∼z t, the vertical CR flux through both upper and
lower sides is
Fout(zt)≡F c,z(zt)−F c,z(−zt)
=8vc,z(zt)Pc(zt)
≡8vc,effP
wc
c (0),
(43)
wherev c,eff ≈v dyn,z(zt) for GeV CRs andP c(zt)≈
P
wc
c (zt)≈ P
wc
c (0). This total flux should balance the
netCR energy injection rate obtained by integrating
the RHS of Equation 6 and evaluating atz=z t. For
the latter, we can define a cumulated vertical profile in-
tegrating sources and sinks as
Fin ≡F in,SN +F in,W −L coll −G st,(44)
where the spatial distribution contributing to the in-
dividual terms is analyzed in Section 4.5. The
direct SN source term is defined asF in,SN(z)≡
(LxLy)−1R z
−z ˙ec,SNdVusing ˙e c,SN (see Equation 32),
with the work gain, collisional loss, and streaming losses
similarly defined as integrals ofW gas→cr,L c, andG st,
using Equation 34, Equation 33, and Equation 35, re-
spectively.
Figure 15 shows the contribution from each term to
the cumulative CR energy source profile, normalized by
the total SN energy injection rate per areaF E,SN ≡

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks29
ESNΣSFR/m∗. As also seen in Figure 8, the CR en-
ergy gain by adiabatic work exceeds direct injection from
SNe, the streaming loss is about half of the direct SN in-
jection, and the collisional loss term is negligible. Direct
SN injection is fully accounted for within|z| ∼200 pc,
converging tof c,inj = 0.1. The work term increases up
to|z| ∼1.5 kpc, while streaming losses continue to ac-
cumulate throughout the domain. The slight mismatch
betweenF out andF in, withF in > Fout, means that the
total CR energy in the simulation domain is gradually
increasing over time. Over the time interval we consid-
ered for the time average,
R
ecdVgrows about 50%, but
this growth does not seem to continue beyond 500 Myr.
The net source term contribution may be character-
ized byf c,net ≡F in/FE,SN, which is the sum of the di-
rect injectionf c,inj and the additional contribution from
volumetric terms (F in,W −L coll −G st)/FE,SN. Since
the collisional and streaming losses are small,f c,net ∼
fc,inj +f W wheref W ≡F in,W/FE,SN. From Figure 2,
theP c profile withinwcgas transitions from flat to ex-
ponentially declining betweenz t = 500 pc and 1 kpc,
where we evaluatef c,net = 0.27 and 0.34, respectively.
By equatingF in(zt) =F out(zt), we have
vc,eff = fc,netESNΣSFR/m∗
8P
wc
c (0)
(45)
=38 km s−1
 fc,net
0.3
 ΣSFR
4×10 −3 M⊙ kpc−2 yr−1

 
P
wc
c (0)
104kB cm−3 K
!−1
.(46)
We use our fiducial parameters forE SN = 1051 erg and
m∗ = 95M ⊙. In thecrmhdmodel, we have P
wc
c (0)/kB =
(1.14±0.14)×10 4 cm−3 K averaged over|z|<50 pc and
ΣSFR = (3.6±1.0)×10 −3 M⊙ kpc−2 yr−1. Withf c,net ∼
0.3, this implies an effective transport velocityv c,eff ∼
30 km s−1. This value is indeed in good agreement with
the dynamical value we find atz t ∼0.5−1 kpc,v dyn,z ∼
35 km s−1.
Equivalently, in R. N. Hix et al. (2025) it was argued
that Equation 45 can be used to predict the total mid-
plane CR pressure of thewcgas if the SFR is known,
andv c,eff for GeV CRs may be estimated as∼v dyn,z(zt).
This prediction for CR pressure may be given via the CR
feedback yield
Υc ≡ P
wc
c (0)
ΣSFR
= fc,net(ESN/m∗)
8vc,eff
(47)
= 664 km s−1
 fc,net
0.3
 vc,eff
30 km s−1
−1
,(48)
when expressed in terms ofv c,eff and the total fraction
of SN energy that goes into CRs. Withf c,net ∼0.3
0 1 2 3 4
|z|[kpc]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5F(|z|)/FE, SN
Figure 15.Vertical profiles of cumulative CR
energy source terms. In steady state, the CR flux
through a height±z,F out(|z|)≡F c,z(z)−F c,z(−z),
matches the net CR source term integrated within [−z, z],
Fin ≡F in,SN +F in,W −G st −L coll. In the figure, all terms
are normalized by the total SN energy injection rate per area
FE,SN ≡E snΣSFR/m∗.
andv c,eff ∼v dyn,z(zt) = 35 km s −1, Υ c ∼570 km s −1,
slightly smaller than the directly-measured value Υ c ∼
665 km s−1 listed in Table 1. We note that in R. N. Hix
et al. (2025), a smaller value Υ c ∼400 km s −1 was ob-
tained from post-processing an MHD-only model similar
to the present one. The main reasons for the difference
are that in post-processing,f c,net ∼f c,inj, and in the
absence of CR-pressure driven acceleration the value of
the dynamical velocity was lower,v dyn,z ∼16 km s −1.
In R. N. Hix et al. (2025), several differentTigress
MHD simulations were post-processed with CR trans-
port to obtain a fitv c,eff ∝Σ 0.20
SFR, similar to the fitted
wcoutflow velocity (v out ∝Σ 0.23
SFR; see C.-G. Kim et al.
2020a), which leads to Υc ∝Σ −0.23
SFR . Extending the cur-
rent fully coupled dynamical simulation to other galactic
conditions will be of great interest for exploring the en-
vironmental dependence of CR transport.
In Section 3 we noted that the exponential scale height
of the CR pressure in the region at 1 kpc<|z|<2 kpc
isH c ∼4 kpc, significantly larger than the scale height
ofH c ∼0.5 kpc found from post-processing simulations.
We can understand the reason for this difference based
on the analytic model for vertical CR transport pre-
sented in L. Armillotta et al. (2025). There, it was ar-
gued that the CR diffusivity, the acceleration scale of
gas, and the velocity in the extraplanar region where
CR-gas coupling becomes strong all combine in deter-
miningH c (see Eq. 20 in that paper). In particular,
there is a larger acceleration scale in the present sim-
ulations, which include the back-reaction of CR pres-

30C.-G. Kim et al.
sure gradients on the gas, than was present in the post-
processing simulations, where gas acceleration was pro-
vided only by MHD stresses. A detailed analysis will
be presented in a separate publication (F. Yu et al,
in preparation), but the extended scale of momentum
transfer in thecrmhdsimulation compared to themhd
simulation is evident in Figure 12.
6.2.Comparison with Other Simulations
There have been several simulations utilizing a similar
local, tall-box setup including CR feedback combined
with a range of ISM physics and CR transport treat-
ments. Earlier simulations often adopt constant CR
diffusion coefficients without CR streaming or explicit
modeling of star formation (P. Girichidis et al. 2016,
2018; C. M. Simpson et al. 2016, 2023). T.-E. Rathjen
et al. (2021) use the SILCC framework to model the ISM
physics (non-equilibrium chemistry but fixed UV radi-
ation), star formation, and feedback, and include CR
streaming but still adopt a constant CR diffusion coef-
ficient (see also T.-E. Rathjen et al. 2023 for varying
environments).
Overall, the common conclusion in the literature is
that CR-mediated dynamics drives stronger, more mass-
loaded, and cooler outflows. However, quantitative re-
sults are sensitive to the CR transport model and the
diffusion coefficient (J. Wiener et al. 2017b; P. F. Hop-
kins et al. 2021b). Some work has suggested that low dif-
fusion coefficientsκ CR ≤10 28 cm2 s−1 can lead to sup-
pression of the SFR (e.g., T. K. Chan et al. 2019; G.
Dashyan & Y. Dubois 2020; V. A. Semenov et al. 2021).
In global galaxy simulations with a variable scattering
rate (T. Thomas et al. 2025a), however, CRs have little
effect on the SFR, similar to what our presentmhdvs.
crmhdmodels demonstrate.
Most recently, B. Sike et al. (2025) present a set of
local simulations using the moving-meshArepocode
coupled with a two-moment Alfv´ en wave regulated CR
transport scheme (T. Thomas & C. Pfrommer 2019; T.
Thomas et al. 2021) and the CRISP framework. They
also calculate the CR scattering rate self-consistently
considering both non-linear Landau and ion-neutral
damping, but the actual formalisms differ quite a bit
from the present work. For a quantitative comparison,
we focus on the CR-NL-IN model of B. Sike et al. (2025),
which includes both wave damping mechanisms and is
thus the most similar to ourcrmhdmodel. Their simula-
tion lasts 250 Myr and time-averaged values are reported
for 112−250 Myr; both intervals are shorter by a fac-
tor of 2 than ours. They found overall higher SFRs in
both MHD and CRMHD models than ours (by a factor
∼2.5) and slightly higher SFRs (∼50%) in their MHD
model than their CR-NL-IN model.
The mass loading factors (not separated by phase)
are∼0.1 and 0.4 atz= 1 kpc for their MHD and CR-
NL-IN models, respectively, decreasing to<0.01 and
∼0.1 atz= 3 kpc. Their higher (and more sustained
with distance) mass loading with CRMHD is similar to
our finding, but our mass loading factor is∼1. The
significant drop of the total mass loading factor in their
MHD model is also quite different from what we find;
ourmhdmodel maintainsη M ∼0.5 atz >3 kpc when
including bothwcandhotoutflows (see also C.-G. Kim
et al. 2020a).
Energy loading factors (without “boosting” by the in-
clusion of galactic rotation) of the thermal gas show
even more dramatic differences from our results: in their
MHD model,η E decreases from 10 −3 atz= 1 kpc to
10−5 atz= 3 kpc, while their CR-NL-IN model main-
tainsη E ∼10 −4 at all heights. Including previousTi-
gresssimulations (C.-G. Kim et al. 2020a),η E >0.01
at all heights without CRs in solar neighborhood condi-
tions (excluding galactic rotation), regardless of whether
runaway SNe are included (C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker
2018). Similar simulations with resolved multiphase out-
flows commonly showη E ≥0.01 (dominated by the hot
wind) (M. Li & G. L. Bryan 2020). It is noteworthy
that the low energy loading factorsη E ≤10 −3 of B.
Sike et al. (2025) are also seen in other Arepo simula-
tions (R. Kannan et al. 2020). A potential difference
stems from the hydrodynamics schemes, i.e., Eulerian
vs. (semi-)Lagrangian. Although high-resolution global
dwarf galaxy simulations using SPH (C.-Y. Hu 2019;
U. P. Steinwandel et al. 2024) also obtain energy loading
factors13 higher than 0.01,η E can drop significantly at
low mass resolution (∼100M ⊙) from C.-Y. Hu (2019).
Since B. Sike et al. (2025) adopted the target resolu-
tion of 10M ⊙ with an additional limit to the cell vol-
ume, lack of resolution is unlikely the reason for low
ηE. Given that the ISM pressure near the midplane
in B. Sike et al. (2025) is about an order of magnitude
lower than our simulations (Pth ∼4×10 3kB K cm−3; see
Figure 2), there are evidently significant differences in
cooling and heating processes, and these may also affect
properties of outflows.
13 The energy associated with galactic rotation is not removed
in these global simulations. But their mass loading factors
areη M >1 at 1 kpc, much higher than that of B. Sike et al.
(2025), and the rotation velocity in dwarf galaxies is less than
the 220 km s−1 assumed in B. Sike et al. (2025). Both imply
that the genuine hot gas energy loading factors are higher in
the dwarf simulations.

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks31
Similar CRMHD simulations employing a variable
scattering rate model have been run for Milky-Way-like
galaxies, either in isolation (T. Thomas et al. 2025a,b) or
in cosmological zoom-ins (P. F. Hopkins et al. 2021b,a,
2022c). In particular, T. Thomas et al. (2025a) ex-
plore the effect of CR feedback in a global, Milky Way
like galaxy considering similar physical ingredients to
ours; their ISM physics produces a multiphase ISM (al-
beit with very low thermal pressure, as seen in B. Sike
et al. 2025) and they include two-moment CR transport
with non-linear Landau and ion-neutral damping. From
comparisons between their MHD and CRMHD simula-
tions, similar to this paper, they find SFRs are barely
changed (∼20% lower in CRMHD). Outflows are warm-
gas dominated, and the mass loading factor measured at
z= 10 kpc is enhanced by a factor of∼4 with CRs (sim-
ilar to the enhancement measured atz >1 kpc in our
simulations). The energy loading factor remains at a
level of∼0.01 in both models. The CR energy loading
factor atz= 10 kpc is∼0.04 which is similar to their
injection rate of 0.05, while we get∼0.3 atz= 1 kpc,
which is 3 times larger than the injection rate of 0.1,
mainly due to additional CR energy gain through adia-
batic work (Figure 15).
7.CONCLUSION
7.1.Summary
We present results from our newly implementedTi-
gress++simulation framework for the star-forming
ISM, including CR feedback. This paper is our first
demonstration of dynamically coupled CRMHD simula-
tions. These simulations consist of multiphase MHD
with gravitational collapse creating star clusters that
produce SNe and radiative heating (as inTigress-
classic, C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker 2017), now ex-
tended with CR injection and two-moment CR trans-
port in which the scattering rate for source terms is
computed based on the self-confinement paradigm (as
in L. Armillotta et al. 2021).
We compare our CRMHD simulation (crmhd) with
an MHD-only simulation (mhd) having otherwise iden-
tical background conditions and physics. The environ-
ment selected for this demonstration is representative
of the solar neighborhood. The current CRMHD sim-
ulation confirms the salient features from our previous
post-processing simulations of CR transport in the mul-
tiphase ISM. At the same time, it reveals and quantifies
mutual dynamical impacts of the CRs and the gas on
each other.
Our main findings are as follows:
•The dynamically-coupled CRMHD simulation in
this paper recovers our main previous findings re-
garding CR transport. For a realistic, multiphase
ISM, CR transport results in a two-zone CR sys-
tem (L. Armillotta et al. 2025; R. N. Hix et al.
2025). In high-density, neutral gas near the mid-
plane, Alfv´ en waves that could scatter CRs are
strongly suppressed by ion-neutral damping, re-
sulting in a diffusion-dominated CR transport re-
gion withκ ∥ ≥10 29 cm2 s−1 for GeV CRs (Fig-
ure 7). Strong diffusion leads to uniform CR pres-
sure extending up to|z| ∼1 kpc for GeV CRs
(Figure 2). In gas that is low density and/or well
ionized, the nonlinear Landau mechanism medi-
ates less efficient wave damping, enabling stronger
coupling between CRs and gas. In the extrapla-
nar region at|z|≳1 kpc,κ ∥ ≤10 28 cm2 s−1 for
GeV CRs, and CR transport is dynamically con-
trolled by advection and streaming, with charac-
teristic velocity≳30 km s −1 (Figure 6).
•SFRs in the CRMHD simulation remain essen-
tially unchanged compared to the MHD simula-
tion (Figure 1), with the slightly lower value at
later times incrmhddue to the reduction in the
disk’s gas surface density (given its higher mass
loss rate). The values for the thermal, turbu-
lent, and magnetic feedback yield (Table 1) are
also essentially unchanged by the presence of CRs.
The nearly-uniform CR pressure within the main
gas disk provides minimal vertical support against
gravity (Figure 2). Thus, the presence of CRs does
not quantitatively alter the level of star formation
and feedback demanded to maintain the thermal,
turbulent, and magnetic pressure that supports
the ISM’s weight.
•The midplane CR pressureP c ∼1.1×
104kB cm−3 K is similar to the other pressures in
the gas (totalingP MHD ∼1.9×10 4kB cm−3 K;
Figure 2), in line with our finding of approximate
equipartition based on post-processing in a wide
range of galactic environments (R. N. Hix et al.
2025; N. B. Linzer et al. 2026), and comparable to
what is observed in the solar neighborhood. The
extraplanar CR pressure follows an exponential
profile with a scale height of∼4 kpc, much larger
than that of the post-processing results, but sim-
ilar to results in the CRMHD simulations of L.
Armillotta et al. (2024). This can be understood
based on the increase in the acceleration scale for
the gas in the region where CRs transition from
diffusive to dynamical transport (see Section 6.1).
The larger scale for extraplanar acceleration owes,

32C.-G. Kim et al.
in turn, to the spatially extended transfer of CR
momentum to the gas (Figure 12).
•The extraplanar CR pressure gradient gradually
accelerates warm-cold gas, leading to more per-
sistent, volume-filling outflows (Figure 5, Fig-
ure 9), similar to those seen in the more ideal-
ized CRMHD simulations of L. Armillotta et al.
(2024). Inside of|z|<2 kpc, acceleration ofwc
gas is achieved via momentum transfer from the
hot phase, but at larger|z|the momentum trans-
fer from CRs towcgas is twice that from the
hotphase (Figure 12). The mass loading factor
(summed over both sides of the disk) in thecrmhd
simulation is∼1.5 above|z|= 1 kpc, which is
∼5 times larger than in themhdsimulation (Fig-
ure 11). However, the hot wind energy loading
factor is significantly reduced in thecrmhdsimu-
lation, due to interaction withwcgas. Nonethe-
less, the total energy loading factor for outflows
in thecrmhdsimulation is an order of magnitude
larger than that in themhdsimulation, with the
vast majority carried in CRs.
•In addition to the CR-gas momentum exchange
that drives warm gas out of the disk at a high rate,
there are significant energy exchanges between gas
and CRs. In the low-density outflowingwcgas at
|z|≳1 kpc, streaming CRs heat the gas at a rate
comparable to the heating by radiation (Figure 8).
CRs are deposited in SN feedback regions in our
simulations at a level of 10% of the SN energy,
which takes place within∼100 pc of the midplane.
However, the flow of CRs down pressure gradients
in the hot gas does substantial additional work on
the CR fluid within|z|≲2 kpc. This work leads to
∼3 times more energy gain in the CRs than what
is directly injected by SNe. A very interesting
question for future investigation will be to char-
acterize the properties of the regions of high CR
pressure gradients between 200 pc≲|z|≲1 kpc,
where the majority of the CR energy flux leaving
the galaxy is accumulated (see Figure 15).
7.2.Future Perspectives
In this first paper, we have limited the scope to di-
rect comparisons of key physical outcomes between the
mhdandcrmhdmodels for solar neighborhood condi-
tions, considering CRs with∼GeV energy. The fiducial
crmhdmodel we present here can also serve as a base-
line for several other studies. In particular, one very
interesting set of questions concerns the impact of sim-
plifications that have often been made in other galactic
CRMHD simulations: adopting constant diffusion coef-
ficients, assuming gas is fully ionized when setting the
Alfv´ en velocity for streaming (rather than realistically
computing the ionization state of different gas phases),
and in some cases ignoring CR streaming altogether.
We have conducted a set of controlled simulations of
CRMHD models with varying assumptions, testing the
impacts of each of these simplifications; results of this
investigation will be presented in upcoming work. This
study also includes exploration of the effect of initial
magnetic field strengths.
It is also important to extend to galactic conditions
beyond the solar neighborhood. In previous work, we
explored differences in CR transport in a set of different
Tigresssimulations via a post-processing approach (L.
Armillotta et al. 2022; R. N. Hix et al. 2025). With our
newTigress++framework, we will be able to investi-
gate the back-reaction of CRs on gas dynamics, which
is of particular interest for assessing potential changes
in outflow loading factors relative to those driven solely
by SN feedback, as quantified from a set ofTigress-
classicsimulations in C.-G. Kim et al. (2020a). For
most direct comparison, these studies of varying galactic
environments will include galactic differential rotation,
as in ourTigress-classicsimulation suite.
Most of the physics modules adopted for the present
simulations are based on theTigress-classicframe-
work of C.-G. Kim & E. C. Ostriker (2017) and simply
ported fromAthenaintoAthena++, but we have also
introduced a few changes. One of these is considering
sink particles as a combined star-forming entity, consist-
ing of both new stars and a gas reservoir (rather than
having 100% star formation efficiency). Currently, the
gas reservoir is dispersed “manually” with a prescribed
mass return into a fixed volume. The impact of the pa-
rameter choices for the present model will be explored
in an upcoming publication. In the future, we envision
improving upon this (somewhat rudimentary) approach
with a subgrid model for cloud disruption that captures
the detailed physics of early feedback (e.g., J.-G. Kim
et al. 2021; L. Lancaster et al. 2025b,a) with greater
veracity.
A more detailed view of the thermal and chemical
state of the multiphase ISM, as well as greater realism in
the physics of early feedback, can be achieved by com-
bining the CRMHD model of the present work with the
Tigress-ncrframework (C.-G. Kim et al. 2023). In
Tigress-ncr(J.-G. Kim et al. 2023), both ionizing and
non-ionizing UV radiation from star particle sources is
followed via adaptive ray tracing, and coupled with a
photochemistry module to set abundances of hydrogen
species as well as carbon and oxygen species that are

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks33
key coolants (see also S. Walch et al. 2015; C.-Y. Hu
et al. 2021, 2023; H. Katz 2022; F. Rodr´ ıguez Montero
et al. 2026). In addition to non-equilibrium cooling and
heating of warm and cold atomic and molecular gas and
nebular cooling of warm and hot ionized gas,Tigress-
ncrprovides for realistic spatial distribution of pho-
toionized gas throughout the multiphase ISM, including
in the fountain/outflow region when ionizing photons
are able to escape from the midplane region. Explicit
CR transport will allow for realistic spatial and tem-
poral variation in the photochemistry module, while at
the same time the possibility of photoionized gas in the
extraplanar region may potentially alter CR transport
through its effect on the ion Alfv´ en speed and the ion-
neutral damping rate.
Finally, much of our empirical understanding of CRs
owes to phenomenological modeling of CR transport at
varying energy, distinguishing between CR primaries
and secondaries, and between species with long and
short lifetimes (e.g. I. A. Grenier et al. 2015). Al-
though the present work considers only CRs of∼GeV
energy, the numerical methods we have implemented are
straightforwardly applied to multiple energy groups of
both hadrons and electrons (see also P. Girichidis et al.
2020; P. F. Hopkins et al. 2022a; N.-S. Diallo et al.
2026). Initial studies of both protons and electrons in
the 1−100 GeV range in post-processing mode have been
very informative about the relative roles of diffusive vs.
dynamical transport vs. losses as a function of energy
(N. B. Linzer et al. 2025; L. Armillotta et al. 2025), as
well as how to infer properties of CR populations and
magnetic fields from synchrotron emission (N. B. Linzer
et al. 2026). Extending these initial investigations into
full CRMHD simulations using theTigress++frame-
work will be of great interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the referee for their constructive com-
ments, which helped improve the manuscript. Support
for this work was provided by grant 80NSSC22K0717
from NASA ATP to CGK, grant AST-2407119 from the
NSF to LA and ECO, and grants 510940 and 10013948
from the Simons Foundation to ECO. LA was supported
in part by the Program “Rita Levi Montalcini” of the
Italian MUR. SM acknowledges support from the EA-
COA Fellowship awarded by the East Asian Core Obser-
vatories Association. J.-G.K acknowledges support from
KIAS Individual Grant QP098701 at Korea Institute
for Advanced Study. Resources supporting this work
were provided in part by the NASA High-End Comput-
ing (HEC) Program through the NASA Advanced Su-
percomputing (NAS) Division at Ames Research Cen-
ter, and in part on computational systems managed and
supported by Princeton University’s Research Comput-
ing. This research has made use of NASA’s Astrophysics
Data System.
Software:Athena++(J. M. Stone et al. 2020),
astropy( Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013, 2018, 2022),
scipy(P. Virtanen et al. 2020),numpy(S. van der Walt
et al. 2011),IPython(F. Perez & B. E. Granger 2007),
matplotlib(J. D. Hunter 2007),xarray(S. Hoyer & J.
Hamman 2017),pandas(W. McKinney 2010),CMasher
(E. van der Velden 2020),adstex(https://github.com/
yymao/adstex),FFTW(M. Frigo & S. G. Johnson 2005),
fftMPI(https://lammps.github.io/fftmpi)
REFERENCES
Armillotta, L., Ostriker, E. C., & Jiang, Y.-F. 2021, ApJ,
922, 11, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac1db2
Armillotta, L., Ostriker, E. C., & Jiang, Y.-F. 2022, ApJ,
929, 170, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac5fa9
Armillotta, L., Ostriker, E. C., Kim, C.-G., & Jiang, Y.-F.
2024, ApJ, 964, 99, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad1e5c
Armillotta, L., Ostriker, E. C., & Linzer, N. B. 2025, ApJ,
989, 140, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adea68
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J.,
et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sip˝ ocz, B. M.,
et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Lim, P. L.,
et al. 2022, apj, 935, 167, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c74
Beck, R. 2001, SSRv, 99, 243,
doi: 10.1023/A:1013805401252
Begelman, M. C., & Zweibel, E. G. 1994, ApJ, 431, 689,
doi: 10.1086/174519
Bennett, J. S., Smith, M. C., Fielding, D. B., et al. 2025,
MNRAS, 543, 1456, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1440
Boulares, A., & Cox, D. P. 1990, ApJ, 365, 544,
doi: 10.1086/169509
Bustard, C., & Zweibel, E. G. 2021, ApJ, 913, 106,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abf64c
Caprioli, D., & Spitkovsky, A. 2014, ApJ, 783, 91,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/783/2/91

34C.-G. Kim et al.
Caproni, A., Amaral Lanfranchi, G., Campos Baio, G. H.,
Kowal, G., & Falceta-Gon¸ calves, D. 2017, ApJ, 838, 99,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa6002
Carr, C., Bryan, G. L., Fielding, D. B., Pandya, V., &
Somerville, R. S. 2023, ApJ, 949, 21,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acc4c7
Chan, T. K., Kereˇ s, D., Hopkins, P. F., et al. 2019,
MNRAS, 488, 3716, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1895
Dashyan, G., & Dubois, Y. 2020, A&A, 638, A123,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201936339
Diallo, N.-S., Dubois, Y., Marcowith, A., Rosdahl, J., &
Commer¸ con, B. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2602.21147,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.21147
Fielding, D., Quataert, E., & Martizzi, D. 2018, MNRAS,
481, 3325, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2466
Fitz Axen, M., Offner, S., Hopkins, P. F., Krumholz, M. R.,
& Grudi´ c, M. Y. 2024, ApJ, 973, 16,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad675a
Frigo, M., & Johnson, S. G. 2005, Proceedings of the IEEE,
93, 216
Fryxell, B., Olson, K., Ricker, P., et al. 2000, ApJS, 131,
273, doi: 10.1086/317361
Gardiner, T. A., & Stone, J. M. 2008, Journal of
Computational Physics, 227, 4123,
doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2007.12.017
Girichidis, P., Naab, T., Hanasz, M., & Walch, S. 2018,
MNRAS, 479, 3042, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1653
Girichidis, P., Pfrommer, C., Hanasz, M., & Naab, T. 2020,
MNRAS, 491, 993, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2961
Girichidis, P., Naab, T., Walch, S., et al. 2016, ApJL, 816,
L19, doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/816/2/L19
Gong, H., & Ostriker, E. C. 2013, ApJS, 204, 8,
doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/204/1/8
Grenier, I. A., Black, J. H., & Strong, A. W. 2015, ARA&A,
53, 199, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082214-122457
Gurman, A., Steinwandel, U. P., Hu, C.-Y., & Sternberg,
A. 2025, ApJ, 984, 142, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adc814
Hix, R. N., Armillotta, L., Ostriker, E., & Kim, C.-G. 2025,
ApJ, 994, 45, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae08b1
Hopkins, P. F., Butsky, I. S., Panopoulou, G. V., et al.
2022a, MNRAS, 516, 3470, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1791
Hopkins, P. F., Chan, T. K., Squire, J., et al. 2021a,
MNRAS, 501, 3663, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3692
Hopkins, P. F., Squire, J., & Butsky, I. S. 2022b, MNRAS,
509, 3779, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2635
Hopkins, P. F., Squire, J., Butsky, I. S., & Ji, S. 2022c,
MNRAS, 517, 5413, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac2909
Hopkins, P. F., Squire, J., Chan, T. K., et al. 2021b,
MNRAS, 501, 4184, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3691
Hopkins, P. F., Chan, T. K., Garrison-Kimmel, S., et al.
2020, MNRAS, 492, 3465, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3321
Hoyer, S., & Hamman, J. 2017, Journal of Open Research
Software, 5, 10, doi: 10.5334/jors.148
Hu, C.-Y. 2019, MNRAS, 483, 3363,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty3252
Hu, C.-Y., Sternberg, A., & van Dishoeck, E. F. 2021, ApJ,
920, 44, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac0dbd
Hu, C.-Y., Sternberg, A., & van Dishoeck, E. F. 2023, ApJ,
952, 140, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acdcfa
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering,
9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Jiang, Y.-F., & Oh, S. P. 2018, ApJ, 854, 5,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaa6ce
Kado-Fong, E., Kim, J.-G., Ostriker, E. C., & Kim, C.-G.
2020, ApJ, 897, 143, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab9abd
Kado-Fong, E., Geha, M., Mao, Y.-Y., et al. 2024, ApJ,
966, 129, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad3042
Kannan, R., Marinacci, F., Simpson, C. M., Glover, S.
C. O., & Hernquist, L. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 2088,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3078
Katz, H. 2022, MNRAS, 512, 348,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac423
Kim, C.-G., Kim, J.-G., Gong, M., & Ostriker, E. C. 2023,
ApJ, 946, 3, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acbd3a
Kim, C.-G., & Ostriker, E. C. 2015, ApJ, 802, 99,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/802/2/99
Kim, C.-G., & Ostriker, E. C. 2017, ApJ, 846, 133,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa8599
Kim, C.-G., & Ostriker, E. C. 2018, ApJ, 853, 173,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaa5ff
Kim, C.-G., Ostriker, E. C., Somerville, R. S., et al. 2020a,
ApJ, 900, 61, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aba962
Kim, C.-G., Ostriker, E. C., Fielding, D. B., et al. 2020b,
ApJL, 903, L34, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abc252
Kim, C.-G., Ostriker, E. C., Kim, J.-G., et al. 2024, ApJ,
972, 67, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad59ab
Kim, J.-G., Gong, M., Kim, C.-G., & Ostriker, E. C. 2023,
ApJS, 264, 10, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac9b1d
Kim, J.-G., Kim, W.-T., & Ostriker, E. C. 2018, ApJ, 859,
68, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aabe27
Kim, J.-G., Kim, W.-T., Ostriker, E. C., & Skinner, M. A.
2017, ApJ, 851, 93, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa9b80
Kim, J.-G., Ostriker, E. C., & Filippova, N. 2021, ApJ, 911,
128, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abe934
Kim, W.-T., Kim, C.-G., & Ostriker, E. C. 2020, ApJ, 898,
35, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab9b87
Koyama, H., & Inutsuka, S.-i. 2002, ApJL, 564, L97,
doi: 10.1086/338978

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks35
Kulsrud, R., & Pearce, W. P. 1969, ApJ, 156, 445,
doi: 10.1086/149981
Lancaster, L., Kim, C.-G., Kim, J.-G., Ostriker, E. C., &
Bryan, G. L. 2025a, ApJ, 989, 43,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade66c
Lancaster, L., Kim, J.-G., Bryan, G. L., et al. 2025b, ApJ,
989, 42, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade66b
Lancaster, L., Ostriker, E. C., Kim, J.-G., & Kim, C.-G.
2021, ApJL, 922, L3, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac3333
Leitherer, C., Schaerer, D., Goldader, J. D., et al. 1999,
ApJS, 123, 3, doi: 10.1086/313233
Li, M., & Bryan, G. L. 2020, ApJL, 890, L30,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab7304
Linzer, N. B., Armillotta, L., Ostriker, E. C., & Quataert,
E. 2025, ApJ, 988, 214, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade5ad
Linzer, N. B., Armillotta, L., Ostriker, E. C., & Quataert,
E. 2026, ApJ, 996, 99, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae2019
Linzer, N. B., Kim, J.-G., Kim, C.-G., & Ostriker, E. C.
2024, ApJ, 975, 173, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad7733
Londrillo, P., & del Zanna, L. 2004, Journal of
Computational Physics, 195, 17,
doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2003.09.016
McKinney, W. 2010, Data Structures for Statistical
Computing in Python,, Proceedings of the 9th Python in
Science Conference doi: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a
McQuinn, K. B. W., van Zee, L., & Skillman, E. D. 2019,
ApJ, 886, 74, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab4c37
Mignone, A., & Del Zanna, L. 2021, Journal of
Computational Physics, 424, 109748,
doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2020.109748
Moon, S., & Ostriker, E. C. 2025, ApJ, 987, 78,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/add477
Naab, T., & Ostriker, J. P. 2017, ARA&A, 55, 59,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081913-040019
Ostriker, E. C., & Kim, C.-G. 2022, ApJ, 936, 137,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7de2
Ostriker, E. C., McKee, C. F., & Leroy, A. K. 2010, ApJ,
721, 975, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/721/2/975
Padovani, M., Ivlev, A. V., Galli, D., & Caselli, P. 2018,
A&A, 614, A111, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201732202
Pandya, V., Fielding, D. B., Angl´ es-Alc´ azar, D., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 508, 2979, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2714
Perez, F., & Granger, B. E. 2007, Computing in Science
and Engineering, 9, 21, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.53
Quataert, E., Jiang, Y.-F., & Thompson, T. A. 2022,
MNRAS, 510, 920, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab3274
Rathjen, T.-E., Naab, T., Walch, S., et al. 2023, MNRAS,
522, 1843, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1104
Rathjen, T.-E., Naab, T., Girichidis, P., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 504, 1039, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab900
Rodr´ ıguez Montero, F., Dubois, Y., Katz, H., Slyz, A., &
Devriendt, J. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2602.21790,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.21790
Ruszkowski, M., & Pfrommer, C. 2023, A&A Rv, 31, 4,
doi: 10.1007/s00159-023-00149-2
Ruszkowski, M., Yang, H.-Y. K., & Zweibel, E. 2017, ApJ,
834, 208, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/834/2/208
Salem, M., & Bryan, G. L. 2014, MNRAS, 437, 3312,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt2121
Schneider, E. E., Ostriker, E. C., Robertson, B. E., &
Thompson, T. A. 2020, ApJ, 895, 43,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab8ae8
Semenov, V. A., Kravtsov, A. V., & Caprioli, D. 2021, ApJ,
910, 126, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abe2a6
Sike, B., Thomas, T., Ruszkowski, M., Pfrommer, C., &
Weber, M. 2025, ApJ, 987, 204,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adda3d
Simpson, C. M., Pakmor, R., Marinacci, F., et al. 2016,
ApJL, 827, L29, doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/827/2/L29
Simpson, C. M., Pakmor, R., Pfrommer, C., Glover, S.
C. O., & Smith, R. 2023, MNRAS, 520, 4621,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3601
Skinner, M. A., & Ostriker, E. C. 2015, ApJ, 809, 187,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/809/2/187
Smith, M. C., Bryan, G. L., Somerville, R. S., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 506, 3882, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1896
Smith, M. C., Fielding, D. B., Bryan, G. L., et al. 2024,
MNRAS, 527, 1216, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3168
Somerville, R. S., & Dav´ e, R. 2015, ARA&A, 53, 51,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082812-140951
Steinwandel, U. P., Bryan, G. L., Somerville, R. S.,
Hayward, C. C., & Burkhart, B. 2023, MNRAS, 526,
1408, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad2744
Steinwandel, U. P., Kim, C.-G., Bryan, G. L., et al. 2024,
ApJ, 960, 100, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad09e1
Sternberg, A., McKee, C. F., & Wolfire, M. G. 2002, ApJS,
143, 419, doi: 10.1086/343032
Stone, J. M., & Gardiner, T. 2009, NewA, 14, 139,
doi: 10.1016/j.newast.2008.06.003
Stone, J. M., Gardiner, T. A., Teuben, P., Hawley, J. F., &
Simon, J. B. 2008, ApJS, 178, 137, doi: 10.1086/588755
Stone, J. M., & Norman, M. L. 1992, ApJS, 80, 753,
doi: 10.1086/191680
Stone, J. M., Tomida, K., White, C. J., & Felker, K. G.
2020, ApJS, 249, 4, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab929b
Sutherland, R. S., & Dopita, M. A. 1993, ApJS, 88, 253,
doi: 10.1086/191823
Thomas, T., & Pfrommer, C. 2019, MNRAS, 485, 2977,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz263

36C.-G. Kim et al.
Thomas, T., Pfrommer, C., & Pakmor, R. 2021, MNRAS,
503, 2242, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab397
Thomas, T., Pfrommer, C., & Pakmor, R. 2025a, A&A,
698, A104, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450817
Thomas, T., Pfrommer, C., Pakmor, R., Lemmerz, R., &
Shalaby, M. 2025b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2510.16125,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.16125
Tsung, T. H. N., Oh, S. P., & Jiang, Y.-F. 2022, MNRAS,
513, 4464, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1123
Uhlig, M., Pfrommer, C., Sharma, M., et al. 2012, MNRAS,
423, 2374, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21045.x
van der Velden, E. 2020, The Journal of Open Source
Software, 5, 2004, doi: 10.21105/joss.02004
van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011,
Computing in Science and Engineering, 13, 22,
doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2011.37
Vijayan, A., Kim, C.-G., Armillotta, L., Ostriker, E. C., &
Li, M. 2020, ApJ, 894, 12,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab8474
Vijayan, A., Krumholz, M. R., & Wibking, B. D. 2025,
MNRAS, 539, 1706, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf136
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020,
Nature Methods, 17, 261, doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2
Walch, S., Girichidis, P., Naab, T., et al. 2015, MNRAS,
454, 238, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv1975
Wiener, J., Oh, S. P., & Zweibel, E. G. 2017a, MNRAS,
467, 646, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx109
Wiener, J., Pfrommer, C., & Oh, S. P. 2017b, MNRAS,
467, 906, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx127
Zhao, X., Bai, X.-N., & Ostriker, E. C. 2026, ApJS, 283,
37, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ae3e7f
Zweibel, E. G. 2013, Physics of Plasmas, 20, 055501,
doi: 10.1063/1.4807033
Zweibel, E. G. 2017, Physics of Plasmas, 24, 055402,
doi: 10.1063/1.4984017

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks37
APPENDIX
A.EFFECTS OF THE VERTICAL BOUNDARY
CONDITIONS
In our previous simulations using theTigressframe-
work (with methods presented in C.-G. Kim & E. C.
Ostriker 2017; W.-T. Kim et al. 2020; C.-G. Kim et al.
2023), we used thediodeboundary conditions (BCs) for
MHD variables (see below for explicit prescription) and
found that the BCs do not affect the results. However,
the samediodeBCs cannot be straightforwardly applied
to CRMHD simulations. The CR energy density pro-
file near the boundaries is nearly flat, and the effective
CR transport velocityv c,z =F c,z/(4Pc)∼60 km s −1
is smaller than the maximum wave speed in the extra-
planar region,∼(P c/ρ)1/2 ∼100 km s −1. At the same
time, warm outflows always occupy most of volume near
boundaries, also with moderate or low velocities. When
using simplediodeBCs, these conditions make the dy-
namical effects of reflected waves from boundaries non-
negligible. We find empirically that CR energy density
profiles and dynamics are strongly affected by the choice
of BCs. To optimize the balance of computational cost
and robustness, we therefore test how outcomes vary
under different possible choices of BCs, comparing our
standard domain size with simulations using larger ver-
tical domains.
The present simulation, like other numerical models
of stratified local disks, remains global in the vertical
direction. Generally, in such cases one can employ an
extrapolation from the active zones into the ghost zones
at thezboundaries. For example, the following are three
possible choices for the variableqin thek-th ghost zone
of the lower and upper boundaries, with the last active
zone indexk s andk e, respectively:
•Zero gradient extrapolation:
q(ks −k) =q(k s), q(k e +k) =q(k e) (A1)
•Constant logarithmic gradient extrapolation:
q(ks −k) =q(k s)
 q(ks)
q(ks + 1)
k
,(A2)
q(ke +k) =q(k e)
 q(ke)
q(ke −1)
k
(A3)
•Constant linear gradient extrapolation:
q(ks −k) =q(k s)−k[q(k s)−q(k s + 1)],(A4)
q(ke +k) =q(k e) +k[q(k e)−q(k e −1)] (A5)
We refer these specifications aszero,lingrad, and
lngrad, respectively.
Additional constraints at the boundaries are some-
times desirable to ensure specific properties. For exam-
ple, with a closed, stratified box like ours, we desire no
inflows and density decreasing outward. To ensure the
former property, a common approach is to prescribe an
extrapolation (usually with zero gradient) for the nor-
mal velocity only when gas is outflowing and setv z = 0
in the ghost zones otherwise. Formally, this prescription
(which we termoutflow) can be written
vz(ks −k) =v z(ks)max
 vz(ks)
|vz(ks)|
z(ks)
|z(ks)| ,0

,(A6)
vz(ke +k) =v z(ke)max
 vz(ke)
|vz(ke)|
z(ke)
|z(ke)| ,0

.(A7)
For the latter property, we introduce the limited loga-
rithmic extrapolation (calledlngrad-lim)
q(ks −k) =q(k s)min
  q(ks)
q(ks + 1)
k
,1
!
,(A8)
q(ke +k) =q(k e)min
  q(ke)
q(ke −1)
k
,1
!
.(A9)
Having explicitly defined five possible extrapolation
choices, which can be separately applied to each vari-
able, Table 2 lists three sets of BCs we have tested. In
the first row, we give the name we adopt here to refer to
a given set of choices:open,diode, orlngrad-outflow.
In ZEUS-2D (J. M. Stone & M. L. Norman 1992),
the termoutflowwas used for BCs that applyzero
extrapolation for all variables. This convention was
subsequently used in several widely used public codes,
e.g., Athena andAthena++ 14, Ramses15, FLASH16, and
Pluto17. However, this choice is only guaranteed to pro-
duce “outflowing” results if the flows have supersonic
outward velocities. For subsonic outflows, this choice
can cause the reflection of waves. If the velocity at the
boundary is inward, this choice can cause inflows, act-
ing as if there exists an infinite reservoir of matter. This
choice of BCs is therefore often referred to alternatively
asopenorinflow/outflowBCs. We adopt the term
14 https://github.com/PrincetonUniversity/athena
15 https://bitbucket.org/rteyssie/ramses
16 https://flash.rochester.edu/site/flashcode
17 https://plutocode.ph.unito.it

38C.-G. Kim et al.
openfor zero-gradient BCs, as listed as the header for
the second column of the table.
For the reasons described above, additional numerical
conditions help to achieve a desired physical state when
flows may be subsonic or inward at a boundary. Thus,
inTigresswe adopted the set of BCs listed under the
headingdiodein the third column.
In the fourth column, under the heading
lngrad-outflow, we list a set of BCs in which vari-
ables are extrapolated with a range of different gradi-
ents. The logarithmic extrapolation for density is exact
when combined with a linear gravitational potential (or
constant gravity) and an isothermal equation of state.
Therefore, for this choice, we adoptlngrad-limforρ
withlingradfor Φ andzeroforT(i.e., isothermal for
P).
The last three rows in Table 2 denote the sets of BCs
for CR variables, which are motivated by the corre-
sponding MHD BCs. Note that we apply extrapolation
for the effective CR transport velocities, not the CR
fluxes.
We caution that the names we adopt in Table 2, and
more generally terms for sets of BCs, are not used con-
sistently in the literature. For example, in FLASH (B.
Fryxell et al. 2000), the termdiodeis consistent with
our present usage, and the same is true in M. A. Skinner
& E. C. Ostriker (2015); J.-G. Kim et al. (2017). How-
ever, A. Caproni et al. (2017) refer to the set we label
asdiodeas “closed boundary conditions.” A. Vijayan
et al. (2025) use the termdiodeto refer to a choice
of BCs withzeroextrapolation for outflowing gas and
reflectiveBCs for inflowing gas.
We have run severalcrmhdsimulations using standard
(z±4096 pc) and taller (z±8192 pc) boxes at low reso-
lution (∆x= 16 pc), to test how results depend on the
choice of BCs. We consider three combinations of BCs:
1.mix:diodefor MHD andlngrad-outflowfor
CR
2.diode:diodefor both MHD and CR variables
3.lngrad:lngrad-outflowfor both MHD and CR
variables.
Our fiducial choice ismix. In Figure 16, we show time
averaged vertical profiles of selected quantities, with
model names in the key based on the choice of BCs and
the box size.
The taller box runs show overall more consistent re-
sults across different BCs. However, thediodeBCs
produce a steep (and presumably unphysical) gradient
inP MHD near the outer boundary in the tall box. Also,
diodeproduces the largest inconsistency in CR pressure
variableopen diode lngrad-outflow
ρzero zero lngrad-lim
vx,v y zero zero zero
vz zero outflow outflow
Pzero zero isothermal
rzero zero zero
Bzero zero zero
Φ zero zero lingrad
ec zero zero lngrad-lim
Fc,x/Pc,F c,y/Pc zero zero zero
Fc,z/Pc zero outflow outflow
T able 2.Boundary condition prescriptions tested here. See
text for details.
profile when the box size is changed. Physically, this is
because the CR pressure is not naturally decreasing out-
ward as steeply as the MHD variables, so CRs accumu-
late near the vertical boundaries when the zero gradient
is imposed. The flat CR pressure indiodereduces the
impact of CRs, resulting in lower mass fluxes at high
|z|. Bothmixandlngradare equally valid choices in
terms of consistency of most variables between the re-
sulting vertical profiles in the standard boxes and the
taller boxes. However,mixproduces better agreement
across box sizes for CR energy flux and MHD mass flux.
Also, the MHD portion of the BCs inmixare the same
as chosen for our previousTigresssimulations. For
these reasons, we have adopted the choicemixfor the
crmhdsimulation presented in the main text.

Tigress++: Cosmic Ray Feedback in Galactic Disks39
10 3
10 2
10 1
nH [cm−3]
lngrad-tall
lngrad
mix-tall
mix
diode-tall
diode
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
FM [M ⊙ kpc−2 yr−1]
102
103
104
PMHD [kBcm−3 K]
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000Pc [kBcm−3 K]
0 2 4 6 8
z [kpc]
1044
1045
1046
1047
FE, MHD [ergkpc−2 yr−1]
0 2 4 6 8
z [kpc]
0
1
2
3FE, c [ergkpc−2 yr−1]
1e46
Figure 16.Time averaged vertical profiles of selected quantities for tests of BCs. From top to bottom, we show hydrogen
number density and mass flux, vertical stress of the thermal gas and CR pressure, and vertical energy flux of the thermal gas
and CR flux. Note that the panels in the right column use linear scales while those in the left column use log scales. The solid
lines denote medians while the shaded areas depict the 16th to 84th percentiles overt= 200−500 Myr.