Title: The Majoron Cosmological Window: Dark Matter and Thermal Leptogenesis
Authors: Arturo de Giorgi, Daniel Naredo-Tuero, Xavier Ponce Díaz
Published: 2026-05-18
Categories: hep-ph, astro-ph.CO

IPPP/26/39
The Majoron Cosmological Window:
Dark Matter and Thermal Leptogenesis
Arturo de Giorgi ,1,∗ Daniel Naredo-Tuero ,2, 3,† and Xavier Ponce D´ ıaz 4,‡
1Institute for Particle Physics Phenomenology, Department of Physics, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, U.K.
2Instituto de F´ ısica Te´ orica UAM/CSIC, Universidad Aut´ onoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain
3Institute for Astroparticle Physics (IAP), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT),
Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
4Department of Physics, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland
The majoron is the Nambu-Goldstone boson associated with the spontaneous breaking of a global
B−Lsymmetry. Remarkably, the minimal majoron framework can simultaneously address three key
empirical indications of physics beyond the Standard Model: neutrino masses, the matter-antimatter
asymmetry, and dark matter. In this work, we identify the cosmologically viable region in which
majoron dark matter and high-scale thermal leptogenesis can be realised simultaneously. We show
that successful leptogenesis plays a central role in making this scenario predictive: by constraining
the right-handed-neutrino mass scale, it determines the irreducible freeze-in contribution to the
majoron abundance and fixes the size of the couplings relevant for visible dark matter decays.
Combining the irreducible dark matter production mechanisms with warm dark matter limits and
indirect searches for decaying dark matter, we map the resulting majoron cosmological window and
show that future X- and gamma-ray telescopes can probe part of the surviving parameter space.
Contents
I. Introduction 1
II. The Model 2
III. Scrutinising the Parameter Space 3
A. Experimental Constraints 3
B. Majoron Dark Matter 4
C. Leptogenesis 6
IV. Results 7
A. Post-inflationary 8
B. Pre-inflationary 8
V. Conclusions 9
A. Majoron Couplings 10
B. Casas-Ibarra Parametrisation 11
C. Majoron Thermalisation and Freeze-in 12
D. Treatment of Leptogenesis 14
E. Details of the Analysis 16
F. Gravitational Waves from Leptogenesis 17
References 18
∗ arturo.de-giorgi@durham.ac.uk
† daniel.naredo@kit.edu
‡ xavier.poncediaz@unibas.ch
I. Introduction
Among the leading empirical indications of physics be-
yond the Standard Model (SM), dark matter (DM), neu-
trino masses, and the observed matter–antimatter asym-
metry require the extension of the SM particle content.
While the latter two can be minimally explained within
the framework of the type-I seesaw [1–6] and (thermal)
leptogenesis mechanisms [7–11], the existence of DM re-
mains unaccounted for in this minimal setup.
In the landscape of proposed SM extensions [12, 13],
themajoron[14–17] is arguably one of the simplest
frameworks capable of accommodating DM. The majoron
is the pseudo-Nambu–Goldstone boson (pNGB) associ-
ated with the spontaneous breaking of a globalB−L
symmetry. Its interactions are suppressed by the seesaw
scale, making it naturally weakly coupled to matter and
stable on cosmological timescales. These properties ren-
der the majoron a natural DM candidate.
The pNGB nature of the majoron allows it to be nat-
urally light. Its mass, however, is not predicted in the
minimal theory. Although several mechanisms can gen-
erate it, cf. [18–23], its origin is not tied to the solution
of a theoretical puzzle, such as the way the axion mass is
linked to the strong-CP problem [24–27]. Nevertheless,
global symmetries are expected to be broken at least by
gravitational effects, making a massive majoron an ap-
pealing possibility. From a bottom-up perspective, the
majoron mass can therefore be treated as a free param-
eter, to be fixed by the requirement of reproducing the
observed DM relic abundance. 1
1 Note that under the assumption of a gravity-induced breaking,
“naively”, operators arising at small dimension may lead to sev-
eral problems, see Refs. [28, 29]. Hence, some sort of protection
needs to be imposed [18, 22].
arXiv:2605.18944v1  [hep-ph]  18 May 2026

2
The ultra-weak couplings of the majoron, rooted in
the high seesaw scale, are both a virtue and a limitation.
On the one hand, the resulting suppression of its inter-
actions with light fermion families and photons [30, 31]
allows it to evade most astrophysical constraints, ren-
dering it a naturallyastrophobic 2 Axion-Like Particle
(ALP). On the other hand, the same suppression makes
its experimental detection challenging. Nevertheless, ma-
joron DM remains a prime target for neutrino, X-ray, and
gamma-ray telescopes [35, 36]. Moreover, extensions of
the minimal majoron framework can make it accessible
to a broader range of experimental searches [37, 38].
However, the presence of the majoron can inter-
play non-trivially with different leptogenesis mechanisms,
which, for simplicity, we can divide into three classes:
scalar-induced, low-scale, and high-scale leptogenesis:
•Coherent majoron motion can realize spontaneous
leptogenesis [39, 40], acting as an effective chem-
ical potential for lepton number [41–45]; related
Affleck–Dine-type constructions [46] use the lepton-
number-carrying scalar condensate to store the
asymmetry before transferring it to the thermal
bath [47]. These scenarios do not arise generically
in the minimal majoron framework, but instead
rely on additional assumptions such as large ma-
joron masses, potentially in tension with DM sta-
bility3, sizeable primordial angular motion, or extra
model-building ingredients.
•In low-scale majoron models, leptogenesis can be
achieved via the Akhmedov-Rubakov-Smirnov [49,
50] mechanism [51, 52], requiring masses of the
right-handed neutrinos (RHNs)M N ∼1−100 GeV.
•In the scenario of standard high-scale leptogenesis,
this discussion is only found in analyses that intro-
duce extra gauge bosons [22], newB−L-violating
operators [53, 54], non-minimal extensions [55], or
new scalar interactions [56–59]. These scenarios are
qualitatively different from the one considered here.
A thermalised majoron decouples as a hot relativis-
tic relic and is therefore constrained to be either
very light or a subdominant DM component [60].
Moreover, in the minimal majoron setup, thermal-
isation is not generic: direct couplings to the SM
are seesaw/loop-suppressed, while efficient equili-
bration requires either sizeable RHN couplings or a
Higgs–singlet portal involving the radial mode.
2 For examples of models of astrophobic axions, see Refs. [32–34].
3 A similar discussion applies to triplet majoron models, e.g. see
Ref. [48].
Motivated by the region of parameter space accessible
to current and future searches for majoron DM [35, 61],
we study the irreducible DM production mechanisms
of the minimal majoron model and their compatibility
with high-scale thermal leptogenesis and experimental
searches. To the best of our knowledge, a systematic
analysis of this combined cosmologically viable window
has not appeared in the literature. 4 Although standard
leptogenesis may proceed as in the type-I seesaw, its si-
multaneous realisation with majoron DM has two im-
portant consequences that have not been fully incorpo-
rated in previous analyses. First, high-scale thermal lep-
togenesis requires the right-handed neutrinos to be ther-
mally populated, or at least sufficiently close to equi-
librium [63]; through the renormalisable majoron–RHN
coupling, this inevitably generates a freeze-in population
of majorons [22, 64, 65], which can be relevant for keV-
scale DM. Second, the requirement of successful lepto-
genesis provides an independent handle on the heavy-
neutrino mass scale, thereby lifting otherwise flat direc-
tions in the majoron parameter space and making decay
bounds into charged fermions and photons predictive.
In this work, we analyze the interplay of these three
empirical indications of physics beyond the Standard
Model within the minimal majoron framework. This
allows us to define acosmologically viablewindow for
majoron models, which can be targeted by future DM
searches. We focus on cosmological histories in which
the early Universe is sufficiently hot for the right-handed
neutrinos to participate in the thermal plasma. This pro-
vides the common origin of the two central ingredients of
our analysis: their out-of-equilibrium dynamics generate
the matter–antimatter asymmetry through thermal lep-
togenesis, while their unavoidable interactions with the
majoron produce an irreducible contribution to the DM
abundance.
II. The Model
The majoron’s minimal embedding consists of a complex
scalar singlet whose vacuum expectation value generates
the mass scale of light and heavy RHNs through the see-
saw mechanism. The Lagrangian of the theory is given
by
−Lϕ = ¯LL YD ˜HN R +ϕ ¯N c
RYN NR +V(ϕ) + H.c. ,(1)
whereL L is the leptonic weak-doublet,H( ˜H) is the
Higgs (dual),N R is a right-handed (RH) neutrino, and
4 Note added:during the very last stage of writing of this
manuscript, Ref. [62] appeared, addressing the same scenario
with a complementary analysis. Our work provides an indepen-
dent assessment of the viable parameter space, with a detailed
scan of the seesaw parameters and a unified treatment of relic-
density, leptogenesis, warm-DM, and decay constraints.

3
ϕis the complex scalar singlet which gives rise to the
majoron. In the above Lagrangian, we omitted flavour
indices; we will assume the existence of three RH neu-
trinos, so thatY D,N are 3×3 matrices. Furthermore,
YN can be chosen to be real and diagonal without loss of
generality.
The majoron,a, can be identified as the angular mode
of the complex singlet field 5
ϕ= (fa +ρ)√
2 eia/fa ,with

|ϕ|2
= f2
a
2 .(2)
We will be agnostic about the singlet’s potentialV(ϕ),
assuming only the presence of a small soft-breaking of
the U(1) which will give rise to the majoron mass. All in
all, the effective majoron Lagrangian can be written as
Lmajoron = 1
2(∂µa)2 − 1
2 m2
aa2 +L a-SM .(3)
whereL a-SM encodes the interactions between the ma-
joron and the SM. While throughout our study we will
considerm a andf a to be independent parameters, once
a source of explicit U(1)-breaking is specified, they be-
come related. For illustrative purposes, we will show
ma −f a relationships stemming from gravity-induced
U(1)-breakings of the form
LU(1)−break = (4π)2 η
M n−4
Pl
ϕn + h.c. ,(4)
whereηis typically anO(1) number. This operator leads
to a majoron mass given by:
m2
a = 16π2n2|η|M 2
Pl
 fa√
2MPl
n−2
.(5)
Lines corresponding tom a −f a relations stemming from
different dimensions (n) of such explicit breaking are
shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
The SSB generates the heavy sterile neutrinos’ masses
MN,i ≃Y N,ifa/
√
2. The active light neutrino massesm i
are then generated via Type-I seesaw
diag(m1, m2, m3)≃ −U T
PMNS
 
MDM −1
N M T
D

UPMNS ,
(6)
withM D ≡Y D v/
√
2, andv= 246 GeV, the Elec-
troweak (EW) vacuum expectation value (vev). While
the two light neutrino mass splittings (∆m2
21 and ∆m2
31)
are precisely measured in neutrino oscillation experi-
ments [66], both the ordering of neutrino mass eigen-
states and the lightest neutrino mass are yet unknown.
5 The mass of the radial mode of the singlet is expected to be of
O(fa) and can be made heavier by choosing the parameters of
the potential. It is typically neglected as its phenomenology and
impact strongly depend on the choice of scalar potential. We
will therefore not consider it in these studies, as commonly done
in the literature.
For the sake of simplicity, throughout our analysis we will
assume the so-callednormal orderingof neutrino masses
(m1 < m 2 < m 3) and a conservative upper limit on the
lightest neutrino mass ofm 1 <0.2 eV.
The majoron couples at tree level only to neutrinos,
while its interactions with charged SM fermions and
gauge bosons are generated radiatively. In particular,
the leading couplings to charged leptons arise at one loop,
whereas those to photons and gluons first appear at two
loops [30, 31]. We collect the relevant interactions in
App. A. As expected for a pNGB, the fermionic couplings
are proportional to the corresponding fermion masses.
Nevertheless, over much of the parameter space, the neu-
trino coupling remains the dominant one: in particular,
it exceeds the electron coupling forf a ≲10 10 GeV, see
Eq. (A10). The photon coupling is further suppressed
by the electromagnetic coupling, by the additional loop
factor, and, for light majorons, by powers of the ma-
joron mass. Consequently, it vanishes in the massless
limit and becomes phenomenologically relevant only for
ma ∼ O(MeV) or larger.
III. Scrutinising the Parameter Space
A. Experimental Constraints
Within the framework of the type-I seesaw, the rela-
tion between the Dirac YukawasY D and the seesaw scale
MN =Y N fa/
√
2 is tightly linked to the mass of the neu-
trinos. Furthermore, for light majorons, the photon cou-
pling gets extremely suppressed. Therefore, generic con-
straints on sub-MeV ALPs from stellar evolution [67, 68]
or supernovae dynamics [69–72] do not provide relevant
bounds for our scenario. More importantly, cosmolog-
ical constraints in this regime, such as those arising
from modifications of the primordial abundances pro-
duced during Big Bang Nucleosynthesis or from distor-
tions of the CMB anisotropy spectra [73–76], are natu-
rally evaded owing to the long lifetime of the high-scale
majoron. For relevant cosmological bounds and effects of
a low-scaleB−Lmajoron see Refs. [52, 77].
The dominant bounds on Majoron DM arise from its
SM decay channels, the most relevant of which are neutri-
nos, charged fermions, and photons. The majoron decay
width into neutrinos is controlled by the ratiom ν/fa and
is given by
Γa→νν = ma
P3
i=1 m2
i
16πf 2a
,(7)
where{m i}3
i=1 are the light neutrino masses. Neutrino
observatories looking for neutrino lines with energyE ν =
ma/2 are able to directly constrain thema−fa parameter
space form a ≳few MeV [35, 36, 61, 78–86].
For the decay to SM fermions and photons, the size
of the couplings (see App. A) is instead controlled by
the entries ofM DM †
D/(vfa),which, parametrically, is

4
10 2
10 1
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
ma [keV]
107
108
109
1010
1011
1012
1013
1014
1015
fa [GeV]
a <250Gyr
Post-inflationary scenario
Misalignment misDMh 2 > 0.12
Cosmic string
radiation
1F Leptogenesis + Freeze-in
fi
DMh2 >0.12
3F Leptogenesis + Freeze-in
fi
DMh2 > 0.12
 Warm DM
bound
Excluded by
DM decays
Neutrino
Observatories
dim= 7
dim= 8
dim= 9
Current
Future
Figure 1. Parameter space for majoron DM in the post-inflationary scenario, compatible with successful thermal leptogenesis.
The green region denotes the cosmologically viable window, where the observed DM abundance can be obtained from the
irreducible misalignment and freeze-in contributions while satisfying DM decay and warm-DM bounds. Current and projected
neutrino-telescope constraints are shown in gray and light gray, respectively. The hatched region is excluded by searches for
decaying DM into charged particles and photons, while the dashed contour indicates the projected sensitivity of future satellite
missions [87, 88]. The red band shows the expected contribution from DM production via cosmic-string radiation. Purple
dashed lines show the prediction ofm a −f a relations, if the mass is given by Planck induced operators, Eq. (5).
O

mν
v
MN
fa

. The dependence of the decays on the heavy
neutrinos’ Yukawas means that bounds on these decay
channels can only be translated tom a −f a space ifM N
can be independently constrained. On the other hand,
the requirement of successful thermal leptogenesis does
provide a lower bound on the RHN mass scale, thus al-
lowing us to translate the constraints onM DM †
D/(vfa)
stemming from majoron DM decay searches into lower
bounds onf a.
On the astrophysical side, the strongest constraints on
the majoron come from visible decays into photons. Pho-
tons produced from decaying DM are being targetted
byX- and gamma-ray observatories [87–95], providing
the best constraints in the keV−100 MeV for ALP-DM,
cf. [96, 97].
On the cosmological side, majoron DM decays inject
energy into the early Universe and therefore alter both
the ionisation and temperature histories. Measurements
of the CMB anisotropies power spectra are highly sen-
sitive to changes in the free electron fraction [98–102],
while Lyman-αobservations [103–106] constrain the tem-
perature of the intergalactic medium around the reioni-
sation epoch. In the near future, measurements of the
21-cm signal will also be powerful probes of decaying
DM [107]. Additionally, cosmology is also sensitive to
invisible decays, as is the case for sub-MeV majorons,
which almost exclusively decay to a pair of neutrinos. By
a combination of CMB+LSS data, the DM lifetime can
be constrained to beτ >250 Gyr [108], as decaying DM
not only affects the expansion history of the Universe,
but also the growth of structure.
Finally, warm DM (wDM) constraints apply. If DM
is too relativistic, it suppresses structure formation at
small scales. If the totality of DM is warm, this effec-
tively translates into a lower bound on the wDM mass,
mwDM ≳5 keV [103–106]. However, since majoron DM is
generically a mixture of cold and warm components (see
Sec. III B), we will employ mixed DM bounds [109–113],
which allow to constrain the relative abundance of wDM
as a function ofm wDM.
In our analysis, we will consider the compilation of
cosmological and astrophysical majoron bounds given in
Ref. [36], as well as additional bounds on the decay to
photons below the MeV [87, 88, 97] and the recent bounds
on the decay to electrons provided in Ref. [114].
B. Majoron Dark Matter
The feebly interacting nature of the majoron easily ren-
ders it cosmologically stable, making it a natural DM
candidate. Generically, there exist three irreducible main
mechanisms that contribute to generating its relic abun-

5
dance6: via misalignment, by the freeze-in mechanism,
and by decay of topological defects related to the U(1)
breaking.
The misalignment mechanism [117–119], provides a
non-thermal mechanism for cold DM production. The
scalar field evolution in the background expanding uni-
verse, leads to the equation of motion:
¨θ+ 3H ˙θ+m 2
a(t)θ≃0.(8)
withθ≡a/f a. At high temperatures, the field is fixed
by Hubble friction at its initial valueθ=θ i. However, as
the Universe expands and cools down, the Hubble rate
becomes comparable to the mass,H(T osc) =m a, and the
field starts oscillating around the minimum of its poten-
tial. These oscillations redshift as matter and therefore
contribute to the DM abundance.
The precise determination of DM abundance from mis-
alignment depends on details of the model, such as the
temperature dependence of the majoron mass, deter-
mined by the source of explicit U(1)-breaking. For a
temperature-independent majoron mass,m a(T)≃m a,
its relic abundance is given by [120]:
Ωmis
DMh2 ≃0.12
 ma
100 keV
1/2
×(9)
×
 θifa
3.38×10 10 GeV
2 90
g∗(Tosc)
1/4
,
whereg ⋆(T) is the effective number of relativistic degrees
of freedom. We note that aT-independent majoron mass
is justified in scenarios in which the source of explicit
U(1)B−L breaking, providing mass for the majoron, is
associated to a scale Λ≫f a, above the scale of sponta-
neousB−Lbreaking, which is the case with the terms we
consider in Eq. (4). Since misalignment is a non-thermal
process, its contribution to the DM abundance is cold,
allowing extremely light fields to constitute the DM.
The abundance of non-thermally produced DM cru-
cially depends on the cosmological history of U(1) spon-
taneous breaking, namely, on whether the symmetry is
broken after or before the end of inflation. These two
scenarios are typically dubbedpost-inflationaryandpre-
inflationary, respectively. In the former scenario, since
the symmetry is restored after inflation, each Hubble
patch was populated with a different, uncorrelated value
of the initial misalignment angle, leading to an average
value ofθ i =
q
1
2π
R π
−π dθθ2 = π√
3. On the contrary,
in the latter scenario, the symmetry is already broken
before or during inflation, in which case a homogeneous
patch with a randomθ i is inflated, meaning thatθ i is
effectively an extra free parameter taking value in the
interval|θ i| ∈[0, π].
6 For early discussions on thermalised DM majoron see [115, 116].
A second contribution to the relic majoron DM abun-
dance comes from thermal production. Indeed, reproduc-
ing the BAU via thermal leptogenesis requires the exis-
tence of a thermal bath of at least one of the right-handed
neutrinos and, since the majoron has sizable Yukawa cou-
plings to RHN, a non-zero irreducible thermal abundance
of majorons is guaranteed to be produced in this sce-
nario. The freeze-in abundance can be obtained by in-
tegrating the Boltzmann equation for the majoron yield
Ya. Including production fromN iNi →aaand from
HL→N ia,HN i →LaandLN i →Ha(see App. C),
and following Ref. [121], we find the parametric scaling 7
Ωfi
DMh2 ≃0.12
 ma
100 keV
3.4×10 10 GeV
fa
2
×
×
3X
i=1
"3.4×10 10 GeV
fa
2 MNi
1.6×10 8 GeV
3
+
 ˜mi
0.1 eV
 MNi
6.2×10 8 GeV
2#
.
(10)
where ˜mi ≡(M †
DMD)ii/MNi ∼ O(m ν).
It should be remarked that sizable majoron DM pro-
duction from the thermal bath could also occur via the
resonants-channelN N→ρ→aa. Sincem ρ ≃ O(f a),
these channels are relevant only ifT rh > f a. However,
we argue that even in this case, this contribution is ex-
pected to be small compared with thet-channel since, in
general, the freeze-in regimes requireM N /fa ≪1 so as
to preclude the thermalisation of the majoron, see Ap-
pendix C. Therefore, in order for thes-channel to be rel-
evant, it is necessary to have a thermal bath of RHN at
T∼m ρ ≃f a ≫M N. However, this is generally not pos-
sible in our minimal majoron setup, since, in the absence
of additional interactions, RHN are populated from in-
verse decays of the leptonic and Higgs doubletsLH→N
which acquireO(T) thermal masses, effectively closing off
the production of RHN forT≫M N.
Finally, the spontaneous breaking of a U(1) symme-
try inevitably leads to the formation of topological de-
fects [122], namely cosmic strings, which, if unstable
as in our case, lose energy by radiating ALPs [123].
This extra non-thermal contribution is absent in the pre-
inflationary scenario, since the abundance of topological
defects formed during inflation will be exponentially di-
luted. The contribution of string radiation to the DM
abundance is an active field of research, mostly relying
on computationally expensive cosmological simulations
that track the dynamics of string formation, interaction,
and decay. It is well known that the contribution to the
7 We assumeT rh ≳M Ni for the RH neutrino species relevant to
freeze-in and leptogenesis, so thatN i is thermally populated and
the freeze-in production, dominated atT∼M Ni, takes place.

6
10 2
10 1
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
ma [keV]
107
108
109
1010
1011
1012
1013
1014
1015
fa [GeV]
a <250Gyr
Pre-inflationary scenario
misDMh 2 > 0.12 ( i 10 3)
Misalignment ( i = 10 3)
Misalignment ( i = 1)
1F Leptogenesis + Freeze-in
fi
DMh2 > 0.12
3F Leptogenesis + Freeze-in
fi
DMh2 > 0.12
 Warm DM
bound
Excluded by
DM decays
Neutrino
Observatories
dim= 7
dim= 9
dim= 11
Current
Future
Figure 2. Parameter space for pre-inflationary Majoron DM compatible with successful thermal leptogenesis. The green region
shows the cosmologically viable window, and the red area the DM relic abundance dependence on the free initial misalignment
angleθ i. The gray and light-gray regions show current and projected neutrino-observatory constraints, respectively. The
hatched region indicates existing bounds from majoron decays into charged particles and photons, while the dashed lines show
the corresponding future sensitivities. Purple lines show them a −f a prediction for different Planck-induced operators, Eq. (5).
DM abundance from string radiation exhibits a paramet-
ric dependence similar to that of misalignment, differing
only in a numerical prefactor. Furthermore, both, analyt-
ical estimates [60, 124] and numerical simulations [125–
131] point towards string radiation providing the larger
contribution.
There is one last remark that needs to be discussed
regarding the restoration of the U(1) symmetry in the
post-inflationary scenario. In our setup, the symmetry
restoration cannot be thermal, since the scalarϕonly
interacts with RHN, and we have argued that it is not
possible to generate a thermal RHN bath atT≫M N.
Furthermore, additionalϕ-interactions that may lead to
a thermal restoration can potentially lead to its thermal-
isation, which would prove catastrophic for DM produc-
tion, as subsequent decays of the radial modeρ→aa
can easily equilibrate the majoron and lead to DM over-
production. Consequently, we consider that, in the post-
inflationary scenario, the symmetry is non-thermally re-
stored, as it occurs in inflationary models in which the
scalar is coupled to the inflaton [132–134].
We also neglect a renormalizable Higgs portal inter-
action,λ Hϕ |H|2|ϕ|2. Forf a ≫v, a generic value of
λHϕ would induce a threshold correctionδm 2
H ∼λ Hϕ f2
a,
thereby reintroducing a tuning in the electroweak scale.
Radiative stability therefore selects the technically nat-
ural ultra-weak regimeλ Hϕ ≲v 2/f2
a, since the limit
λHϕ →0 corresponds to a decoupling of the Higgs and
singlet sectors, due to an extended Poincar´ e symme-
try [135, 136]. In this regime, the portal is also cosmolog-
ically irrelevant: the interaction rate for Higgs-mediated
processes involving the radial mode remains well below
the Hubble rate at the relevant temperatures, and hence
the radial modeρis not thermalised through the Higgs
portal.
Note that for a majoron scalef a ∼10 10 GeV and a
massm a =O(100) keV, both thermal and non-thermal
production mechanisms contribute to the relic abun-
dance, bearing in mind that the heavy neutrino mass
MN can be treated as a free parameter [22]. At com-
parable temperatures, the decays of right-handed neu-
trinos generate the lepton asymmetry responsible for the
BAU. Achieving the observed DM relic abundance, there-
fore, involves a non-trivial interplay between these mech-
anisms: one must simultaneously avoid overclosing the
Universe while reproducing the measured DM density.
C. Leptogenesis
It is well-known that out-of-equilibrium decays of very
heavy RHN can account for the baryon asymmetry of the
Universe, via the so-called (thermal) leptogenesis mech-
anism [7–11]. Since, in our model, thermal leptogenesis
takes place in the standard fashion, we will not go into
the details on how the BAU is computed from RHN de-
cays, and instead refer the reader to the vast dedicated
literature in Refs. [63, 137, 138]. However, we will outline

7
several key features that are relevant for our scrutiny of
the majoron parameter space.
We will consider thermal leptogenesis in two distinct
regimes: the one-flavour approximation and the fully-
flavoured regime. The former is typically valid when
RHN decays occur atT≫10 12 GeV, where interac-
tions mediated by the charged lepton Yukawas are out
of equilibrium, and therefore the total lepton asymmetry
is stored in a coherent flavour superposition. However, at
lower temperatures, the tau and even the muon Yukawa
interaction becomes efficient, effectively decohering the
lepton asymmetries stored in their associated flavours,
and the evolution of the total lepton asymmetry can no
longer be tracked with a single flavour [139].
For the purposes of our analysis, the crucial role played
by leptogenesis is to constrain the RHN mass scale. In
the context of one-flavour thermal leptogenesis, David-
son and Ibarra [140] derived a lower bound on the light-
est RHN mass,M N1, that needs to be satisfied in order
to correctly reproduce the BAU. Depending on particu-
lar assumptions, such as the initial RHN population, this
bound readsM N1 ≳10 8 −109 GeV. However, it has been
shown that, upon including flavour effects, leptogenesis
can be successful even for RHN significantly below the
Davidson-Ibarra bound [141]. Since leptogenesis gener-
ally provides a lower bound on the RHN mass scale, in
the context of majoron DM, it provides extremely com-
plementary information to the parameter space. Indeed,
both majoron decays into charged fermions/photons and
DM production via freeze-in depend on a combination
ofM N andf a. By effectively providing an independent
handle onM N, leptogenesis allows to chart the region in
them a −f a parameter space where the model can ac-
count for both the BAU and the DM abundance while
satisfying observational constraints.
Even though leptogenesis, majoron freeze-in, and de-
cays are all sensitive to the mass scale of RHN, there is no
exact correspondence between the three processes. For
instance, in the presence of a hierarchical RHN spectrum,
leptogenesis is mostly sensitive to the mass of the lightest
RHN,M N1, whereas freeze-in production, as it becomes
evident from Eq. (10), will be controlled by the mass
of the heaviest RHN that manages to thermalise. Al-
ternatively, majoron decays to charged fermions depend
on the whole RHN mass matrix (see App. A) and there-
fore will generally be sensitive to the heaviest RHN mass.
As a consequence, for a givenM N1, freeze-in production
and decays could be strongly enhanced in the presence of
strong hierarchies in the RHN spectrum, thus shrinking
the available parameter space.
In order to avoid such scenarios and remain as con-
servative as possible, we always consider a mildly hierar-
chical RHN spectrumM N3 /MN2 =M N2 /MN1 = 2, such
that the only free mass scale isM N1. In this context, we
explore the parameter compatible with thermal leptoge-
nesis in the following fashion: in the one-flavour approxi-
mation, we follow Ref. [63], whereas in the fully flavoured
regime, we make uses of the codeULYSSES[142, 143] to
compute the BAU and make use of itsMultiNest[144–
146] interface to explore the viable parameter space.
IV. Results
In order to characterize the window of them a −f a space
in which majoron DM production is compatible with
successful thermal leptogenesis and observational con-
straints, we carry out a dedicated exploration of the ma-
joron parameter space. As shown in App. A, the seesaw
parameters determine the structure of majoron couplings
to photons and charged leptons, and the scale of RHN
masses controls both the size of the aforementioned cou-
plings, as well as leptogenesis and DM freeze-in produc-
tion.
For our numerical scan, we employ the popular Casas-
Ibarra parametrisation [147], which allows to scan the
seesaw parameter space while correctly reproducing neu-
trino oscillation data. Within this choice, the full seesaw
Lagrangian can be characterized with 11 free parameters8
P≡ {m 1, δ, α21, α31, x1,2,3, y1,2,3, MN1 }(see App. B for
details). We recall that, since we are fixing the RHN
mass hierarchy, only the lightest RHN mass is free.
We define the viable window ofm a −f a parameter
space in the following way (more details in App. E):
1. As computing the BAU from thermal leptogenesis
is the most computationally expensive task in our
analysis, our starting point is an ensemble of points
inP-space which is compatible with generating the
correct BAU (see App. D).
2. From each pointP, it is possible to predict the
majoron couplings to photons and charged fermions
normalised to its decay constant,g aX fa withX=
fSM, γ.
3. Using the irreducible contribution from misalign-
ment, since eachP-point fixes the RHN masses and
˜mi, it is possible to find a trajectory inm a −f a
space in which the sum of the two contributions to
the DM abundance (Eqs. (9) and (10)) yield the
observed value ΩDMh2 ≃0.12.
4. Over this trajectory, it is now possible to consis-
tently apply DM decay constraints of Sec. III A, as
their validity depends on DM being entirely made
up of majorons.
5. Since observational constraints place upper bounds
ong aX as a function ofm a, these can be automat-
ically converted to lower bounds onf a, which are
only applicable in the trajectory of them a −f a
8 For simplicity and due to the precision with which they are mea-
sured, we fix the light neutrino mixing anglesθ ij and the mass
splittings ∆m2
21 and ∆m2
31 to their best-fit values [66].

8
plane where the correct DM abundance can be re-
produced. We remove all points of this trajectory
in which the conditionf a < f DM−decay
a (ma) is sat-
isfied.
6. Additionally, whenm a ≲5 keV, we remove the
points in which the fraction of warm DMf wDM i.e.,
the contribution arising from freeze-in, exceeds the
mixed wDM bounds (see Section III A).
By repeating the above procedure for allP-points and
marginalising over them, it is possible to consistently
map thelargestpossible region of them a −f a in which
leptogenesis and the correct DM abundance can be si-
multaneously achieved while respecting the bounds on
DM decays and wDM. Our results are shown as the
shaded green regions in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, for the post-
inflationary and pre-inflationary scenarios, respectively.
A. Post-inflationary
As discussed in Sec. III B, in the post-inflationary sce-
nario, the initial misalignment angle is fixed to the aver-
age valueθ i ≃π/
√
3 and, given that Ω mis
DMh2 ∝f 2
a m1/2
a ,
the allowed region for consistent majoron DM is bounded
from above by misalignment overproduction, as shown by
the dotted red line in Fig. 1. However, there is much theo-
retical evidence for the fact that the contribution coming
from cosmic string radiation, albeit showcasing a similar
parametric dependence, cf. [60], provides the larger con-
tribution. In order to illustrate this, we show as a shaded
red area the typical region of parameter space in which
the whole DM can be produced via string radiation, us-
ing the estimates given in Ref. [124] for a temperature-
independent ALP mass, which predict smallerf a by an
O(1−10) factor.
Alternatively, since the freeze-in contribution to the
DM abundance (10) is inversely proportional tof a and
leptogenesis requires a minimum RHN mass scale,M N1,
the shaded green region is bounded from below by
freeze-in overproduction, depicted by dotted blue lines
in Fig. 1, depending on whether leptogenesis is com-
puted in the one-flavour approximation or in the fully
three-flavoured regime. Since flavour effects can help en-
hance the lepton asymmetry, three-flavour leptogenesis
allows for lighter RHN and thus can accommodate more
parameter space compatible with DM production. In
fact, in the one-flavour regime, the upper bound from
misalignment/strings and the lower bound from freeze-in
and leptogenesis only allow form a ≲keV, where wDM
bounds constrain the abundance of frozen-in majorons
to be a subdominant contribution to the total DM den-
sity. This can also be seen from the fact that below the
wDM bound, the green region shrinks to coincide with
the parameter space in which the total DM density can
be produced non-thermally.
Even though non-thermal and freeze-in DM produc-
tion can, in principle, allow for majoron masses up to
ma ∼100 MeV, the allowed region in Fig. 1 reaches only
up tom a ≃1 MeV. This is a consequence of the in-
terplay between leptogenesis, DM production and DM
decay constraints: for majorons above the MeV scale,
the decay channela→e +e− opens, providing stringent
constraints and since in a post-inflationary scenario, the
scalef a needs to be relatively small to evade DM overpro-
duction and, together with the fact thatM N1 is bounded
from below by leptogenesis, means that theg ae coupling
cannot be arbitrarily small. In fact, we find that in none
of the points of our numerical scan isg ae below the cur-
rent observational constraints, effectively excluding ma-
joron DM withm a >2m e. This implies that, unfortu-
nately, neutrino telescopes (whose bounds are depicted
in gray in Fig. 1) will not be able to probe our majoron
setup, as they can only probe DM decays to neutrinos
form a ≳few MeV.
Lastly, we show in Fig. 1 as dashed black lines the re-
gion that will be probed in the future, considering the
forecasted sensitivities of the observatories outlined in
Sec. III A. As just discussed, upcoming neutrino obser-
vatories, such as JUNO and HyperK, will not be able to
access the relevant parameter space. On the other hand,
apart from neutrinos, a sub-MeV majoron can only de-
cay to a pair of photons. Consequently, the only observa-
tional facilities that will be able to probe the parameter
space will be X-ray/gamma-ray observatories. In par-
ticular, as pointed out in sec. III A, we have included
forecasts from a possible THESEUS mission [87] and the
Gamma-TPC telescope concept [88]. The dashed black
line in Fig. 1 shows the region that these two proposals
will be able to cover. In fact, we find that the improve-
ment can only occur form a ∼0.1−1 MeV, in which
Gamma-TPC dominates the sensitivity. Unfortunately,
THESEUS will have little to no impact due to it being
sensitive to lighter majorons (m a ∼1−100 keV) and the
majoron-photon coupling scaling asg aγ ∝m 2
a for masses
belowm e.
B. Pre-inflationary
As discussed in Sec. III B, the pre-inflationary scenario
differs from its post-inflationary counterpart by the ab-
sence of DM production from topological defects, where
the total non-thermal contribution arises from misalign-
ment with the initial misalignment angleθ i being a free
parameter|θ i| ∈[0, π]. In particular, since now it is pos-
sible to have|θ i| ≪1, the target DM parameter space
can be opened to higherf a. In particular, as a refer-
ence, we consider values|θ i| ∈[10 −3,1], and the region
in which misalignment can be made compatible with the
total DM abundance is shown as the shaded red region
in Fig. 2.
Due to the higherf a values that are now allowed (pro-
vided that|θ i| ≪1) there is now a sizable window of pa-
rameter space in which 1F leptogenesis can be made com-
patible with DM production, which we show with a gray

9
line. Similarly, higherf a values also mean longer-lived
majorons, opening parameter space form a ≥1 MeV for
fa ≳10 11 GeV, where bounds on the decaya→e +e−
can be evaded in the three-flavoured regime of leptoge-
nesis. This is not the case in the one-flavoured regime,
which remains compatible only with sub-MeV majorons
(unless|θ i| ≪10 −3). This is due to the heavier RHN
masses required in this scenario for leptogenesis, contrary
to the fully-flavoured regime. In fact, since majoron cou-
plings to charged fermions scale withM N for a fixedf a
(see App. A), larger values off a are needed to evade
thea→e +e− bound and open up parameter space for
ma >MeV.
Despite the allowed parameter space, up tom a ≃
100 MeV, the associatedf a values are slightly above what
current or future neutrino telescopes can probe, again un-
derscoring how powerful the constraints on visible DM
decays are, despite arising at the loop level for the ma-
joron.
The future prospects of probing the allowed window
are shown as black dashed lines in Fig. 2. Since heav-
ier masses are now allowed, the Gamma-TPC proposal
can constrain more parameter space, as its sensitivity
extends up tom a ∼10 MeV. As it can be observed
from Fig. 2, it will be able to exclude majorons above
a few MeV, except for a small window corresponding to
ma ∼ O(10−100 MeV) that is, unfortunately, just be-
yond the sensitivity of next-generation neutrino observa-
tories.
V. Conclusions
The majoron offers one of the most minimal frameworks
that can simultaneously and naturally explain the origin
of neutrino masses, the abundance of dark matter (DM),
and the matter-antimatter asymmetry via thermal lep-
togenesis. In this work, we have investigated this con-
nection in the singlet majoron model, focusing on the re-
gion in which DM is produced without thermalising the
majoron sector, and the baryon asymmetry is generated
through standard high-scale thermal leptogenesis.
The central point of our analysis is that these require-
ments are not independent. Successful thermal leptogen-
esis fixes, or at least strongly constrains, the right-handed
neutrino mass scale. The same scale controls the irre-
ducible freeze-in production of majorons and enters the
loop-induced couplings responsible for visible DM decays.
As a result, imposing leptogenesis removes otherwise flat
directions in the majoron parameter space and turns the
relic-density and decay constraints into predictive bounds
in the (m a, f a) plane. We have quantified this interplay
through a scan of the seesaw parameter space compatible
with neutrino data and successful leptogenesis, including
both the one-flavour and fully flavoured regimes.
The main results, summarised in Figs. 1 and 2 for
the post- and pre-inflationary scenarios, cover the most
prominent parameter space of this minimal model. In the
post-inflationary case, the combination of misalignment
production, the irreducible freeze-in abundance, warm-
DM limits, and visible-decay constraints selects a rela-
tively narrow window. In particular, the viable region is
restricted to sub-MeV majoron masses, and scales above
fa ≳10 8 GeV, with the opening of thea→e +e− chan-
nel excluding heavier DM in our scan. The remaining
uncertainty is dominated by the contribution from the
string network associated with U(1)B−L breaking, whose
normalization is still subject to the usual uncertainties in
global-string simulations.
In the pre-inflationary case, the initial misalignment
angle becomes a free parameter. This allows larger val-
ues off a and correspondingly longer majoron lifetimes,
opening viable parameter space up to masses of order
100 MeV. Nevertheless, visible decay searches remain
highly constraining, even though the relevant couplings
arise only at loop level. In both cosmological histories,
the viable cosmological window is therefore shaped by
a non-trivial balance between cold non-thermal produc-
tion, warm freeze-in production, successful leptogenesis,
and indirect-detection limits.
Our results also clarify the experimental prospects.
Neutrino telescopes probe majoron decays directly
through the tree-level coupling to neutrinos, but the re-
gion compatible with thermal leptogenesis and DM sta-
bility largely lies outside their current and near-future
reach. Instead, the most promising improvements arise
fromX- and gamma-ray searches for visible decays, es-
pecially in the MeV region, where projections of the
Gamma-TPC [88] concept can test part of the remain-
ing parameter space. By contrast, missions target-
ing lighter keV-scale photons are less effective as the
majoron-photon coupling is strongly suppressed when
ma ≲100 keV.
Overall, the type-I majoron model remains a viable
and predictive framework for linking neutrino masses,
DM, and the baryon asymmetry. The surviving parame-
ter space is limited but well motivated, and its further ex-
ploration will require both improved indirect searches for
decaying DM and a sharper understanding of the cosmo-
logical history of the broken U(1) B−L symmetry, in par-
ticular the role of string radiation in the post-inflationary
scenario.
An intriguing complementary probe is the measure-
ment of the stochastic gravitational-wave background
produced along the DM and asymmetry. Although
gravitational-wave detectors cannot yet reach the signals
expected from leptogenesis directly (see Appendix F and
references therein), the cosmic string network associated
with the breaking of the U(1) B−L symmetry could yield
an observable background for appropriate values of the
breaking scale (see e.g. [148, 149]), offering a promising
complementary window into the high-scale physics of this
hermetic yet rich model.

10
Note added
During the very last stage of writing of this manuscript,
Ref. [62] appeared, addressing the same scenario with
a complementary analysis. Our work provides an inde-
pendent assessment of the viable parameter space, with
a detailed scan of the seesaw parameters and a unified
treatment of relic-density, leptogenesis, warm-DM, and
decay constraints.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank K. Chathirathas, M. Kaltschmidt,
Y. F. Perez-Gonzalez, I. Mart´ ınez Soler and J. Turner
for useful discussions and comments that improved the
work. The work of DNT was supported by the Span-
ish MIU through the National Program FPU (grant
number FPU20/05333) and by the Alexander von Hum-
boldt Foundation. This article is based upon work from
COST Action COSMIC WISPers CA21106, supported
by COST (European Cooperation in Science and Tech-
nology).
A. Majoron Couplings
In this appendix, we collect the majoron couplings used to recast ALP constraints onto the majoron parameter space.
The majoron couples at tree level only to neutral leptons, whereas its interactions with charged fermions and gauge
bosons are generated radiatively. The leading couplings relevant for our phenomenological analysis, namely those to
leptons, nucleons, and photons, are given by [30]
La−SM =ia
1
2 ¯νmν
fa
γ5ν+ ¯ℓ
 
gS
ℓ +g P γ5

ℓ+ ¯ngnγ5n+ ¯pgpγ5p− 1
4 gaγγ F ˜F

,(A1)
with
gS
αβ = 1
16π2v2fa
h
(mℓα −m ℓβ)(MDM †
D)αβ
i
,(A2)
gP
αβ = 1
16π2v2fa
h
mℓα δαβ Tr
n
MDM †
D
o
−(m ℓα +m ℓβ)(MDM †
D)αβ
i
,(A3)
gp = −1.3mp
16π2fa
Tr
n
MDM †
D
o
v2 , g n = 1.24mn
16π2fa
Tr
n
MDM †
D
o
v2 ,(A4)
gaγγ = αem
8π3v2fa

X
l
(MDM †
D)ll h
 m2
a
4m2
l

+ Tr(MDM †
D)
X
f
N f
c Q2
f T f
3 h
 
m2
a
4m2
f
!
 ,(A5)
wherelruns over leptons,fover all fermions,N u,d
c = 3,T u
3 = 1
2 =−T d,l
3 ,{Q l, Qd, Qu}={−1,− 1
3 ,+ 2
3 }, and
h(x)≡ − 1
4x

log
h
1−2x+ 2
p
x(x−1)
i2
−1 =



x
3 + 8x2
45 + 4x3
35 +O(x 4), x→0,
−1 + (π+ilog 4x) 2
4x +O(x −2), x→ ∞.
(A6)
The proportionality of the majoron-fermions coupling to their masses is guaranteed by its ALP (pNGB) nature, which
becomes manifest in the derivative basis (see e.g. Ref. [150] for a pedagogical derivation). For a majoron lighter than
a MeV,m a ≪MeV, the photon coupling simplifies to
gaγγ ≈ − αem m2
a
12π
X
f
N f
c Q2
f
gaf f
m3
f
,(A7)
wherefruns over all fermions,Q f is their electric charge,N f
c is the number of colours,g af f is the diagonal component
ofg S
αβ for each fermion. Notice that in this limit, the coupling to photons becomes proportional tom 2
a, and thus
vanishes in the massless limit.

11
Schematically, ignoring particle generation indices, form a ≪MeV, the scaling of the majoron’s couplings goes as
La−SM ∼ia

gaνmν ¯νν+gaℓmℓ¯ℓℓ− 1
4 gaγF ˜F

,(A8)
gaν ∼ 1
fa
, g aℓ ∼ 1
16π2
mν
v2
MN
fa
, g aγ ∼ αem
64π3
mν
v2
MN
fa
 m2
a
m2e

,(A9)
where to recast in terms of the seesaw formula, we have to add the Majorana YukawaY N =M N /fa. Analogous
scaling holds for quarks, nucleons, and gluons.
Due to the seesaw relation between the parameters, there are several regimes in which different effective couplings
dominate. For instance, takingM N /fa = 1, the majoron coupling to neutrinos dominates over the electron coupling
wheng aνmν ≳g aℓme, which gives
fa ≲ 16π2v2
me
≈2×10 10 GeV,(A10)
where,v= 246 GeV. An analogous discussion holds for photons, and the coupling to neutrinos dominates when The
neutrino coupling dominates over the photon one wheng aνmν ≳g aγ, giving
fa ≲ 64π3
αem
v2m2
e
m2a
≈4×10 11 GeV×
100 keV
ma
2
.(A11)
Therefore, the parameter space shown in the main text lives in the region where a non-trivial interplay between the
strength of couplings occurs.
B. Casas-Ibarra Parametrisation
In order to efficiently scan the seesaw parameter space while correctly reproducing light neutrino masses and mixings,
as measured from neutrino oscillation data [66], we make use of the popular Casas-Ibarra parametrisation [147], in
which the Dirac Yukawa can be expressed as:
MD =i U PMNS
q
mdiag
ν RTp
MN (B1)
whereU PMNS is the usual active neutrino mixing matrix [151, 152],
UPMNS =


1 0 0
0c 23 s23
0−s 23 c23




c13 0s 13e−iδ
0 1 0
−s13eiδ 0c 13




c12 s12 0
−s12 c12 0
0 0 1




1 0 0
0e i α21
2 0
0 0e i α31
2

 ,(B2)
whilem diag
ν = diag(m 1, m2, m3) andM N are diagonal matrices of mass eigenstates for light neutrinos and RHN,
respectively. TheR-matrix is a complex 3×3 orthogonal matrix (i.e.RR T =R T R= 1), and can be parametrised
with 3 complex anglesω i =x i +iy i:
R=


1 0 0
0c ω1 sω1
0−s ω1 cω1




cω2 0s ω2
0 1 0
−sω2 0c ω2




cω3 sω3 0
−sω3 cω3 0
0 0 1

 ,(B3)
where we have been using the notationc ω = cosω,s ω = sinω,c ij = cosθ ij ands ij = sinθ ij. The total amount of
free parameters that we will consider for all of our scans is the following:U PMNS has 3 real mixing anglesθ ij (which
we will fix to their best-fit values [66]) and three possible CP-violating phases (one Dirac phase,δ, and possibly two
extra Majorana phasesα 21 andα 31). As form diag
ν , only the lightest neutrino mass eigenstate is free, as the other two
are constrained by the measured mass splittings (∆m 2
21 and ∆m2
31). TheR-matrix has 6 real free parameters and
the RHN masses constitute an additional 3 parameters, but, as we have argued in the main text, we will fix the RHN
mass hierarchy, such that onlyM N1 is a free parameter.
All in all, our seesaw sector has 11 free parameters,
P≡ {m 1, δ, α21, α31, x1,2,3, y1,2,3, MN1 },(B4)

12
over which we will scan in order to gauge which parameter regions are compatible with a successful thermal leptogenesis
and to predict both majoron couplings to SM particles (see App. A) and the majoron abundances produced via freeze-
in (10).
Some key quantities for our analysis can be expressed as a function of this parametrisation. For example, the
effective neutrino masses ˜mi, which determine the rate of RHN decays for leptogenesis, can be expressed as:
˜mi ≡ (M †
DMD)ii
MNi
=
3X
j=1
mj|Rij|2 .(B5)
Similarly, the matrix determining the structure of the majoron couplings to SM fermions and gauge bosons (see
App. A), is given by:

MDM †
D

vf =U PMNS
s
mdiag
ν
v RT MN
fa
R∗
s
mdiag
ν
v U †
PMNS ,(B6)
which explicitly showcases the parametric scaling of the loop-level majoron couplings with the RHN yukawasY N ≡√
2MN
fa
.
C. Majoron Thermalisation and Freeze-in
In this appendix, we analyse the possible thermalisation channels of the majoron with the SM thermal bath. If
the majoron sector thermalises, majoron-mediated scatterings can keep the right-handed neutrinos in equilibrium for
longer and thereby modify the standard high-scale thermal-leptogenesis dynamics [56–59]. A thermalised majoron
decouples while relativistic and therefore behaves as a hot relic; it cannot constitute the dominant DM component
in the mass range of interest, since it would excessively suppress the formation of small-scale cosmological structure.
Only very light majorons are compatible with this cosmological history, where non-thermal DM mechanisms set the
relic abundance. In this work, we have studied the region that opens up if the majoron is never in thermal equilibrium
with the SM.
Direct couplings between the majoron and SM fields arise only after integrating out the RH neutrinos. For
instance, the coupling to light neutrinos can be understood as descending from the higher-dimensional operator
a( Lc
L ˜H ∗)( ˜H †LL). Similarly, the couplings to charged fermions, which are generated at one loop, also arise from
operators involving Higgs insertions. As a consequence, the effective direct couplings of the majoron to SM fermions
are only generated after electroweak symmetry breaking.
This observation is particularly relevant for the thermal history of the majoron. The usual SM thermalisation
channels, such as two-to-two scatterings, inverse decays, and Primakoff processes, become active only once the Higgs
acquires a non-zero vev. For axions and generic ALPs, these processes have been widely studied in the literature,
see e.g. [153, 154]. Making use of the results of Ref. [154], after rescaling the fermion and gauge-boson couplings by
the naive estimates in Eq. (A9), one finds that the corresponding majoron interaction rates are far too suppressed
to bring the majoron into thermal equilibrium with the SM bath. Inverse decays are also negligible in the high-scale
majoron regime, for instance, fora→ννprocesses see Ref. [77].
Having argued that, in high-scale majoron models, the angular mode cannot thermalise through its direct SM
interactions, we now turn to the seesaw sector. In the remainder of this appendix, we derive the conditions under
which interactions with the RH neutrinos can bring the majoron into thermal equilibrium. We then compute the
corresponding irreducible freeze-in contributions to the majoron abundance in the regime where thermalisation is not
reached.
The contribution from the processesL αH→aN i,HN i →aL α,L αNi →aH, andN iNi →aacan be written in
terms of the reaction densities
γLH,HN,LN
i (T) = T
64π4
Z ∞
M 2
i
ds √sbσLH,HN,LN
i (s)K 1
 √s
T

,(C1)
and
γN N
i (T) = T
64π4
Z ∞
4M 2
i
ds √sbσN N
i (s)K 1
 √s
T

.(C2)
For theLHchannel, where the initial states are massless, the reduced cross section is
bσLH
i (s) = 2s σLH
i (s).(C3)

13
Summing over lepton flavours, the cross section is
σLH
i (s) =
X
α
σαi(LαH→aN i) = 2 (Y †
DYD)ii
32π
M2
i
f2a
(s−M 2
Ni)3
s2
(s−M 2
Ni)2 +M 2
NiΓ2
i
 ≃2 (Y †
DYD)ii
32πf 2a
xi −1
x2
i
,(C4)
wherex i ≡s/M 2
Ni. Here, the factor of 2 accounts for the electroweak degrees of freedom. The width entering the
propagator can be estimated from the standard RH-neutrino decay rate,
Γi ≃Γ(N i →LH) = Mi
8π (Y †
DYD)ii ≃ Mi
8π
mνMi
v2 ,(C5)
where in the last step we used the seesaw scaling (Y †
DYD)ii ∼m νMi/v2. Notice how in the last equality of Eq. C4 we
have dropped the decay width, since as long as Γ i/MNi ≪1 (which is always the case for our parameter space), its
presence is numerically irrelevant.
The same coupling combination controls the crossed processesHN i →aL α andL αNi →aH.
Summing over lepton flavours, and using the same electroweak multiplicity convention as above, one obtains
σLN
i (s) =
X
α
σαi(LαNi →Ha) = 2 (Y †
DYD)ii
16πf 2a
1 +x i(logx i −1)
(xi −1) 2 ,(C6)
σHN
i (s) =
X
α
σαi(HN i →L αa) = 2(Y †
DYD)ii
16πf 2a
xi logx i
(xi −1) 2 ,withx i ≡ s
M2
Ni
.(C7)
with the corresponding reduced cross sections given by:
bσLN/HN
i (s) = 2(s−M 2
Ni)σLN/HN
i (s) (C8)
Thet/u-channel processN iNi →aais parametrically different, since it is controlled directly by the majoron
coupling to RH neutrinos and does not depend on the Dirac Yukawa coupling. The corresponding cross section is
σN N
i (s)≡σ N N
ii→aa(s) = M4
i
32πf 4a
1
s β2
i (s)
1
2 log
1 +β i(s)
1−β i(s)

−β i(s)

, β i(s) =
r
1− 4M2
i
s .(C9)
The reduced cross section is therefore
bσN N
i (s) = 2s β2
i (s)σ N N
i (s) = M4
i
16πf 4a
1
2 log
1 +β i(s)
1−β i(s)

−β i(s)

.(C10)
In addition, there can bes-channel diagrams mediated by the radial modeρ. We neglect these contributions in
the regime considered here. Indeed, we assume that the majoron never thermalises, which requires avoiding efficient
production of the radial sector. Sincem ρ ∼f a, this amounts to working in a regime where the relevant temperatures
are below the radial threshold, or where the radial mode is otherwise not populated. Under this assumption, the
dominant thermal production channels areLH→N ia,HN i →aL,LN i →aH, andN iNi →aa. All in all, to
quantify whether these interactions are efficient, we compare their rate with the Hubble expansion. We define the
majoron interaction rate as the production rate normalised to the equilibrium number density of majorons,
Γ(P)
a (T)≡N (P)
a
γP
i (T)
neq
a (T) ,(C11)
whereγ P
i is the reaction density for the processP=LH, HN, LN, N N, andN (P)
a denotes the number of majorons
produced in each reaction. For example,N (N N)
a = 2 forN iNi →aa, whileN (LH)
a =N (HN)
a =N (LN)
a = 1.
Thermalisation is expected whenever Γ a(T)/H(T)≳1, for some range of temperatures.
In Fig. 3 (left) we show the different interaction rates normalised to the Hubble rate, as a function ofz=M N /T. We
observe that only the channelN iNi →aacan thermalise the majoron for sufficiently large Majorana Yukawa coupling,
YN ≳0.1. The channels involving the Dirac Yukawa interaction are instead intrinsically more suppressed, as their
size is tied to the light-neutrino masses through the seesaw relation. By contrast, production throughN iNi →aa
is controlled directly by the Majorana Yukawa couplingY N, and therefore does not inherit this additional seesaw
suppression. However, the rate of this process scales asY 4
N. As a result, even a moderate suppression of the Majorana
Yukawa coupling rapidly reduces its efficiency, preventing the majoron from reaching thermal equilibrium.

14
10−2 10−1 100 101 102
z = MN /T
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
□a/H
□a/H = 1
HL → N a
LαNi → H a
H Ni → Lαa
NiNi → aa
MN /fa = 10 −2 , ˜mν = 0.05 eV
MN /fa = 10 −1 , ˜mν = 0.1 eV
no-thermal
N
1
thermal N1
10−5 10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1 100
˜m1 [eV]
107
108
109
1010
1011
1012
1013
1014
1015
M1 [GeV]
M1 ≥
√
4π fa
Ω
2−a
a
= 0
.1 Ω
1−a
a
Ω
1−a
a
= 0
.1 Ω
2−a
a
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
103
104
105
Ω2−a
a /Ω1−a
a
Figure 3. Thermalisation and freeze-in production of majorons from the seesaw sector.Left:interaction rates normalised to
the Hubble expansion rate as a function ofz=M N /T, for the channelsHL→N a,N N→aa, and the crossed processes
HN→aL,LN→aH. The dotted and solid lines represent the two different benchmarks shown in the legend.Right:relative
importance of theN N→aaandHL→N aproduction mechanisms in the (em 1, M1) plane, forf a = 1013 GeV. The colour scale
shows Ω2−a
a /Ω1−a
a , while the black contours indicate where each contribution accounts for 10% of the observed DM abundance.
The green and yellow contours delimit the regions whereN 1 is thermally populated and where one-flavour thermal leptogenesis
can be realised, respectively. The grey region corresponds to non-perturbative Majorana Yukawa coupling,M 1 ≥
√
4π fa.
Even if these processes cannot thermalise the majoron, they can generate an irreducible population of majorons
via freeze-in. To compute the relic abundance, we can integrate the Boltzmann equation following Ref. [121], finding:
Ω2−a
DM h2 ≃0.12
 ma
100 keV
3.4×10 10 GeV
fa
4 3X
i=1
 MNi
1.6×10 8 GeV
3
,(C12)
Ω1−a
DM h2 ≃0.12
 ma
100 keV
3.4×10 10 GeV
fa
2 3X
i=1
 ˜mi
0.1 eV
 MNi
6.2×10 8 GeV
2
,(C13)
where we have used the common definition in the leptogenesis literature (Y †
DYD)ii ≡ 2
v2 ˜miMNi.
In Fig. 3 (right), we show the regions of parameter space in which production throughN iNi →aaand through
LH→aN i together with its crossed processes is most relevant. We also indicate the region where one-flavour thermal
leptogenesis can successfully take place, following Ref. [63]. As expected from the parametric dependence of the rates,
theHL→aN i channel becomes comparatively more important when the Majorana Yukawa coupling is small andem1
is large, since in this regime the purely Majorana processN iNi →aais suppressed while the Dirac-Yukawa-induced
channels are enhanced.
D. Treatment of Leptogenesis
We sketch here the procedure for scanning the seesaw parameter space compatible with the correct BAU. As stated
in the main text, we consider leptogenesis either in the one-flavour (1F) approximation or in the fully-flavoured (3F)
regime.
One-flavour approximation.In this scenario, we closely follow Ref [63], in which useful and easily-applicable
results were presented after a careful evaluation of the Boltzmann equations governing leptogenesis. In particular,
we make use of the fact that, when the RHN spectrum is hierarchical, the baryon-to-photon ratio can be expressed
as [63]:
ηB =−9.73×10 −3ϵN1 η ,(D1)

15
whereϵ N1 is the CP-asymmetry in the decays of the lightest RHN,N 1, andηis an efficiency factor. The former is
given by
ϵN1 = 1
4πv2
X
j̸=1
Im

M †
DMD
2
j1


M †
DMD

11
f
 
M2
Nj
M2
N1
!
(D2)
withf(x) being a loop function defined in Eq. (31) of Ref. [63]. Provided thatM N1 ≪10 14 GeV (as it is the case in
our analysis), the efficiency only depends on the quantity ˜m1, defined as:
˜m1 =

M †
DMD

11
MN1
.(D3)
The key observation is that, for a hierarchical RHN mass spectrum, the CP-asymmetry showcases the simple
scalingϵ N1 ∝M N1. Bearing this in mind, we perform our scan in the following way: we randomly scan in the
space ofP≡ {m 1, δ, α21, α31, x1,2,3, y1,2,3, MN1 }keeping the RHN hierarchies fixed toM N3 /MN2 =M N2 /MN1 = 2.
From the Casas-Ibarra parametrisation (see App. B), it is then possible to compute both ˜m 1 (or, equivalently,
η) andϵ N1. Sinceϵ N1 is the only quantity scaling withM N1, it is straightforward to re-scaleM N1 in order
to get the correct value forη B through Eq. (D1), provided thatϵ N1 has the correct sign. Using this strategy, it
is easy to obtain a large amount of points compatible with the BAU without the use of dedicated sampling algorithms.
Fully-flavoured regime. In this scenario, the valuation of the BAU from the seesaw parameter space is a
much more involved task. Indeed, this regime requires treating the lepton asymmetry as a matrix in flavour space,
whose evolution captures the flavour-dependent wash-out and RHN decays, while also interpolating between the
different flavoured regimes (which depend on the efficiency of the charged lepton Yukawa interactions) [141, 155].
ForM N1 ≪10 9 GeV, we should expect both theτandµYukawa interactions to be highly efficient, thus completely
decohering the three flavours, in which case the density matrix equations become diagonal, effectively reducing to
three Boltzmann equations for three flavoured CP asymmetries that evolve independently. However, as shown in
Ref. [141], even in this region of parameter space, there exist points in which the Boltzmann equations do not capture
the full behaviour of the density matrix equations. Consequently, we always solve the density matrix equations for
a single decaying RHN of massM N1 using the publicly availableULYSSEScode [142, 143] and its interface with
MultiNest[144–146], which allows for an easy (although expensive) exploration of the seesaw parameter space that
is compatible with the correct value of the BAU.
In general, lowering the scale of thermal leptogenesis necessitates stronger RHN interactions with respect to the
Hubble rate, entering the so-calledstrong wash-outregime. In such a regime, one must be careful, as the rather
large Yukawa couplings that are needed, together with the fact that the Casas-Ibarra parametrisation in Eq. (B1) is
defined to automatically reproduce the light neutrino mass matrix, can easily lead to accepting parameter points in
which the individual contributions of each RHN tom ν are orders of magnitude above the scale of neutrino masses but
conspire to cancel to give the correct result. In such cases, this fine-tuned cancellation is not perturbatively stable, and
typically, including e.g. the 1-loop correction, spoils the fine-tuning and yields catastrophically large neutrino masses.
Similarly, the overall size of the Yukawa couplings suggests that the tree-level implementation of the Casas-Ibarra
parametrisation (B1) should be extended to include the one-loop contribution tom ν [156]. This is achieved by making
the following substitution in Eq. (B1):
MN − →

M −1
N − MN
16π2v2


log

M 2
N
m2
H


M 2
N
m2
H

−1
+ 3
log

M 2
N
m2
Z


M 2
N
m2
Z

−1




−1
(D4)
which is straightforward given thatM N is diagonal.
We perform both the 1F and 3F analysis employing this modified parametrisation and, additionally, we asses
how fine-tuned are the contributions tom ν with a similar procedure as in Ref. [141]: for eachP(see App. B), we
compute the 1-loop correction to the neutrino mass matrix,m 1−loop
ν , perform a singular value decomposition (SVD)
and compare its singular values to those of the fullm ν (which simply correspond to the three neutrino massesm 1,2,3).
F.T.≡
P3
i=1 SVD[m1−loop
ν ]P3
i=1 SVD[mν]
=
P3
i=1 SVD[m1−loop
ν ]P3
i=1 mi
(D5)

16
In the presence of large cancellations induced by the Casas-Ibarra parametrisation, the singular values of just the
1-loop part are much larger thanm 1,2,3, yielding F.T.≫1. On the contrary, when there are no sizable cancellations
withinm ν, the loop contribution will be smaller than the total, simply by virtue of the 1/16π 2 suppression. As such,
after our initial scan, we will only keepP-points which satisfy F.T. <0.2.
E. Details of the Analysis
We provide here details on how we define the allowed green region in Figs. 1 and 2. As advertised in the text,
the starting point is a scan of the seesaw parameter space that is compatible with leptogenesis, as presented in
App. D. This scan consists on a set of pointsP≡ {m 1, δ, α21, α31, x1,2,3, y1,2,3, MN1 }which we can use to predict
the structure of majoron couplings and the freeze-in abundance. The goal is to employ this scan to chart the region
ofm a −f a parameter space in which, if leptogenesis is successful, the majoron reproduces the DM abundance and
survives observational bounds on decaying DM. Our analysis is carried in the following steps.
For eachP-point:
1. In order to determine them a −f a region in which the correct DM abundance can be generated, one needs to
take into account both the non-thermal contribution (misalignment and string radiation, with the latter only
being present in the post-inflationary scenario) and the contribution from freeze-in. The former only depends
onm a andf a (onceθ i has been fixed), while the latter additionally depends on the RHN mass scale and on
˜mi, which are specified by the correspondingP-point. Given this input, now it is possible to compute the total
ΩDMh2 as a function of onlym a andf a. As such, one can solve the following equation:
Ωnon−th
DM h2 + Ωfi
DMh2 = 0.12,(E1)
where the contributions from misalignment and freeze-in can be found in Eqs. (9, 10), respectively. The above
equation can be rewritten in a more explicit fashion:
 fa
fnon−th(ma)
2
+
 fsingle−a(ma)
fa
2
+
 fdouble−a(ma)
fa
4
= 1,(E2)
wheref non−th is defined as thef a value, for a givenm a, in which the total DM abundance is generated via
non-thermal production. In the case that non-thermal production is exclusively given by misalignment, the
expression forf non−th can be easily extracted from Eq. (9):
fnon−th(ma)≃ 3.4×10 10 GeV
θi
100 keV
ma
1/4
,(E3)
whereasf single−a andf double−a are defined similarly tof non−th, but for the single and double majoron freeze-in
channels, respectively. They can be directly extracted from Eq. (10)
fsingle−a(ma) = 3.4×10 10 GeV
 ma
100 keV
1/2
 3X
i=1
 MNi
2.2×10 9 GeV
2 ˜mi
0.1 eV
!1/2
fdouble−a(ma) = 3.4×10 10 GeV
 ma
100 keV
1/4
 3X
i=1
 MNi
1.6×10 8 GeV
3!1/4
.
(E4)
Eq. (E2) is a polynomial equation of third degree inf 2
a, which can be solved using Cardano’s method [157].
Whenever this polynomial has real solutions forf 2
a, it has two positive roots which correspond to two possible
values off a which, for a givenm a, can accommodate the correct DM abundance: the largestf a value corresponds
to dominant non-thermal production, whereas the smallest root is a solution in which freeze-in dominates.
Furthermore, there will be somem a value above which the correspondingf non−th,f single−a, andf double−a
render Eq. (E2) with no real solutions, in which case non-thermal production along with freeze-in overproduce
DM∀f a. All in all, Eq. (E2) defines a trajectory inm a −f a along which the majoron constitutes the total of
the DM density.

17
2. Over this trajectory, it is now consistent to apply observational bounds on decaying DM, as discussed in Sec. III A.
In particular, the most relevant bounds we will consider are those stemming from visible majoron decays, mainly
to photons, electrons, and muons. Even though we include decays to heavier particles, such asτorb-quarks,
these do not play any role in our target parameter space, as we find no viable majorons above the muon mass.
These visible decays constrain the couplings presented in Eqs. A1 to A5. These can be predicted for each
P-point, up to an overall 1/f a factor. It is therefore possible to recast the bounds ong aℓ andg aγγ into a bound
onf a, which we will dubf vis−decay by combining all the different visible channels. In practice,f vis−decay is
defined as:
fvis−decay(ma) =f 0
vuutX
ℓ
 gaℓ|fa=f0
gbound
aℓ (ma)
2
+
 
gaγγ |fa=f0
(ma)
gboundaγγ (ma)
!2
(E5)
wheref 0 is an arbitrary anchor value off a, which for example we choosef 0 = 1010 GeV. Them a-dependent
bounds on the couplings are taken from the references outlined in Sec. III A.
In addition to these bounds on visible DM decays, we include a bound on the lifetimeτ a >250 Gyr of the
majoron, as obtained by a combination of CMB+LSS data [108]. This bound turns out to only be relevant in
a region of our parameter space in which the total majoron decay width is dominated by the neutrino channel
a→νν. As such, the majoron lifetime can be easily computed from Eq. (7), with the lightest neutrino mass
taken fromP. This yields an additional lower bound onf a, which we will dubf lifetime. Formally, it is defined
as:
flifetime(ma) = 2.5×10 8 GeV
 ma
100 keV
1/2
 P3
i=1 m2
i
2.5×10 −3 eV2
!
(E6)
Lastly, the combined lower bound onf a obtained from DM decays is obtained by summing in quadrature
fvis−decay andf lifetime.
fDM−decay(ma) =
q
(fvis−decay(ma))2 + (flifetime(ma))2 (E7)
3. We then remove all points in them a −f a trajectory reproducing the DM abundance that do not satisfy the
conditionf a < f DM−decay.
4. For the region corresponding tom a <5 keV, we apply mixed wDM bounds, and remove points in the trajectory
for which the frozen-in contribution is above the bounds mentioned in Sec. III A.
We repeat this procedure for allP-points and we marginalize over them, thus charting the biggest region ofm a −f a
space in which both thermal leptogenesis is successful and the majoron can constitute the total DM abundance of
the Universe, while surviving all astrophysical and cosmological constraints, which we dub theMajoron Cosmological
Window. The result is shown as the shaded green region in both Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.
F. Gravitational Waves from Leptogenesis
Besides conventional direct probes of majoron physics, one could hope to get complementary information directly
from the neutrino sector. However, within Type-I seesaw scenarios, any hope for direct observation of neutrino
physics is hopeless. Gravitational waves (GWs) offer an exquisite complementary opportunity. The measurements of
LIGO and VIRGO [158] have opened a new era for particle physics, with the possibility to directly access the early
epochs dynamics of ultra-heavy particles, including RHNs. In fact, the Planck-suppressed couplings of GWs allow
for the information to survive over a long time and be probed today. Several works have discussed the matter in
the literature [159–161]. We report here some of the main findings, and most importantly, infer consequences and
complementary avenues for Majoron physics.
A thermal bath of heavy RHNs, followed by their decay, can affect GW signals mainly in two ways:
1. GWs can be emitted via bremsstrahlung directly during the decay of the RHN. The peak and magnitude of the
signal are directly related to the mass and Yukawa of the lightest RHN.

18
Figure 4. Parameter space available (within the black contour) for thermal leptogenesis in relation to the peak and abundance
of the GWs spectrum.
2. If the RHN does not decay instantaneously, they can induce an early matter-dominated epoch, thus affecting
the SM prediction for the stochastic cosmic gravitational microwave background (CGMB). The modification
thus still bears information on the lightest RHN parameters.
As noted in Ref. [161], the simultaneous measurement of both signals would unambiguously point to this scenario and
allow for measuringY≡
q
(YDY †
D)11 andM N1. From the direct measurement of the peak position and magnitude,
(fpeak
gw , h2Ωgw(fpeak
gw )) of the GWs spectrum from RHNs decay, one can estimate [161]
MN1 ≈10 15 GeV×
"
h2Ωgw(fpeak
gw )
2.8×10 −16
#1/2
, Y≈10 −4 ×
"
h2Ωgw(fpeak
gw )
2.8×10 −16
#1/4
×
"
7.9×10 12 Hz
fpeak
gw
#
.(F1)
The GW details of the peak are therefore in a one-to-one correspondence with the parameters defined in Eq. (D3)
since
˜m1 ≈3×10 −10 eV×
"
7.9×10 12 Hz
fpeak
gw
#2
.(F2)
The relation between the GWs parameters and the region of successful leptogenesis can be seen in Fig. 4. However, as
argued in Ref. [161], in the near future, it is therefore unlikely to be able to constrain leptogenesis. The measurements
of high-frequency GWs (fgw ≳10 kHz) are extremely challenging (see Ref. [162] for a review), and new technological
breakthroughs are needed to probe signals with such a small relic abundance.
[1] P. Minkowski,µ→eγat a Rate of One Out of10 9 Muon Decays?, Phys. Lett. B67(1977) 421–428.
[2] T. Yanagida,Horizontal Symmetry and Masses of Neutrinos, Prog. Theor. Phys.64(1980) 1103.
[3] M. Gell-Mann, P. Ramond, and R. Slansky,Complex Spinors and Unified Theories, Conf. Proc. C790927(1979)
315–321, [arXiv:1306.4669].
[4] R. N. Mohapatra and G. Senjanovic,Neutrino Mass and Spontaneous Parity Nonconservation, Phys. Rev. Lett.44
(1980) 912.
[5] J. Schechter and J. W. F. Valle,Neutrino Masses in SU(2) x U(1) Theories, Phys. Rev. D22(1980) 2227.
[6] S. Centelles Chuli´ a, A. Herrero-Brocal, and A. Vicente,The Type-I Seesaw family, JHEP07(2024) 060,
[arXiv:2404.15415].

19
[7] M. Fukugita and T. Yanagida,Baryogenesis Without Grand Unification, Phys. Lett. B174(1986) 45–47.
[8] L. Covi, E. Roulet, and F. Vissani,CP violating decays in leptogenesis scenarios, Phys. Lett. B384(1996) 169–174,
[hep-ph/9605319].
[9] L. Covi and E. Roulet,Baryogenesis from mixed particle decays, Phys. Lett. B399(1997) 113–118, [hep-ph/9611425].
[10] A. Pilaftsis,CP violation and baryogenesis due to heavy Majorana neutrinos, Phys. Rev. D56(1997) 5431–5451,
[hep-ph/9707235].
[11] W. Buchmuller and M. Plumacher,CP asymmetry in Majorana neutrino decays, Phys. Lett. B431(1998) 354–362,
[hep-ph/9710460].
[12] C. Albertuset. al.,WISPedia – the WISPs Encyclopedia,arXiv:2602.09089.
[13] A. Arzaet. al.,The COSMIC WISPers White Paper: The physics case for Weakly Interacting Slim Particles,
arXiv:2603.03433.
[14] Y. Chikashige, R. N. Mohapatra, and R. D. Peccei,Are There Real Goldstone Bosons Associated with Broken Lepton
Number?, Phys. Lett. B98(1981) 265–268.
[15] Y. Chikashige, R. N. Mohapatra, and R. D. Peccei,Spontaneously Broken Lepton Number and Cosmological Constraints
on the Neutrino Mass Spectrum, Phys. Rev. Lett.45(1980) 1926.
[16] J. Schechter and J. W. F. Valle,Neutrino Decay and Spontaneous Violation of Lepton Number, Phys. Rev. D25(1982)
774.
[17] G. B. Gelmini and M. Roncadelli,Left-Handed Neutrino Mass Scale and Spontaneously Broken Lepton Number, Phys.
Lett. B99(1981) 411–415.
[18] I. Z. Rothstein, K. S. Babu, and D. Seckel,Planck scale symmetry breaking and majoron physics, Nucl. Phys. B403
(1993) 725–748, [hep-ph/9301213].
[19] Y. Nomura, T. Watari, and T. Yanagida,Quintessence axion potential induced by electroweak instanton effects, Phys.
Lett. B484(2000) 103–111, [hep-ph/0004182].
[20] M. Frigerio, T. Hambye, and E. Masso,Sub-GeV dark matter as pseudo-Goldstone from the seesaw scale, Phys. Rev. X
1(2011) 021026, [arXiv:1107.4564].
[21] A. de Giorgi, L. Merlo, X. Ponce D´ ıaz, and S. Rigolin,The minimal massive Majoron Seesaw Model, JHEP03(2024)
094, [arXiv:2312.13417].
[22] A. Greljo, X. Ponce D´ ıaz, and A. E. Thomsen,Insights on the cosmic origin of matter from proton stability, JCAP11
(2025) 043, [arXiv:2505.18259].
[23] M. Berbig,About electroweak domain walls in Majoron models,arXiv:2506.02910.
[24] S. Weinberg,A New Light Boson?, Phys. Rev. Lett.40(1978) 223–226.
[25] F. Wilczek,Problem of StrongPandTInvariance in the Presence of Instantons, Phys. Rev. Lett.40(1978) 279–282.
[26] R. D. Peccei and H. R. Quinn,CP Conservation in the Presence of Instantons, Phys. Rev. Lett.38(1977) 1440–1443.
[27] R. D. Peccei and H. R. Quinn,Constraints Imposed by CP Conservation in the Presence of Instantons, Phys. Rev. D16
(1977) 1791–1797.
[28] E. K. Akhmedov, Z. G. Berezhiani, R. N. Mohapatra, and G. Senjanovic,Planck scale effects on the majoron, Phys.
Lett. B299(1993) 90–93, [hep-ph/9209285].
[29] J. M. Cline, K. Kainulainen, and K. A. Olive,Constraints on majoron models, neutrino masses and baryogenesis,
Astropart. Phys.1(1993) 387–398, [hep-ph/9304229].
[30] J. Heeck and H. H. Patel,Majoron at two loops, Phys. Rev. D100(2019), no. 9 095015, [arXiv:1909.02029].
[31] A. Herrero-Brocal and A. Vicente,The majoron coupling to charged leptons, JHEP01(2024) 078, [arXiv:2311.10145].
[32] L. Di Luzio, F. Mescia, E. Nardi, P. Panci, and R. Ziegler,Astrophobic Axions, Phys. Rev. Lett.120(2018), no. 26
261803, [arXiv:1712.04940].
[33] F. Bj¨ orkeroth, L. Di Luzio, F. Mescia, E. Nardi, P. Panci, and R. Ziegler,Axion-electron decoupling in nucleophobic
axion models, Phys. Rev. D101(2020), no. 3 035027, [arXiv:1907.06575].
[34] L. Di Luzio, F. Mescia, E. Nardi, and S. Okawa,Renormalization group effects in astrophobic axion models, Phys. Rev.
D106(2022), no. 5 055016, [arXiv:2205.15326].
[35] C. Garcia-Cely and J. Heeck,Neutrino Lines from Majoron Dark Matter, JHEP05(2017) 102, [arXiv:1701.07209].
[36] K. Akita and M. Niibo,Updated constraints and future prospects on majoron dark matter, JHEP07(2023) 132,
[arXiv:2304.04430].
[37] Q. Liang, X. Ponce D´ ıaz, and T. T. Yanagida,Axion Detection Experiments Can Probe Majoron Models, Phys. Rev.
Lett.134(2025), no. 15 151803, [arXiv:2406.19083].
[38] Y. Lu, Z. S. C. Picker, A. Kusenko, and T. T. Yanagida,Neutrino masses, matter-antimatter asymmetry, dark matter,
and supermassive black hole formation explained with Majorons, Phys. Rev. D113(2026), no. 1 015037,
[arXiv:2506.23401].
[39] A. G. Cohen and D. B. Kaplan,Thermodynamic Generation of the Baryon Asymmetry, Phys. Lett. B199(1987)
251–258.
[40] A. G. Cohen and D. B. Kaplan,SPONTANEOUS BARYOGENESIS, Nucl. Phys. B308(1988) 913–928.
[41] M. Ibe and K. Kaneta,Spontaneous thermal Leptogenesis via Majoron oscillation, Phys. Rev. D92(2015), no. 3
035019, [arXiv:1504.04125].
[42] E. J. Chun and T. H. Jung,Leptogenesis driven by a Majoron, Phys. Rev. D109(2024), no. 9 095004,
[arXiv:2311.09005].
[43] J. Wada,Majoron-driven leptogenesis in gauged U(1)Lµ-Lτmodel, Phys. Rev. D110(2024), no. 10 103510,
[arXiv:2404.10283].

20
[44] E. J. Chun, H. M. Lee, and J.-H. Song,Spontaneous leptogenesis in type I seesaw models, Phys. Rev. D113(2026),
no. 7 075021, [arXiv:2512.06413].
[45] H. Takahashi and J. Wada,Asymmetric Dark Matter from Low-Scale Spontaneous Leptogenesis,arXiv:2601.01849.
[46] I. Affleck and M. Dine,A New Mechanism for Baryogenesis, Nucl. Phys. B249(1985) 361–380.
[47] R. N. Mohapatra and N. Okada,Unified model for inflation, pseudo-Goldstone dark matter, neutrino mass, and
baryogenesis, Phys. Rev. D105(2022), no. 3 035024, [arXiv:2112.02069].
[48] M. Berbig,Type II Seesaw Leptogenesis in a Majoron background, JHEP04(2026) 116, [arXiv:2506.23290].
[49] E. K. Akhmedov, V. A. Rubakov, and A. Y. Smirnov,Baryogenesis via neutrino oscillations, Phys. Rev. Lett.81
(1998) 1359–1362, [hep-ph/9803255].
[50] T. Asaka and M. Shaposhnikov,TheνMSM, dark matter and baryon asymmetry of the universe, Phys. Lett. B620
(2005) 17–26, [hep-ph/0505013].
[51] A. Caputo, P. Hernandez, and N. Rius,Leptogenesis from oscillations and dark matter, Eur. Phys. J. C79(2019), no. 7
574, [arXiv:1807.03309].
[52] M. Escudero and S. J. Witte,The hubble tension as a hint of leptogenesis and neutrino mass generation, Eur. Phys. J.
C81(2021), no. 6 515, [arXiv:2103.03249].
[53] T. Brune,Leptogenesis in Majoron models without domain walls, Phys. Rev. D107(2023), no. 9 096023,
[arXiv:2201.12239].
[54] S. F. King, S. K. Manna, R. Roshan, and A. Sil,Leptogenesis with Majoron dark matter, Phys. Rev. D111(2025),
no. 9 095008, [arXiv:2412.14121].
[55] T. Brune,Leptogenesis in a Majoron plus triplet model, Phys. Rev. D111(2025), no. 11 115001, [arXiv:2501.11529].
[56] I. Vilja,Baryogenesis in the singlet majoron model, Phys. Lett. B324(1994) 197–200, [hep-ph/9312283].
[57] P.-H. Gu and U. Sarkar,Leptogenesis Bound on Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking of Global Lepton Number, Eur. Phys.
J. C71(2011) 1560, [arXiv:0909.5468].
[58] P.-H. Gu, E. Ma, and U. Sarkar,Pseudo-Majoron as Dark Matter, Phys. Lett. B690(2010) 145–148,
[arXiv:1004.1919].
[59] D. Aristizabal Sierra, M. Tortola, J. W. F. Valle, and A. Vicente,Leptogenesis with a dynamical seesaw scale, JCAP07
(2014) 052, [arXiv:1405.4706].
[60] M. Reig, J. W. F. Valle, and M. Yamada,Light majoron cold dark matter from topological defects and the formation of
boson stars, JCAP09(2019) 029, [arXiv:1905.01287].
[61] K. Akita, G. Lambiase, M. Niibo, and M. Yamaguchi,Neutrino lines from MeV dark matter annihilation and decay in
JUNO, JCAP10(2022) 097, [arXiv:2206.06755].
[62] K. Akita, K. Hamaguchi, H. Kitagawa, and T. Yokoyama,Minimal Majoron Dark Matter,arXiv:2605.12946.
[63] G. F. Giudice, A. Notari, M. Raidal, A. Riotto, and A. Strumia,Towards a complete theory of thermal leptogenesis in
the SM and MSSM, Nucl. Phys. B685(2004) 89–149, [hep-ph/0310123].
[64] J. Heeck and D. Teresi,Cold keV dark matter from decays and scatterings, Phys. Rev. D96(2017), no. 3 035018,
[arXiv:1706.09909].
[65] S. Boulebnane, J. Heeck, A. Nguyen, and D. Teresi,Cold light dark matter in extended seesaw models, JCAP04(2018)
006, [arXiv:1709.07283].
[66] I. Esteban, M. C. Gonzalez-Garcia, M. Maltoni, I. Martinez-Soler, J. a. P. Pinheiro, and T. Schwetz,NuFit-6.0: updated
global analysis of three-flavor neutrino oscillations, JHEP12(2024) 216, [arXiv:2410.05380].
[67] F. Capozzi and G. Raffelt,Axion and neutrino bounds improved with new calibrations of the tip of the red-giant branch
using geometric distance determinations, Phys. Rev. D102(2020), no. 8 083007, [arXiv:2007.03694].
[68] M. J. Dolan, F. J. Hiskens, and R. R. Volkas,Advancing globular cluster constraints on the axion-photon coupling,
JCAP10(2022) 096, [arXiv:2207.03102].
[69] T. Brune and H. P¨ as,Massive Majorons and constraints on the Majoron-neutrino coupling, Phys. Rev. D99(2019),
no. 9 096005, [arXiv:1808.08158].
[70] A. Caputo, H.-T. Janka, G. Raffelt, and E. Vitagliano,Low-Energy Supernovae Severely Constrain Radiative Particle
Decays, Phys. Rev. Lett.128(2022), no. 22 221103, [arXiv:2201.09890].
[71] M. Diamond, D. F. G. Fiorillo, G. Marques-Tavares, and E. Vitagliano,Axion-sourced fireballs from supernovae, Phys.
Rev. D107(2023), no. 10 103029, [arXiv:2303.11395]. [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 108, 049902 (2023)].
[72] D. F. G. Fiorillo, G. G. Raffelt, and E. Vitagliano,Strong Supernova 1987A Constraints on Bosons Decaying to
Neutrinos, Phys. Rev. Lett.131(2023), no. 2 021001, [arXiv:2209.11773].
[73] D. Cadamuro and J. Redondo,Cosmological bounds on pseudo Nambu-Goldstone bosons, JCAP02(2012) 032,
[arXiv:1110.2895].
[74] M. Millea, L. Knox, and B. Fields,New Bounds for Axions and Axion-Like Particles with keV-GeV Masses, Phys. Rev.
D92(2015), no. 2 023010, [arXiv:1501.04097].
[75] P. F. Depta, M. Hufnagel, and K. Schmidt-Hoberg,Robust cosmological constraints on axion-like particles, JCAP05
(2020) 009, [arXiv:2002.08370].
[76] M. Escudero Abenza, C. Garcia-Perez, and M. Ovchynnikov,Nucleosynthesis and CMB bounds on photophilic ALPs: a
fresh look, Eur. Phys. J. C86(2026), no. 5 500, [arXiv:2511.00157].
[77] M. Escudero and S. J. Witte,A CMB search for the neutrino mass mechanism and its relation to the Hubble tension,
Eur. Phys. J. C80(2020), no. 4 294, [arXiv:1909.04044].
[78]Super-KamiokandeCollaboration, K. Bayset. al.,Supernova Relic Neutrino Search at Super-Kamiokande, Phys.
Rev. D85(2012) 052007, [arXiv:1111.5031].

21
[79]Super-KamiokandeCollaboration, H. Zhanget. al.,Supernova Relic Neutrino Search with Neutron Tagging at
Super-Kamiokande-IV, Astropart. Phys.60(2015) 41–46, [arXiv:1311.3738].
[80] A. Albertet. al.,Results from the search for dark matter in the Milky Way with 9 years of data of the ANTARES
neutrino telescope, Phys. Lett. B769(2017) 249–254, [arXiv:1612.04595]. [Erratum: Phys.Lett.B 796, 253–255 (2019)].
[81]BorexinoCollaboration, M. Agostiniet. al.,Search for low-energy neutrinos from astrophysical sources with Borexino,
Astropart. Phys.125(2021) 102509, [arXiv:1909.02422].
[82]KamLANDCollaboration, S. Abeet. al.,Limits on Astrophysical Antineutrinos with the KamLAND Experiment,
Astrophys. J.925(2022), no. 1 14, [arXiv:2108.08527].
[83]Super-KamiokandeCollaboration, K. Abeet. al.,Diffuse supernova neutrino background search at
Super-Kamiokande, Phys. Rev. D104(2021), no. 12 122002, [arXiv:2109.11174].
[84]IceCubeCollaboration, R. Abbasiet. al.,Indirect search for dark matter in the Galactic Centre with IceCube, in37th
International Cosmic Ray Conference, 7, 2021.arXiv:2107.11224.
[85] C. A. Arg¨ uelles, D. Delgado, A. Friedlander, A. Kheirandish, I. Safa, A. C. Vincent, and H. White,Dark matter decay
to neutrinos, Phys. Rev. D108(2023), no. 12 123021, [arXiv:2210.01303].
[86]IceCubeCollaboration, R. Abbasiet. al.,Search for neutrino lines from dark matter annihilation and decay with
IceCube, Phys. Rev. D108(2023), no. 10 102004, [arXiv:2303.13663].
[87] C. Thorpe-Morgan, D. Malyshev, A. Santangelo, J. Jochum, B. J¨ ager, M. Sasaki, and S. Saeedi,THESEUS insights into
axionlike particles, dark photon, and sterile neutrino dark matter, Phys. Rev. D102(2020), no. 12 123003,
[arXiv:2008.08306].
[88] T. Shuttet. al.,The GammaTPC Gamma-Ray Telescope Concept,arXiv:2502.14841.
[89] K. Perez, K. C. Y. Ng, J. F. Beacom, C. Hersh, S. Horiuchi, and R. Krivonos,Almost closing theνMSM sterile neutrino
dark matter window with NuSTAR, Phys. Rev. D95(2017), no. 12 123002, [arXiv:1609.00667].
[90] K. C. Y. Ng, B. M. Roach, K. Perez, J. F. Beacom, S. Horiuchi, R. Krivonos, and D. R. Wik,New Constraints on
Sterile Neutrino Dark Matter fromN uST ARM31 Observations, Phys. Rev. D99(2019) 083005, [arXiv:1901.01262].
[91] J. W. Foster, M. Kongsore, C. Dessert, Y. Park, N. L. Rodd, K. Cranmer, and B. R. Safdi,Deep Search for Decaying
Dark Matter with XMM-Newton Blank-Sky Observations, Phys. Rev. Lett.127(2021), no. 5 051101,
[arXiv:2102.02207].
[92] A. Dekker, E. Peerbooms, F. Zimmer, K. C. Y. Ng, and S. Ando,Searches for sterile neutrinos and axionlike particles
from the Galactic halo with eROSITA, Phys. Rev. D104(2021), no. 2 023021, [arXiv:2103.13241].
[93] B. M. Roach, S. Rossland, K. C. Y. Ng, K. Perez, J. F. Beacom, B. W. Grefenstette, S. Horiuchi, R. Krivonos, and
D. R. Wik,Long-exposure NuSTAR constraints on decaying dark matter in the Galactic halo, Phys. Rev. D107(2023),
no. 2 023009, [arXiv:2207.04572].
[94] F. Calore, A. Dekker, P. D. Serpico, and T. Siegert,Constraints on light decaying dark matter candidates from 16 yr of
INTEGRAL/SPI observations, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.520(2023), no. 3 4167–4172, [arXiv:2209.06299].
[Erratum: Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc. 538, 132 (2025)].
[95] C. Fong, K. C. Y. Ng, and Q. Liu,Searching for particle dark matter with eROSITA early data, Phys. Rev. D112
(2025), no. 8 083052, [arXiv:2401.16747].
[96] F. S. Queiroz and K. Sinha,The Poker Face of the Majoron Dark Matter Model: LUX to keV Line, Phys. Lett. B735
(2014) 69–74, [arXiv:1404.1400].
[97] C. O’Hare, “cajohare/axionlimits: Axionlimits.”https://cajohare.github.io/AxionLimits/, July, 2020.
[98] J. A. Adams, S. Sarkar, and D. W. Sciama,CMB anisotropy in the decaying neutrino cosmology, Mon. Not. Roy.
Astron. Soc.301(1998) 210–214, [astro-ph/9805108].
[99] N. Padmanabhan and D. P. Finkbeiner,Detecting dark matter annihilation with CMB polarization: Signatures and
experimental prospects, Phys. Rev. D72(2005) 023508, [astro-ph/0503486].
[100] T. R. Slatyer, N. Padmanabhan, and D. P. Finkbeiner,CMB Constraints on WIMP Annihilation: Energy Absorption
During the Recombination Epoch, Phys. Rev. D80(2009) 043526, [arXiv:0906.1197].
[101] V. Poulin, J. Lesgourgues, and P. D. Serpico,Cosmological constraints on exotic injection of electromagnetic energy,
JCAP03(2017) 043, [arXiv:1610.10051].
[102] T. R. Slatyer and C.-L. Wu,General Constraints on Dark Matter Decay from the Cosmic Microwave Background, Phys.
Rev. D95(2017), no. 2 023010, [arXiv:1610.06933].
[103] J. Baur, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, C. Y` eche, C. Magneville, and M. Viel,Lyman-alpha Forests cool Warm Dark Matter,
JCAP08(2016) 012, [arXiv:1512.01981].
[104] C. Y` eche, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, J. Baur, and H. du Mas des Bourboux,Constraints on neutrino masses from
Lyman-alpha forest power spectrum with BOSS and XQ-100, JCAP06(2017) 047, [arXiv:1702.03314].
[105] J. Baur, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, C. Yeche, A. Boyarsky, O. Ruchayskiy, E. Armengaud, and J. Lesgourgues,
Constraints from Ly-αforests on non-thermal dark matter including resonantly-produced sterile neutrinos, JCAP12
(2017) 013, [arXiv:1706.03118].
[106] V. Irˇ siˇ cet. al.,New Constraints on the free-streaming of warm dark matter from intermediate and small scale Lyman-α
forest data, Phys. Rev. D96(2017), no. 2 023522, [arXiv:1702.01764].
[107] Y. Sun, J. W. Foster, H. Liu, J. B. Mu˜ noz, and T. R. Slatyer,Inhomogeneous energy injection in the 21-cm power
spectrum: Sensitivity to dark matter decay, Phys. Rev. D111(2025), no. 4 043015, [arXiv:2312.11608].
[108] T. Simon, G. Franco Abell´ an, P. Du, V. Poulin, and Y. Tsai,Constraining decaying dark matter with BOSS data and
the effective field theory of large-scale structures, Phys. Rev. D106(2022), no. 2 023516, [arXiv:2203.07440].
[109] A. Kamada, K. T. Inoue, and T. Takahashi,Constraints on mixed dark matter from anomalous strong lens systems,

22
Phys. Rev. D94(2016), no. 2 023522, [arXiv:1604.01489].
[110] A. Schneider,Constraining noncold dark matter models with the global 21-cm signal, Phys. Rev. D98(2018), no. 6
063021, [arXiv:1805.00021].
[111] G. Parimbelli, G. Scelfo, S. K. Giri, A. Schneider, M. Archidiacono, S. Camera, and M. Viel,Mixed dark matter: matter
power spectrum and halo mass function, JCAP12(2021), no. 12 044, [arXiv:2106.04588].
[112] C. Y. Tan, A. Dekker, and A. Drlica-Wagner,Mixed warm dark matter constraints using Milky Way satellite galaxy
counts, Phys. Rev. D111(2025), no. 6 063079, [arXiv:2409.18917].
[113] R. An, E. O. Nadler, A. Benson, and V. Gluscevic,COZMIC. II. Cosmological Zoom-in Simulations with Fractional
non-CDM Initial Conditions, Astrophys. J.986(2025) 128, [arXiv:2411.03431].
[114] T. T. Q. Nguyen, P. De la Torre Luque, I. John, S. Balaji, P. Carenza, and T. Linden,INTEGRAL, eROSITA and
Voyager constraints on light bosonic dark matter: ALPs, dark photons, scalars, B-L and Li-Lj vectors, Phys. Rev. D
113(2026), no. 10 103010, [arXiv:2507.13432].
[115] M. Lattanzi and J. W. F. Valle,Decaying warm dark matter and neutrino masses, Phys. Rev. Lett.99(2007) 121301,
[arXiv:0705.2406].
[116] M. Lattanzi,Decaying Majoron Dark Matter and Neutrino Masses, AIP Conf. Proc.966(2008), no. 1 163–169,
[arXiv:0802.3155].
[117] L. F. Abbott and P. Sikivie,A Cosmological Bound on the Invisible Axion, Phys. Lett. B120(1983) 133–136.
[118] M. Dine and W. Fischler,The Not So Harmless Axion, Phys. Lett. B120(1983) 137–141.
[119] J. Preskill, M. B. Wise, and F. Wilczek,Cosmology of the Invisible Axion, Phys. Lett. B120(1983) 127–132.
[120] N. Blinov, M. J. Dolan, P. Draper, and J. Kozaczuk,Dark matter targets for axionlike particle searches, Phys. Rev. D
100(2019), no. 1 015049, [arXiv:1905.06952].
[121] M. Blennow, E. Fernandez-Martinez, and B. Zaldivar,Freeze-in through portals, JCAP01(2014) 003,
[arXiv:1309.7348].
[122] T. W. B. Kibble,Topology of cosmic domains and strings, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General9(aug,
1976) 1387.
[123] R. Davis,Cosmic axions from cosmic strings, Physics Letters B180(1986), no. 3 225–230.
[124] K. Chathirathas and T. Schwetz,How light can ALP dark matter be?,arXiv:2511.15790.
[125] M. Gorghetto, E. Hardy, and G. Villadoro,Axions from Strings: the Attractive Solution, JHEP07(2018) 151,
[arXiv:1806.04677].
[126] M. Gorghetto, E. Hardy, and G. Villadoro,More axions from strings, SciPost Phys.10(2021), no. 2 050,
[arXiv:2007.04990].
[127] M. Buschmann, J. W. Foster, A. Hook, A. Peterson, D. E. Willcox, W. Zhang, and B. R. Safdi,Dark matter from axion
strings with adaptive mesh refinement, Nature Commun.13(2022), no. 1 1049, [arXiv:2108.05368].
[128] H. Kim and M. Son,More scalings from cosmic strings, JHEP07(2025) 052, [arXiv:2411.08455].
[129] K. Saikawa, J. Redondo, A. Vaquero, and M. Kaltschmidt,Spectrum of global string networks and the axion dark matter
mass, JCAP10(2024) 043, [arXiv:2401.17253].
[130] J. N. Benabou, M. Buschmann, J. W. Foster, and B. R. Safdi,Axion Mass Prediction from Adaptive Mesh Refinement
Cosmological Lattice Simulations, Phys. Rev. Lett.134(2025), no. 24 241003, [arXiv:2412.08699].
[131] H. Kim, J. Park, and M. Son,Axion dark matter from cosmic string network, JHEP07(2024) 150, [arXiv:2402.00741].
[132] G. Ballesteros, J. Redondo, A. Ringwald, and C. Tamarit,Unifying inflation with the axion, dark matter, baryogenesis
and the seesaw mechanism, Phys. Rev. Lett.118(2017), no. 7 071802, [arXiv:1608.05414].
[133] Y. Bao, J. Fan, and L. Li,Opening up a Window on the Postinflationary QCD Axion, Phys. Rev. Lett.130(2023),
no. 24 241001, [arXiv:2209.09908].
[134] A. H. Sopov, C. Tamarit, and R. R. Volkas,The post-inflationary cosmology of the VISHνaxion-majoron model,
arXiv:2512.12627.
[135] R. R. Volkas, A. J. Davies, and G. C. Joshi,NATURALNESS OF THE INVISIBLE AXION MODEL, Phys. Lett. B
215(1988) 133–138.
[136] R. Foot, A. Kobakhidze, K. L. McDonald, and R. R. Volkas,Poincar´ e protection for a natural electroweak scale, Phys.
Rev. D89(2014), no. 11 115018, [arXiv:1310.0223].
[137] W. Buchmuller, P. Di Bari, and M. Plumacher,Leptogenesis for pedestrians, Annals Phys.315(2005) 305–351,
[hep-ph/0401240].
[138] C. Hagedorn, R. N. Mohapatra, E. Molinaro, C. C. Nishi, and S. T. Petcov,CP Violation in the Lepton Sector and
Implications for Leptogenesis, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A33(2018), no. 05n06 1842006, [arXiv:1711.02866].
[139] A. Abada, S. Davidson, A. Ibarra, F. X. Josse-Michaux, M. Losada, and A. Riotto,Flavour Matters in Leptogenesis,
JHEP09(2006) 010, [hep-ph/0605281].
[140] S. Davidson and A. Ibarra,A Lower bound on the right-handed neutrino mass from leptogenesis, Phys. Lett. B535
(2002) 25–32, [hep-ph/0202239].
[141] K. Moffat, S. Pascoli, S. T. Petcov, H. Schulz, and J. Turner,Three-flavored nonresonant leptogenesis at intermediate
scales, Phys. Rev. D98(2018), no. 1 015036, [arXiv:1804.05066].
[142] A. Granelli, K. Moffat, Y. F. Perez-Gonzalez, H. Schulz, and J. Turner,ULYSSES: Universal LeptogeneSiS Equation
Solver, Comput. Phys. Commun.262(2021) 107813, [arXiv:2007.09150].
[143] A. Granelli, C. Leslie, Y. F. Perez-Gonzalez, H. Schulz, B. Shuve, J. Turner, and R. Walker,ULYSSES, universal
LeptogeneSiS equation solver: Version 2, Comput. Phys. Commun.291(2023) 108834, [arXiv:2301.05722].
[144] F. Feroz and M. P. Hobson,Multimodal nested sampling: an efficient and robust alternative to MCMC methods for

23
astronomical data analysis, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.384(2008) 449, [arXiv:0704.3704].
[145] F. Feroz, M. P. Hobson, and M. Bridges,MultiNest: an efficient and robust Bayesian inference tool for cosmology and
particle physics, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.398(2009) 1601–1614, [arXiv:0809.3437].
[146] F. Feroz, M. P. Hobson, E. Cameron, and A. N. Pettitt,Importance Nested Sampling and the MultiNest Algorithm,
Open J. Astrophys.2(2019), no. 1 10, [arXiv:1306.2144].
[147] J. A. Casas and A. Ibarra,Oscillating neutrinos andµ→e, γ, Nucl. Phys. B618(2001) 171–204, [hep-ph/0103065].
[148] C.-F. Chang and Y. Cui,Stochastic Gravitational Wave Background from Global Cosmic Strings, Phys. Dark Univ.29
(2020) 100604, [arXiv:1910.04781].
[149] P. Di Bari, S. F. King, and M. H. Rahat,Gravitational waves from phase transitions and cosmic strings in neutrino
mass models with multiple majorons, JHEP05(2024) 068, [arXiv:2306.04680].
[150] J. Bonilla, A. de Giorgi, B. Gavela, L. Merlo, and M. Ramos,The cost of an ALP solution to the neutral B-anomalies,
JHEP02(2023) 138, [arXiv:2209.11247].
[151] B. Pontecorvo,Neutrino Experiments and the Problem of Conservation of Leptonic Charge, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.53
(1967) 1717–1725.
[152] Z. Maki, M. Nakagawa, and S. Sakata,Remarks on the unified model of elementary particles, Prog. Theor. Phys.28
(1962) 870–880.
[153] M. Badziak and M. Laletin,Precise predictions for the QCD axion contribution to dark radiation with full phase-space
evolution, JHEP02(2025) 108, [arXiv:2410.18186].
[154] F. D’Eramo and A. Lenoci,Back to the phase space: Thermal axion dark radiation via couplings to standard model
fermions, Phys. Rev. D110(2024), no. 11 116028, [arXiv:2410.21253].
[155] S. Blanchet, P. Di Bari, D. A. Jones, and L. Marzola,Leptogenesis with heavy neutrino flavours: from density matrix to
Boltzmann equations, JCAP01(2013) 041, [arXiv:1112.4528].
[156] J. Lopez-Pavon, E. Molinaro, and S. T. Petcov,Radiative Corrections to Light Neutrino Masses in Low Scale Type I
Seesaw Scenarios and Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay, JHEP11(2015) 030, [arXiv:1506.05296].
[157] G. Cardano,Ars magna, liber unus. 1545.
[158]LIGO Scientific, VirgoCollaboration, B. P. Abbottet. al.,Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black
Hole Merger, Phys. Rev. Lett.116(2016), no. 6 061102, [arXiv:1602.03837].
[159] Z. A. Borboruah, F. F. Deppisch, A. Ghoshal, and L. Malhotra,Inflationary gravitational waves and laboratory searches
as complementary probes of right-handed neutrinos, Phys. Rev. D112(2025), no. 5 056003, [arXiv:2504.15374].
[160] M. Chianese, G. Dom` enech, T. Papanikolaou, R. Samanta, and N. Saviano,Induced Gravitational Waves as Cosmic
Tracers of Leptogenesis,arXiv:2504.20135.
[161] H. Murayama, B. Noether, and J. Sch¨ utte-Engel,Observing leptogenesis in action with gravitational waves, JCAP12
(2025) 027, [arXiv:2506.15772].
[162] N. Aggarwalet. al.,Challenges and opportunities of gravitational-wave searches above 10 kHz, Living Rev. Rel.28
(2025), no. 1 10, [arXiv:2501.11723].