Title: Ensemble asteroseismology: An ensemble approach to detecting signatures of solar-like oscillations in K-dwarfs
Authors: William J. Chaplin, Tiago L. Campante, Mikkel N. Lund, Martin B. Nielsen, Guy R. Davies, Emily Hatt, Rachel Howe, Amalie Stokholm
Published: 2026-05-22
Categories: astro-ph.SR

Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. aa59600-26©ESO 2026
May 25, 2026
Ensemble asteroseismology
An ensemble approach to detecting signatures of solar-like oscillations in
K-dwarfs
William J. Chaplin1,⋆ , Tiago L. Campante2,3 , Mikkel N. Lund4, Martin B. Nielsen1, Guy R. Davies1, Emily Hatt1,
Rachel Howe1, and Amalie Stokholm1
1 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom
2 Instituto de Astrofísica e Ciências do Espaço, Universidade do Porto, Rua das Estrelas, 4150-762 Porto, Portugal
3 Departamento de Física e Astronomia, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade do Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre, s/n, 4169-007
Porto, Portugal
4 Stellar Astrophysics Centre, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Aarhus University, Ny Munkegade 120, DK-8000 Aarhus C,
Denmark
Received XX, YY
ABSTRACT
Context.Solar-like oscillations have to date been observed in hundreds of main-sequence and sub-giant stars. However, only a handful
of detections have been made in K-type dwarfs, using ground-based extreme precision radial velocity observations and space-based
photometric observations made by the NASAKeplerand TESS missions. Whilst the upcoming ESA PLATO Mission promises to add
to these individual detections, it will do so only in a similar, modest number of stars.
Aims.Here, we propose a new ensemble strategy to exploit the PLATO data, in which frequency power spectra on hundreds of
K-dwarfs lying in constrained ranges of effective temperature are combined in a weighted manner to significantly improve the de-
tectability of the oscillations. Whilst this approach means it is not possible to extract usable constraints on individual oscillation
frequencies, it provides a way to detect and measure the characteristics of the composite envelope of oscillation power given by
the ensemble, which in turn provides diagnostics of granulation and magneto-convection and the impact of magnetic activity on the
modes.
Methods.We use data in the PLATO Input Catalogue (PIC) to make discrete numerical predictions of the detectability of the ensemble
spectra. We also derive a simple analytical approximation of our method that obviates the need to perform numerical calculations over
a discrete sample of targets, and which serves as a useful tool to make quick predictions for other future or planned missions.
Results.Our predictions indicate that PLATO has the potential to provide solid ensemble detections well into the K-dwarf regime. In
summary, PLATO offers an ideal opportunity to exploit this new approach.
Key words.Asteroseismology – Stars: oscillations (including pulsations) – Stars: late-type
1. Introduction
Thanks to a now extensive database of space- and ground-based
observations made, respectively, in photometry and Doppler ve-
locity, solar-like oscillations have been detected in hundreds of
main-sequence stars. Detecting oscillations in K dwarfs has,
however, proven to be extremely challenging since the maximum
amplitudes of solar-like oscillations decrease as one moves to
cooler temperatures on the lower main sequence. At the time of
writing, only four detections have been made for K-dwarfs using
space-based data (e.g., see Barclay et al. 2013; Campante et al.
2016; Hon et al. 2024; Lund et al. 2025). All four detections lie
at the boundary between late G and early K-type stars. The
detection boundary has been extended into the mid-K range
thanks to a concerted effort to utilise extreme precision ground-
based radial velocity capabilities at a number of observatories
(e.g., see Campante et al. 2024; Lundkvist et al. 2024; Hon et al.
2024; Li et al. 2025; Campante et al. 2026). But even with these
new detections, the combined sample of K-dwarf detections still
numbers only around ten stars.
⋆ Corresponding author: w.j.chaplin@bham.ac.uk
Here, we propose a new ensemble strategy that will signifi-
cantly improve the prospects of detecting signatures of solar-like
oscillations in these stars. The basic approach we consider is to
co-add the frequency power spectra of many individual stars to
reduce the variance of the noise in the combined spectrum com-
pared to that of any individual spectrum, and hence to improve
the effective S/N in the oscillations. We leverage the fact that
by selecting stars on the lower main sequence from sufficiently
narrow ranges inT eff, we may assume that to first order they
take similar fundamental properties (i.e., massM, radiusR, and
luminosityL). This in turn means that we should expect their os-
cillation spectra to have similar frequencies of maximum oscil-
lation powerν max, and to therefore contribute to a cumulative ex-
cess of mode power in a constrained range of frequencies in the
combined frequency-power spectrum. Whilst combining power
spectra in this way rules out extracting or utilizing individual
oscillation frequencies—the ensemble yields a composite, inter-
leaved spectrum—it nevertheless opens the way to detecting and
measuring the properties of the composite excess of mode power.
The maximum amplitudes of solar-like oscillations are of-
ten described in terms of a dependence on stellar mass and lu-
Article number, page 1
arXiv:2605.23515v1  [astro-ph.SR]  22 May 2026

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59600-26
minosity that goes like (L/M) s (e.g., see Kjeldsen & Bedding
1995; Houdek et al. 1999; Samadi et al. 2005, 2007), wheresis
an exponent that controls the dependence. The lower the value
ofs, the less steep is the fall offof the amplitudes as one pro-
gresses down the lower main sequence. While the above men-
tioned ground-based sample is small, it has nevertheless demon-
strated that the maximum mode amplitudes appear to fall off
more steeply than previously expected as one moves from the
G- into the K-dwarf regime, with a breakpoint in behaviour at
the transition between classes. While results on G-type stars
are consistent withs≃1, the exponent appears to be closer
to 1.5 for K dwarfs (Campante et al. 2026). The ensemble ap-
proach offers the prospect of being able to test this dependence
over a much larger statistical sample of stars, and further into
the K-dwarf regime. By constructing different combinations—
e.g., from ranges inT eff, measures of activity, etc.—one can in
principle explore the dependence of the amplitudes on stellar
properties, and provide new information on the underlying mode
physics, granulation and magnetoconvection (since near-surface
turbulence excites and intrinsically damps the modes), and the
impact of magnetic activity on these processes.
An ensemble approach of this type, using a large statisti-
cal sample of stars, is now possible thanks to the upcoming
ESA PLATO Mission (Rauer et al. 2025). PLATO promises to
add more individual detections of solar-like oscillations in K
dwarfs, but only in modest numbers at the G/K dwarf bound-
ary (Goupil et al. 2024). However, its large field of view (much
larger thanKepler) and high-precision photometry (much lower
noise than TESS) make it extremely well suited to exploiting
the ensemble method. PLATO will be able to deliver the data
required to apply the method, i.e., high cadence, long-duration
lightcurves for a large enough sample of bright K-dwarfs, which
neitherKepleror TESS could or can provide. Our aim in this
paper is, therefore, not only to introduce the approach but to
also show it has the potential to deliver positive detections us-
ing PLATO data. Our PLATO predictions use the actual targets
in the PLATO Input Catalogue (PIC; see Montalto et al. 2021),
coupled to the best estimates available of the PLATO noise per-
formance. In addition, we also provide simple analytical formu-
lae that require only basic inputs, and which may be used to
make general predictions for other planned or future missions.
The layout of the rest of the paper is as follows. In Section 2
we introduce the ensemble approach, and the need to weight the
combination of power spectra in an appropriate manner. We also
present the weighted summation that describes the standard de-
viation of the background power spectral density of the combi-
nation for the case of a discrete sample of targets. In Section 2.2
we derive a simple analytical approximation that obviates the
need to perform numerical calculations over a discrete target
sample. Section 2.3 explains in detail how to calculate the de-
tection significance and an equivalent detection probability for
the weighted combination using the standard deviation, for both
the discrete and analytical cases. We then go on to present pre-
dictions for PLATO in Section 3. Section 3.1 introduces the in-
put data from the PLATO Input Catalogue (PIC) on which the
discrete numerical predictions are based, and Section 3.2 then
explains how parameters needed for the predictions were calcu-
lated from the PIC data. The results of our PLATO predictions
are presented in Section 3.3. We finish in Section 4 with key
conclusions and discussion.
2. The ensemble spectrum
2.1. Basic approach
Consider time-domain observations made on a regular cadence
∆tthat cover a total durationT. In what follows, we assume they
are photometric data, since we focus on predictions for PLATO.
We consider power spectra computed from these data are sam-
pled at critical frequencies separated by∆ T =1/T, so that the
individual bins of the spectra are statistically independent. The
observed power spectral density in each bin is distributed about
the underlying limit spectrum—i.e., the spectrum that would be
given by an infinite number of independent noise realizations—
withχ 2 two-degrees-of-freedom statistics. The standard devia-
tion of the power within any given bin then corresponds to the
underlying limit power for that bin.
Now, assume that we co-add independent spectra, each hav-
ing the same underlying limit spectrum and noise characteris-
tics. The standard deviation of the noise of the combined average
spectrum will be reduced by a factor of one over the square root
of the number of spectra making any cumulative excess of power
due to solar-like oscillations easier to detect against the back-
ground power. At the frequencies of interest, the background will
be largely dominated by shot noise, but also have a small con-
tribution from granulation. This is what underlies the approach
of combining independent spectra, i.e., reducing the variance or
standard deviation on the noise. Clearly, the larger the number of
stars, the better are the prospects for making a detection. How-
ever, in practice, targets from a volume-limited field sample will
not have the same noise. As we go to greater distances, there
will be more stars that can contribute to the combined spectrum,
but with higher noise. The combination therefore needs to be a
weighted one.
We define a discrete sample of stars of interest,i=1...N star
(of which more in Section 3 below). Letb i be the background
power spectral density of a given star across the frequency range
where the oscillations are most prominent. The combination of
spectra that minimizes the variance of the power spectral density
of the ensemble, and hence optimizes the S/N of the combined
oscillation signal in the frequency domain, uses weights 1/b 2
i .
The standard deviation of the background power spectral density
of the ensemble spectrum is then given by:
σPSD =

NstarX
i=1
1/b2
i

−1/2
.(1)
We may then estimate the probability of detecting the combined
oscillation signal, given the estimatedσ PSD and the weighted
summation of the oscillation power of the individual targets. Be-
fore we go on to explain that step in Section 2.3 below, we first
present the derivation of an analytical approximation ofσ PSD.
This analytical form is helpful for understanding the detectabil-
ity predictions, and can also serve as a useful tool for making
quick predictions for other future or planned missions since it
requires only a few basic inputs, as we now go on to see.
2.2. Analytical approximation forσ PSD
In what follows, we make a number of approximations and ide-
alized assumptions that allow us to derive a straightforward ex-
pression forσ PSD. As noted above, we select stars over a suf-
ficiently narrow range inT effon the lower main sequence that
we may assume they have similar fundamental properties. For
the resulting typical luminosityL, the fluxFin the instrumental
Article number, page 2

Chaplin et al.: Ensemble asteroseismology of K dwarfs
bandpass will scale in the ideal case with distancerlike:
F ∝r −2.
The relative root-mean square (rms) photometric noise,σ(r),
scales like:
σ(r)∝ F −1/2,
so that:
σ(r)∝r.
Consider the noise over a cadence∆t. Definingσ 10 to be the
resulting photometric noise measured in the instrument bandpass
for a target at a distance of 10 pc having the givenLandT eff, we
may then write:
σ(r)=σ 10
 r
10

.(2)
The background power spectral densityb(r) in the frequency do-
main for a spectrum satisfying Parseval’s theorem is then given
by:
b(r)=2σ 2(r)∆t≡2σ 2
10
 r
10
2
∆t,(3)
In the rest of the analytical treatment in this section, we assume
that across the range of frequencies where the oscillation sig-
nal is most prominent the contribution from granulation to the
background power constitutes only a small fraction of the total
background, with shot noise being the dominant source. This is
a good approximation for our PLATO targets of interest (see fur-
ther discussion in Section 2.3 below), though note we do include
granulation explicitly in the discrete target sample predictions
made using the PIC.
Next, we take the number density of stars in the local solar
neighbourhood that lie in the targeted parameter range to ben
(per pc3); and adopt a fractional sky coverageαfor our obser-
vations. Assuming a uniform spatial distribution of targets, the
numberN star(r) within a shell of thicknessdrat a distancerwill
be
Nstar(r)=4παnr 2dr.(4)
If we construct the weighted sum of the power spectra of all stars
fromr=d min out to some distancer=d max, the standard devia-
tion of the background power spectral density of the combination
will be:
σPSD =

dmaxX
dmin
Nstar(r)/b2(r)

−1/2
.(5)
Substituting from Equations 3 and 4 above gives:
σPSD =

 10
σ10
!4  παn
∆t2
 dmaxX
dmin
r−2dr

−1/2
,(6)
which in the limit ofdr→0 implies:
σPSD ≃

 10
σ10
!4  παn
∆t2
 dmaxZ
dmin
r−2dr

−1/2
.(7)
Evaluating the integral gives:
σPSD ≃
 σ10
10
2  ∆t√παn
!
[1/dmin −1/d max]−1/2 .(8)
The form or "shape" of this expression follows intuitive expec-
tations. First, there is the obvious result that a smaller value of
σ10 and higher values ofnandαshould lead to a reduced stan-
dard deviation in the combined spectrum. The dependence on
dmin andd max also follows expectations. The closest target sets
the baseline for the combined spectrum, hence a smallerd min
should give lower noise. Extending to larger distances should
also be beneficial, although the one-over-square-root depen-
dence ond max indicates that incremental gains diminish as one
incorporates successively more distant stars, reflecting the trade-
offat larger distances between having greater numbers of stars
to include at the cost of them having higher levels of noise.
2.3. Detection prediction approach for the ensemble
spectrum
We follow the now well-established approach (Chaplin et al.
2011b; Campante et al. 2016; Lund et al. 2016; Schofield et al.
2019; Goupil et al. 2024) to predicting the detectability by con-
sidering the significance at which the total observed power due to
the oscillations,P tot, can be measured against background power
due to sources of noise and stellar granulation. However, here we
must handle the ensemble case and so develop a new variant on
the established framework.
The statistics describing the distribution of power within any
independent frequency bin of the weighted combination are non-
trivial. The combination acts like aχ 2 distribution with an effec-
tive number of degrees of freedomn d.o.f. ≲30, i.e., the noise
about the underlying combined limit spectrum is not Gaussian
but has an asymmetric spread. The effective number of degrees
of freedom depends on the respective weights and underlying
noise of the constituent spectra that make up the weighted com-
bination. We may simplify the statistics by considering what
happens if instead we average or sum the power across a range
of bins in the combined, weighted spectrum. Thanks to the cen-
tral limit theorem, the average or sum will then follow statistics
of a normal (Gaussian) distribution about the underlying limit
spectrum of the combination. This allows us to develop the fol-
lowing simple prediction for the detectability of the cumulative
excess of power due to the oscillations against the broad-band
background noise.
Let us start from the basic case of a single, individual spec-
trum. Consider a range of frequencies where the spectrum is
dominated by broad-band background noise, having an under-
lying power spectral density ⟨b⟩. The uncertainty on the average
power spectral density across the background range, which we
assume coversNindependent frequency bins, is given by:
δ⟨b⟩ = σ⟨b⟩
√
N
≡ ⟨b⟩√
N
.(9)
Here,σ ⟨b⟩ is the standard deviation of the noise about the limit
spectrum; and as noted previously, for theχ 2 two-degrees-of-
freedom statistics governing the individual spectrum case,σ⟨b⟩ =
⟨b⟩.
Next, let ⟨P⟩ be the average power spectral density across
the frequency rangeWof the spectrum that contains the oscilla-
tion signal. This range is centred on the frequency of maximum
Article number, page 3

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59600-26
oscillations powerν max, which follows the scaling relation:
νmax =ν max,⊙
 M
M⊙
! R
R⊙
!−2  Teff
Teff,⊙
!−1/2
,(10)
where we adoptν max,⊙ =3090µHz andT eff,⊙=5777 K. Note the
background range—which is dominated by contributions from
shot and instrumental noise, and granulation—is assumed to lie
adjacent to or to straddle the oscillation range. For simplicity
in what follows, we assume the oscillation range also coversN
bins, as per the background range. We therefore have:
δ⟨P⟩ ≈ ⟨P⟩√
N
≡ σ⟨P⟩
√
N
.(11)
This relation is approximate: unlike the background case—
where the underlying power spectral density varies smoothly and
slowly in frequency—this range shows more underlying varia-
tion due to the presence of the modes.
Now, the total excess power due to oscillations in the target
range is given by:
Ptot =W (⟨P⟩ − ⟨b⟩) .(12)
The uncertainty on the total excess power then follows from sim-
ple error propagation, i.e.,
δ2
Ptot =W 2 
δ2
⟨P⟩ +δ 2
⟨b⟩

.(13)
For the main-sequence stars of interest here the total power
due to the oscillations will be a small fraction of the back-
ground power due to the PLATO instrumental/shot noise, as
was/is the case for the photometric data collected byKepler
and TESS (e.g., see Chaplin et al. 2011b, 2013; Campante et al.
2016; Schofield et al. 2019). This means that ⟨P⟩ ≃ ⟨b⟩, allow-
ing us to make the simplificationδ ⟨P⟩ ≃δ ⟨b⟩. We may therefore
write:
δPtot ≃
√
2Wδ ⟨b⟩ ≡
√
2W σ⟨b⟩
√
N
≡
√
2W ⟨b⟩√
N
.(14)
Now, the frequency rangeWcovered by theNindependent fre-
quency bins is given by:
W=N∆ T ≡ N
T .(15)
Substituting from above then gives:
δPtot ≃σ ⟨b⟩
 2W
T
!1/2
≡ ⟨b⟩
 2W
T
!1/2
.(16)
The implied statistical significance of the excessPtot is therefore:
stot = Ptot
δPtot
≃
 Ptot
σ⟨b⟩
! T
2W
1/2
≡
 Ptot
⟨b⟩
! T
2W
1/2
.(17)
Let us now extend to the ensemble case of the weighted com-
bined spectrum. Equation 1 described the standard deviation of
the background power spectral densityσ PSD of the weighted
combination. We therefore just need to substituteσ PSD forσ ⟨b⟩
in Equation 17 above to give the implied statistical significance
sPSD of the excessP tot in the combined, weighted case. The result
is:
sPSD ≃
 Ptot,PSD
σPSD
! T
2W
1/2
,(18)
where
Ptot,PSD =
hPNstar
i=1 Ptot,i/b2
i
i
hPNstar
i=1 1/b2
i
i (19)
is the weighted combination of each individualP tot,i. If instead
we adopt the analytical approximation ofs PSD given by Equa-
tion 8, we obtain:
sPSD ≈P tot

100
σ2
10∆t

 παnT
2W
1/2
[1/dmin −1/d max]1/2 ,(20)
whereP tot is now computed from the "typical" or central adopted
fundamental properties (see Section 2.2 above).
As a final step, we may converts PSD to an equivalent detec-
tion probabilityp final. For a given one-sided false-alarm proba-
bilityp false, the corresponding critical significance level is
zcrit = Φ−1(1−p false),(21)
whereΦdenotes the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
the standard normal distribution. The probability that the mea-
sured signal exceeds this critical threshold is then
pfinal =1−Φ (zcrit −s PSD) .(22)
We now go on to explain how we used the formulae above to
make ensemble predictions for PLATO.
3. Predictions for PLATO
The PLATO instrument comprises 26 small-aperture (12-cm)
wide-field telescopes. The 24 normal cameras provide data on
a∆t=25 sec cadence, with a pixel scale of 15 arcsec. The
normal cameras are grouped into four co-aligned sets, with the
pointings slightly offset to give partially overlapping fields and
a combined effective field of view (e.g., see Nascimbeni et al.
2025) of≃2149 deg 2. Depending on their placement in the com-
bined field, targets may therefore be observed by 6, 12, 18 or 24
normal cameras. There are in addition two fast cameras, which
provide data on a 2.5-sec cadence in blue and red filters. Here,
we make predictions assuming observations made by the normal
cameras.
PLATO will begin science operations with aT=2 yr
stare in its southern LOPS2 field (Montalto et al. 2021;
Nascimbeni et al. 2022, 2025). Decisions on what follows will
be made after launch, but one scenario would see observations
of this field extended for a full 8 yr. Here, we produce predic-
tions forT=2, 4 and 8-yr observations of bright K-dwarfs in
the LOPS2 field, using data and information contained in the
PLATO Input Catalogue (PIC)1.
3.1. Underpinning data
We use the PIC estimates ofM,RandT effto calculate oscil-
lation and granulation parameters for selected targets; and the
expected total noise per hour (e.g., see Börner et al. 2024) given
in the PIC to calculate the background power spectral density of
each target that is attributable to noise. Note that we excluded
targets having a Gaia Renormalised Unit Weight Error (RUWE)
metric>3.6 to remove sources with non-single-star astrometric
solutions, thereby rejecting objects likely affected by unresolved
1 We used PIC version 2.1.0.1
Article number, page 4

Chaplin et al.: Ensemble asteroseismology of K dwarfs
multiplicity or strong blending, which could also give unreliable
stellar parameter estimates.
The main PLATO predictions come from calculating the dis-
crete, weighted summations forσ PSD (Equation 1) andP tot,PSD
(Equation 19) using inputs from the PIC for each individual star
in the target sample, from which we may then estimate the detec-
tion significances PSD and equivalent detection probabilityp final
of the weighted ensemble using Equations 18 and 22 respec-
tively. We supplement these main results with predictions made
using the analytical approximations (Equations 8 and 20).
3.2. Predicted parameters for each target
In this section we explain in detail how we calculated the neces-
sary oscillation, granulation and background parameters for each
individual target, and the effective number of degrees of freedom
needed to determine the detection significance and probability.
3.2.1. Oscillations power
Following convention (e.g., see Chaplin et al. 2011b;
Campante et al. 2016; Schofield et al. 2019; Goupil et al.
2024), we assume the power excess due to the oscillations
follows a Gaussian-like envelope. The total oscillations power
Ptot may then be written in the form:
Ptot =
 π
4 ln 2
1/2
HenvΓenv,(23)
whereH env andΓ env are, respectively, the height and full width
at half maximum (FHWM) of the envelope. The envelope height
follows from (e.g., see Basu & Chaplin 2017):
Henv =
 ςA2
max
∆ν
!
,(24)
whereA max is the root mean square (RMS) maximum equiva-
lent radial-mode amplitude,ςis the sum in power of the mode
visibilities of different angular degrees, and
∆ν= ∆ν ⊙
 M
M⊙
!1/2  R
R⊙
!−3/2
(25)
is the large frequency separation, and we adopt∆ν ⊙ =135µHz.
We follow Chaplin et al. (2011b) in assuming that the maximum
amplitudes follow:
Amax =A max,⊙β
 L/M
L⊙/M⊙
!s  Teff
Teff,⊙
!−2
(26)
wheresis the aforementioned amplitude exponent, andβis a
factor that corrects for the overestimation of mode amplitudes in
F-type stars. Since here we deal with much cooler stars, we are
safe in settingβ=1.
BothA max andςare sensitive to the bandpass filter of the
observations. Here we use calculations for the PLATO band-
pass made by Lund et al. (2026), which yield values ofA max,⊙ =
2.4 ppm andς=3.15.
For the envelope width, we adopt the scaling of Mosser et al.
(2012):
Γenv =0.66ν 0.88
max ≡0.66
 M
M⊙
!0.88  R
R⊙
!−1.76  Teff
Teff,⊙
!−0.44
.(27)
Cool main-sequence stars with good asteroseismic detections
have been shown to follow this relation to reasonable approxi-
mation, and whilst there is clearly an additional temperature de-
pendence to the observed widths not captured by the above, that
dependence only appears to be relevant at higherT effthan we
consider here (see Schofield 2019).
Finally, we note that we took no account in our predictions of
the impact of magnetic activity on the mode amplitudes (e.g., see
Chaplin et al. 2011a; Campante et al. 2014; Mathur et al. 2019;
Sayeed et al. 2025). It is worth noting that the amplitude scaling
relation used here is calibrated on measurements fromKepler
targets that span a range of activity levels. We return to this point
in Section 4.
3.2.2. Background power
The mean background power spectral density ⟨b⟩ has contribu-
tions from shot/instrumental noise,b instr and from granulation,
bgran, i.e.,
⟨b⟩ =b instr +b gran.(28)
The shot/instrumental contribution follows from:
binstr =2σ 2
∆t∆t,(29)
whereσ ∆t is the noise per cadence∆t. Here, we assume observa-
tions would in practice be made at a PLATO cadence of 25 sec.
This rapid cadence—which results in a very high Nyquist fre-
quency of 20,000µHz—allows us to ignore the attenuation of
oscillation signals at high frequencies due to the finite sampling
in the time domain (e.g., see Basu & Chaplin 2017 and refer-
ences therein).
As is standard for PLATO, the PIC provides noise estimates
for targets on a 1-hr timescale—values we refer to here asσ hr—
which capture all expected sources of instrumental noise. Using
these 1-hr values, the above is modified to:
binstr =2σ 2
hr ×3600×10 −6,(30)
where the factor 10 −6 ensures the estimates are in units of
ppm2 µHz−1.
We follow Chaplin et al. (2011b) when modelling the granu-
lation contribution. Here, our termbgran corresponds to the power
spectral density of the granulation atνmax. As such, we ignore the
frequency dependence of the granulation signal, taking this as a
suitable proxy value. It follows from the relation:
bgran =b gran,⊙
 νmax
νmax,⊙
!−2
≡b gran,⊙
 M
M⊙
!−2  R
R⊙
!4  Teff
Teff,⊙
!
.(31)
Note thatb gran,⊙ =0.09 ppm 2µHz−1 in the PLATO bandpass (cf.
Lund et al. 2026).
3.2.3. Degrees of freedom for detectability calculation
Finally, we need to fix the widthWadopted in computations
of the detection significances PSD and the associated detection
probabilityp final. This in effect defines the number of degrees
of freedom used in the calculations, through the corresponding
number of binsN(Equation 4). A widthW≃2Γ env would seem
Article number, page 5

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59600-26
Fig. 1: An HR diagram showing stars in the PIC on the lower
main sequence havingV≤12. The selected sample of K-dwarfs
is plotted in red. The dashed blue lines mark thresholds used
to reject targets lying significantly above or below the main se-
quence (see text).
to be a straightforward, natural choice for any individual star,
since this will capture all but a small fraction of the total oscil-
lation power contained within its Gaussian envelope. However,
we must bear in mind that the composite spectrum is a weighted
summation over stars having slightly differentνmax. This has the
effect of spreading power beyond the 2Wrange of any single
star. For every combination of stars we consider, we therefore
calculated the effective full width of the composite power enve-
lope. We modelled the envelope of each star as a Gaussian—with
Henv andΓ env fixed accordingly—then made a weighted combi-
nation to produce the composite envelope, from which the width
Wwas calculated. This is the width we adopt in the predictions
that follow.
3.3. Results
Fig. 1 is an HR diagram showing stars in the PIC on the lower
main sequence having apparent magnitudes in the visual band
V≤12. To filter out targets lying significantly above and below
the main sequence we applied a moving median filter of width
400 K to constrain the underlyingL-T efftrend, and then offset
that trend line by 0.1 dex and−0.2 dex to give, respectively, the
upper and lower selection thresholds marked by the blue dashed
lines in the figure. The final K-dwarf sample comprises 2,410
stars spanning the range 3900≤T eff <5300 K—i.e., from the
K/M dwarf boundary at the cool end to the G/K dwarf bound-
ary at the hot end—with an apparent visual magnitude cut-offof
V≤12. In what follows, we make detectability predictions for
subsamples of stars in 400 K wideT effbins, with each bin offset
by 100 K. The narrower the width of the bins, the more similar
are the fundamental properties and theν max of the targets, which
maximises the extent to which a peaked accumulation of power
builds in the combined spectrum when the individual spectra are
combined. However, narrowing the bin width comes at the ex-
pense of reducing the number of targets whose frequency power
spectra will be combined in thatT effbin, which in turn reduces
the S/N in the composite spectrum. The choice of 400 K was
found to strike a good compromise between the spread on fun-
damental properties in each bin and the size of the sample.
Fig. 2 plots the medianM,R,ν max (top row),P tot andσ hr
(bottom row) of each subsample as a function of the central
temperature of the bin, using the PIC parameters and with the
shaded regions bounding the 16th and 84th percentiles. Note we
also tested the impact on our predictions of instead using the
GaiaDR3gspphot(Gaia Collaboration et al. 2023) estimates
of logg,R, andT efffor our selected targets. This did not signif-
icantly affect the results that follow, nor the conclusions drawn
from our analysis.
To introduce our predictions and the general form they take,
Fig. 3 shows illustrative results for three temperature bins, differ-
ent values of the amplitude exponents, and an assumed observa-
tion duration ofT=2 yr. Plots in the left-hand column show the
predicted significances PSD as a function of the cumulative num-
ber of stars included in the combined spectrum. Stars are added
in order of increasing noiseσ hr, beginning with the lowest-noise
target. The middle column shows the predictions as a function
of apparent visual magnitude,V. The branches in the plots arise
from differences in the number of PLATO cameras that observe
each target, depending on where in the PLATO field-of-view the
target lies. This means that, for PLATO at least, there is not a
one-to-one relationship between noise and apparent magnitude.
Plots in the right-hand column show the corresponding detec-
tion probabilitiesp final, calculated for a false-alarm threshold of
pfalse =0.01.
Results for all three temperature bins in Fig. 3 show similar
trends. The detection significance and probability both increase
as we include more stars. Most of the cumulative gain comes
from the early batches of stars. This is to be expected because
they have the lowest noise. The results asymptote at higher star
counts: as noted already near the end of Section 2.2, this reflects
the diminishing returns of including higher-noise stars. The sig-
nificance and probability decrease for higher values of the ampli-
tude exponent,s, and as we progress from the highest to the low-
est temperature bins, owing to the lower predicted amplitudes.
It is also instructive to show the predictions from the analyt-
ical approach. Recall it uses Equations 8 and 20, and requires
its own set of inputs. First, the effective PLATO field of view
of≃2149 deg 2 corresponds to an all-sky fraction ofα=0.052.
Appendix A presents the analysis we performed to arrive at an
equivalent stellar number densityn=2.4×10 −3 pc−3 for the se-
lected sample in the 4300≤T eff<4700 K temperature bin. We
then adopted central fundamental stellar properties for the bin of
M=0.72 M ⊙,R=0.72 R ⊙, andT eff=4500 K. To estimate the
noiseσ 10 for these central properties, we converted the central
luminosity (L∝R 2T 4
eff) to aV-band magnitude at 10 pc, using
a bolometric correction calculated following Torres (2010); and
then used the noise model in Börner et al. (2024) to estimateσhr.
We made predictions for different numbers of cameras, assuming
the noise scales with the square root of that number.
Fig. 4 plots the analytical predictions ofs PSD andp final for
the 4300≤T eff <4700 K temperature bin, with different rows
showing predictions for different numbers of PLATO cameras.
The form of the predictions follows what we saw from the dis-
crete numerical predictions. Note the cumulative count of stars
reaches a slightly higher number atV=12 than the PIC subsam-
ple for this temperature bin, because the subsample is consistent
with being volume complete only out to a distance of≃87 pc
(see Appendix A). However, a star having the adopted central
fundamental parameters used to make the analytical predictions
Article number, page 6

Chaplin et al.: Ensemble asteroseismology of K dwarfs
Fig. 2: The medianM,R,ν max (top row),P tot andσ hr (bottom row) of each PIC subsample as a function of the central temperature
of the bin. The shaded regions bound the 16th and 84th percentiles. For theP tot plot, the shading is associated to thes=1.5
predictions.
in Fig. 4 reachesV=12 at a slightly greater distance of just over
93 pc.
As expected, the results from the analytical predictions are
highly dependent on the number of cameras. The 12-camera
prediction is the closest to the discrete numerical predictions in
Fig 3. This is not surprising: 12 corresponds to the mean/median
number of observing cameras (out of a total of 24) expected over
any PLATO field sample2. However, the 12-camera predictions
will err on the slightly pessimistic side should the lowest-noise
star be observed with a larger number of cameras, i.e., that star
provides the anchor point from which the combineds PSD accu-
mulates.
Fig. 5 captures the bottom-line predictions for PLATO. Here,
we plot the maximums PSD (left-hand panels) andp final (right-
hand panels) to which the predictions asymptote as more stars
are added, as a function of the central temperature of each bin.
We show predictions for observations of lengthT=2, 4 and
8 yr (top to bottom rows). The horizontal dashed lines shown in
the left-hand panels mark the 3σlevel. The horizontal lines in
the right-hand panels mark the corresponding probabilityp final
that an underlying 3σsignal will beat the adopted false alarm
threshold ofp false =0.01.
With 2 yr of data, the detection significance reaches the 3σ
level for all values of the amplitude exponent when the central
bin temperatureT eff ≳4700 K. That the trends are not entirely
smooth is just a reflection of the finite size and nature of the
underlying samples in each temperature bin. With 4 yr of data,
what were marginal detections become firm, highly significant
2 Of the total PLATO field of view, 13.5 % has 24-camera coverage,
11.1 % has 18-camera coverage, 32.9 % has 12-camera coverage, and
42.5 % has 6-camera coverage. Strictly speaking there is therefore a
57.5 % chance of having coverage by 12 or more cameras.
detections, and thes=1.4 data now exceed the 3σlevel at a
central bin temperatureT eff≳4600 K. With even more data we
predict significant detections ats=1.4 and below that push into
the late-K regime.
Fig. 6 shows examples of what combined the power spectra
would look like. Here, we constructed artificial PLATO spec-
tra for the 4300≤T eff <4700 K temperature bin, including
contributions from p-modes, granulation and noise. Detail on
the construction is presented in Appendix B. Artificial spectra
were calculated assumings=1.2, and observation lengths of
T=2 yr (top panels), corresponding to a very marginal de-
tection case (see Fig. 5), andT=4 yr (bottom panels), corre-
sponding to a firmer detection. The left-hand panels show the
combined, weighted spectra for all 357 stars in this bin (ren-
dered in grey), after applying a 5µHz boxcar to smooth the spec-
trum. The orange lines correspond to the underlying combined
limit spectrum, with the p-mode contribution corresponding to
the weighted combination of the Gaussian envelopes of each
star (see Section 3.2.1). The right-hand panels plot the residuals
given by subtracting the limit spectra from the combined spec-
tra. This should leave the weighted, combined contribution due
to the p modes, whose underlying limit contribution is shown by
the orange line. The yellow points with error bars correspond to
averages of the combined spectra computed for 550µHz-wide
bins, each offset by 275µHz.
4. Conclusions
We have presented an ensemble method for detecting signatures
of solar-like oscillations in K-type dwarfs, and shown that the
upcoming PLATO mission provides an ideal opportunity to ex-
ploit this new approach. Frequency power spectra on hundreds
of K-dwarfs lying in constrained ranges of effective temperature
Article number, page 7

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59600-26
Fig. 3: Prediction results using data from the PIC, for three temperature bins (by row); different values of the amplitude exponent,s
(see plot annotation); and an assumed observation duration ofT=2 yr. Plots in the left-hand column shows PSD as a function of the
cumulative star count, while those in the middle column instead use the apparent visual magnitude,V, as the independent variable.
Plots in the right-hand column showp final as a function of the cumulative star count.
would be combined in a weighted manner to significantly im-
prove the detectability of the oscillations. Whilst this approach
means one is unable to extract usable constraints on individ-
ual oscillation frequencies, it provides a way to detect and mea-
sure the characteristics of the composite envelope of oscillation
power given by the ensemble.
Our predictions—which use information from the PLATO
Input Catalogue on bright K-dwarf targets in the southern
LOPS2 field—suggest that PLATO has the potential to provide
ensemble detections well into the K-dwarf regime. The effec-
tive temperature limit at which we start to see robust detections
would provide valuable information. But it is also worth stress-
ing that even the absence of significant detections would allow
us to place strong limits on how the mode amplitudes scale
with stellar properties. Results on the stars with known detec-
tions suggest that there is a breakpoint at the boundary between
G- and K-type dwarfs in how the amplitudes scale with fun-
damental stellar properties. Our predictions indicate we would
be able to explore that transition in some detail using ensemble
PLATO data based on a statistically significant sample of stars.
We know that strong magnetic activity suppresses the amplitudes
of solar-like oscillations (e.g., see Chaplin et al. 2011a and refer-
ences therein). Sayeed et al. (2025) have recently demonstrated a
significant correlation of mode amplitudes with direct measures
of activity based on emission in Ca H&K lines. Activity is, of
course, likely to be a relevant issue for any field sample of K
dwarfs. However, a large statistical sample allows the effects to
be explored, e.g., by breaking down the large samples into sub-
samples that show different levels of activity based on additional
spectroscopic data or signatures of rotational modulation of ac-
tive features in the PLATO lightcurves.
Results from PLATO will of course depend on the quality
of the photometry, including the potential impact of background
sources. Our predictions have made use of realistic noise esti-
mates provided by the PLATO project, which include estimated
instrumental and other contributions beyond the expected shot
noise levels. Moreover, that our proposed sample contains bright
targets lends confidence that contamination from background
sources will not be a serious issue for any analysis.
Finally, we note that an ensemble approach may be useful
in other scenarios. Stellar clusters are an obvious example, tar-
geting ranges of the cluster isochrone that lie beyond the range
Article number, page 8

Chaplin et al.: Ensemble asteroseismology of K dwarfs
Fig. 4: Estimateds PSD andp final from the analytical predictions for the 4300≤T eff<4700 K temperature bin, with different rows
showing predictions for different numbers of PLATO cameras.
of detectability for individual stars. The cumulative gains given
by combining data on different stars are much easier to predict
in the cluster scenario, since all member stars lie at essentially
the same distance, unlike the field star case. The proposed ESA
HAYDN mission (Miglio et al. 2024) would provide an excel-
lent opportunity to exploit the approach.
Acknowledgements.This work presents results from the European Space
Agency (ESA) space mission PLATO. The PLATO payload, the PLATO Ground
Segment and PLATO data processing are joint developments of ESA and the
PLATO mission consortium (PMC). Funding for the PMC is provided at na-
tional levels, in particular by countries participating in the PLATO Multilat-
eral Agreement (Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany,
Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Norway, and United
Kingdom) and institutions from Brazil. Members of the PLATO Consortium can
be found athttps://platomission.com/. The ESA PLATO mission web-
site ishttps://www.cosmos.esa.int/plato. We thank all teams working
for PLATO. W.J.C., G.R.D, M.B.N. and A.S. acknowledge the support of the UK
Space Agency. T.L.C. is supported by Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia
(FCT) in the form of a work contract (2023.08117.CEECIND/CP2839/CT0004).
M.N.L. acknowledges support from the ESA PRODEX programme (PEA
4000142995). This research has made use of NASA’s Astrophysics Data Sys-
tem Bibliographic Services.
References
Anderson, E. R., Duvall, Jr., T. L., & Jefferies, S. M. 1990, ApJ, 364, 699
Ball, W. H., Chaplin, W. J., Schofield, M., et al. 2018, ApJS, 239, 34
Barclay, T., Rowe, J. F., Lissauer, J. J., et al. 2013, Nature, 494, 452
Basu, S. & Chaplin, W. J. 2017, Asteroseismic Data Analysis: Foundations and
Techniques
Börner, A., Paproth, C., Cabrera, J., et al. 2024, Experimental Astronomy, 58, 1
Campante, T. L., Chaplin, W. J., Lund, M. N., et al. 2014, ApJ, 783, 123
Campante, T. L., Kjeldsen, H., Li, Y ., et al. 2024, A&A, 683, L16
Campante, T. L., Schofield, M., Kuszlewicz, J. S., et al. 2016, ApJ, 830, 138
Campante, T. L., Zhou, Y ., Kjeldsen, H., et al. 2026, submitted to A&A, submit-
ted
Chaplin, W. J., Bedding, T. R., Bonanno, A., et al. 2011a, ApJ, 732, L5
Chaplin, W. J., Kjeldsen, H., Bedding, T. R., et al. 2011b, ApJ, 732, 54
Chaplin, W. J., Kjeldsen, H., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., et al. 2013, arXiv e-
prints, arXiv:1309.0702
Gaia Collaboration, Vallenari, A., Brown, A. G. A., et al. 2023, A&A, 674, A1
Gizon, L. & Solanki, S. K. 2003, ApJ, 589, 1009
Goupil, M. J., Catala, C., Samadi, R., et al. 2024, A&A, 683, A78
Henry, T. J. & Jao, W.-C. 2024, ARA&A, 62, 593
Henry, T. J., Kirkpatrick, J. D., & Simons, D. A. 1994, AJ, 108, 1437
Hon, M., Huber, D., Li, Y ., et al. 2024, ApJ, 975, 147
Houdek, G., Balmforth, N. J., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., & Gough, D. O. 1999,
A&A, 351, 582
Kjeldsen, H. & Bedding, T. R. 1995, A&A, 293, 87
Li, Y ., Huber, D., Ong, J. M. J., et al. 2025, ApJ, 984, 125
Lund, M. N., Ballot, J., & Chaplin, W. J. 2026, A&A, 708, A150
Lund, M. N., Chaplin, W. J., Casagrande, L., et al. 2016, PASP, 128, 124204
Article number, page 9

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59600-26
Fig. 5: Maximums PSD (left-hand panels) andp final (right-hand panels) to which the predictions asymptote as more stars are included
in the combination, plotted as a function of the central temperature of each bin. Predictions are shown for observations of length
T=2, 4 and 8 yr. Colours denote different values of the amplitude exponents, and are as per previous figures, i.e.,s=1.2 in blue,
s=1.3 in orange,s=1.4 in green, ands=1.5 in red.
Lund, M. N., Chontos, A., Grundahl, F., et al. 2025, A&A, 701, A285
Lund, M. N., Silva Aguirre, V ., Davies, G. R., et al. 2017, ApJ, 835, 172
Lundkvist, M. S., Kjeldsen, H., Bedding, T. R., et al. 2024, ApJ, 964, 110
Mathur, S., García, R. A., Bugnet, L., et al. 2019, Frontiers in Astronomy and
Space Sciences, 6, 46
Miglio, A., Mosser, B., Girardi, L., et al. 2024, in 8th TESS/15th Kepler Astero-
seismic Science Consortium Workshop, 51
Montalto, M., Piotto, G., Marrese, P. M., et al. 2021, A&A, 653, A98
Mosser, B., Elsworth, Y ., Hekker, S., et al. 2012, A&A, 537, A30
Nascimbeni, V ., Piotto, G., Börner, A., et al. 2022, A&A, 658, A31
Nascimbeni, V ., Piotto, G., Cabrera, J., et al. 2025, A&A, 694, A313
Prisinzano, L., Montalto, M., Piotto, G., et al. 2026, A&A, 706, A207
Rauer, H., Aerts, C., Cabrera, J., et al. 2025, Experimental Astronomy, 59, 26
Samadi, R., Georgobiani, D., Trampedach, R., et al. 2007, A&A, 463, 297
Samadi, R., Goupil, M. J., Alecian, E., et al. 2005, JA&A, 26, 171
Santos, A. R. G., García, R. A., Mathur, S., et al. 2019, ApJS, 244, 21
Sayeed, M., Huber, D., Chontos, A., & Li, Y . 2025, AJ, 170, 212
Schmidt, M. 1968, ApJ, 151, 393
Schofield, M., Chaplin, W. J., Huber, D., et al. 2019, ApJS, 241, 12
Schofield, M. J. 2019, Phd thesis, University of Birmingham, School of
Physics & Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, B15 2TT,
UK, available athttps://etheses.bham.ac.uk/id/eprint/9226/1/
Schofield2019PhD.pdf
Torres, G. 2010, AJ, 140, 1158
White, T. R., Bedding, T. R., Stello, D., et al. 2011, ApJ, 742, L3
Winters, J. G., Henry, T. J., Jao, W.-C., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 216
Article number, page 10

Chaplin et al.: Ensemble asteroseismology of K dwarfs
Fig. 6: Artificial PLATO spectra for the 4300≤T eff<4700 K temperature bin, calculated assumings=1.2 and observation lengths
ofT=2 yr (top panels), andT=4 yr (bottom panels). The left-hand panels show the combined, weighted spectra for all 357 stars
in this bin (rendered in grey), after applying a 5µHz boxcar to smooth the spectrum. The orange lines correspond to the underlying
combined limit spectrum, with the p-mode contribution corresponding to the weighted combination of the Gaussian envelopes of
each star. The right-hand panels plot the residuals given by subtracting the limit spectra from the combined spectra. This should
leave the weighted, combined contribution due to the p modes, whose underlying limit contribution is shown by the orange line.
The yellow points with error bars correspond to averages of the combined spectra computed for 550µHz-wide bins, each offset by
275µHz.
Article number, page 11

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59600-26
Appendix A: Estimation of equivalent stellar number densities for PLATO sample
The left-hand panel of Fig. A.1 shows the cumulative count of selected stars that lie the range 4300≤T eff<4700 K, plotted as a
function of distance and with Poisson error bars. The red line is a best-fit model of the number densityn, assuming the sample is
consistent with being uniformly distributed and volume complete out to some distanced fit,max. Before coming back to the fit, we
first discuss how we determinedd fit,max by performing a uniformity test (Schmidt 1968) on the sample (see also Prisinzano et al.
2026). Consider those stars that lie within a distanced max that encloses the volumeV max =4/3πd 3
max. Each of theN max stars within
that volume lie at some distancer i, which encloses the volumeV i =4/3πr 3
i . In a uniformly distributed sample, the sum
⟨V/Vmax⟩ =N −1
max
X
i
Vi/Vmax (A.1)
has an expectation value of 0.5, and a standard error of (12Nmax)−1/2. The right-hand panel of Fig. A.1 plots this statistic for a range
of assumedd max. The sample is seen to deviate from 0.5 by more than one standard error at a distance ofd fit,max =87 pc. The red
line in the left-hand panel then shows the result of fitting the cumulative star counts to a simple model having a constant number
densityn, i.e.,V(r)=4/3αnπr 3, out to the distanced fit,max. With a PLATO all-sky fraction ofα=0.052, the fit returns a best-fitting
stellar density ofn≃2.4×10 −3 pc−3. This value is not out of line with results from the RECONS survey 3 (e.g., see Henry et al.
1994; Henry & Jao 2024), and other studies using those data (e.g., see Winters et al. 2019).
Appendix B: Construction of artificial PLATO power spectra
We used the individual data on each star in the PIC as input to our computation of the artificial PLATO power spectra. The required
input data included the seismic parametersν max (discussed in Section 2.3),H env,∆ν,A max andΓ env (all discussed in Section 3.2.1);
and the background parametersb instr andb gran (discussed in Section 3.2.2). Below we describe how spectra were computed for
individual stars. We then followed the procedures outlined in the main body of the paper to combine those individual spectra to give
the composite, weighted spectra shown in Fig. 6 for the 4300≤T eff<4700 K temperature bin.
For a given star, we first laid down a set of mode frequencies using the asymptotic relation
νnl = ∆ν (n+l/2+ϵ ) −Dl(l+1). (B.1)
Here,ν nl are the frequencies of modes of overtone numbernand angular degreel, and we include contributions for 5≤n≤30 and
0≤l≤3. The value of the phase termϵfixes the placement of the overtones in frequency. Since we are interested in detecting
the weighted excess of power in the combined spectrum, the values chosen are not crucial. Nevertheless, guided by the results of
White et al. (2011)—which suggestϵis primarily a function ofT eff—we assume values for K-dwarfs will be similar to those of red
giants with detected oscillations that have similarT eff. We then drewϵfor each star from a uniform random distribution, such that
ϵ∈U[0.7,1.3].
3 REsearch Consortium On Nearby Stars, www.recons.org.
Fig. A.1: Left-hand panel: cumulative counts versus distance for the sample in the temperature bin 4300≤T eff ≤4700 K, with
Poisson error bars. The red line shows the best-fitting model, assuming a volume-complete sample out tod fit,max =87 pc. That
limit was fixed by the results shown in the right-hand panel, from performing a Schmidt uniformity test on the selected sample as a
function of distance (see text for details).
Article number, page 12

Chaplin et al.: Ensemble asteroseismology of K dwarfs
The termDfixes the small separations in frequency between adjacent modes of angular degreel=0 and 2, andl=1 and 3. Again,
the exact values adopted here are not crucial. Guided by computed frequencies of stellar evolutionary models (e.g., see White et al.
2011), we drewDfor each star from a uniform random distribution, such that
D∈U[1.3,2.5].
We modelled the rotationally split, azimuthal components of each non-radial mode according to
νnlm =ν nl +mδν rot, (B.2)
where the rotational splitting parameterδν rot is assumed to be the same for all modes (e.g., see Ball et al. 2018). As perϵandD, the
exact values adopted for the splitting are not critical. Here, we used the results of Santos et al. (2019) on measured surface rotation
periodsP rot of K-dwarfs observed byKepler, taking their median period ofP rot ≃25 d to fix the splitting for all stars at a value of
δνrot =1/P rot =0.46µHz.
The height (maximum power spectral density) of each mode in the power spectrum is given by:
Hnlm = 2Vlεlm(i)A2
max
πΓnl
exp
−4 ln 2
 νnlm −ν max
Γenv
!2 .(B.3)
The termV l fixes the relative mode visibilities for different angular degrees, whereς(see Section 3.2.1) corresponds to the sum
of these visibilities. Following the computations for PLATO in Lund et al. (2026), we adopted values ofV 0 =1.0,V 1 =1.54,
V2 =0.51 andV 3 =0.10. The termε lm(i) fixes how the visibility of each mode component is affected by the stellar angle of
inclinationipresented by the star, and is calculated from (Gizon & Solanki 2003):
εlm(i)= (l− |m|)!
(l+|m|)! [P|m|
l (cosi)] 2. (B.4)
Here, we assumed the orientations in space of the rotation axes of our sample of stars are random, meaning we could assign an angle
ifor each star according to (e.g., see Ball et al. 2018):
i=cos −1(U[0,1]).
The variableΓ nl in Equation B.3 fixes the widths of the mode peaks in the frequency domain. These widths are known to vary with
frequency in any given solar-like oscillator (e.g., see results onKeplerstars in Lund et al. 2017). Capturing that variation is not
critical to the outcome of these simulations, as per the reasons we have given above for other parameters. For the sake of simplicity
we therefore adopted a single width for all modes in all stars. We expect the widths for K-dwarfs to be narrower than those shown
by detected solar-like oscillations in G and K dwarfs. Here, we fixedΓ nl =0.25µHz.
With all oscillation parameters computed, the total underlying noise-free (limit) spectrum due to the modes is given by:
Posc =
X
nlm
Hnlm
1+
 ν−ν nlm
Γnl/2
!2
−1
. (B.5)
The full limit spectrum then includes contributions from granulation and instrumental noise, and is given by:
P(ν)=η 2[Posc(ν)+P gran(ν)]+b instr, (B.6)
where for completeness we include the factorη=sinc[π(ν∆t)] that captures the signal attenuation due to the finite sampling∆t,
though as noted in Section 3.2.2 the cadence of 25 s means this has a negligible impact in the range of frequencies of interest here.
The power spectral density due to granulation is calculated from
Pgran(ν)= bgran[1+(2πν maxτgran)2]
1+(2πντ gran)2 , (B.7)
where we recall thatb gran corresponds to the granulation power spectral density atν max (see Section 3.2.2), and the granulation
timescale is given by:
τgran =τ gran,⊙ (νmax,⊙/νmax), (B.8)
and we adoptτ gran,⊙ =200 sec.
The grid of frequenciesνon which the spectrum is calculated is given byν=j/T, where the dummy integerjruns from
0≤j≤ν Nyq/∆T . Hereν Nyq ≡1/(2∆t)=20,000µHz is the Nyquist frequency for the PLATO cadence of∆t=25 sec (see also
Section 3.2.2); and∆ T =1/T(see Section 2.1) corresponds to the frequency resolution at critical sampling. With the underlying
noise-free power spectrum computed, the final step added stochastic noise—commensurate with the requiredχ 2 2-d.o.f. statistics—
to give a proxy of the observed spectrumPobs(ν) of the star. This was achieved by the following computation (Anderson et al. 1990):
Pobs(ν)=−P(ν) ln(U[0,1]). (B.9)
Article number, page 13