Title: Measuring cosmic bulk flow with kinetic Sunyaev-Zel'dovich velocity reconstruction
Authors: Suroor Seher Gandhi, Matthew C. Johnson, Jordan Krywonos, Michael J. Hudson
Published: 2026-05-12
Categories: astro-ph.CO

Measuring cosmic bulk flow with kinetic Sunyaev-Zel’dovich
velocity reconstruction
SuroorSeher Gandhi, 1,∗ Matthew C.Johnson, 1, 2 JordanKrywonos, 1, 2 and Michael J.Hudson3, 4, 1
1Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, 31 Caroline St N, Waterloo, ON N2L 2Y5, Canada
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, York University, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada
3Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo,
200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada
4Waterloo Centre for Astrophysics, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada
Cosmic bulk flow—the volume-averaged peculiar velocity of matter—serves as a fundamental test
of the Cosmological Principle when probed on gigaparsec (Gpc) scales. Historically, however, mea-
surements of cosmic bulk flow have been limited toR≲100h −1Mpc. We present an application
of kinetic Sunyaev-Zel’dovich (kSZ) velocity reconstruction to constrain the bulk flow on cosmolog-
ical scales, over a volume of effective radiusR∼2000h −1Mpc. We use theWISE×SuperCOSMOS
andunWISEgalaxy catalogs, combined with CMB temperature maps fromPlanckto reconstruct
large-scale velocities in six tomographic bins ranging0.1≲z≲1.5. We place some of the tightest
upper limits to date on bulk velocity at200≲R[h −1Mpc]≲2000, finding results fully consis-
tent with theΛCDMbulk flow expectation. OurunWISEconstraints are in strong tension with
theCatWISEquasar number-count dipole measurement if that dipole is due to a coherent bulk flow
∼370 kms −1 atR∼1000h −1Mpc. We also derive constraints on the matter power spectrum
at low-k(k≲10 −3 Mpc−1) with low-z(z∼1) galaxy samples. Alongside these cosmological con-
straints, we introduce a novel approach to map the optical depth bias—an inherent astrophysical
degeneracy in kSZ velocity reconstruction—across different data combinations. Our work bridges
the theoretical gap between bulk flow and kSZ-reconstructed velocities, and expands the horizon of
bulk velocity measurements out to Gpc scales.
I. INTRODUCTION
The peculiar velocity field on large scales (≳100h−1
Mpc) is a valuable probe for constraining cosmological
models. Large-scale matter and velocity perturbations
are well-described by linear theory [e.g., 1, 2], providing
a regime where robust comparisons against observations
are possible. One of the fundamental quantities derived
from the peculiar velocity field is its volume average,
known as bulk flow or bulk velocity. In a homogeneous
and isotropic universe, these bulk motions are expected
to diminish as the averaging scale increases. Homogene-
ity and isotropy on large scales are postulated by the
cosmological principle—the tenet underpinning the stan-
dard model of cosmology,ΛCDM. Tracing bulk flow as
a function of scale helps assess if the coherent motion
of matter converges to the cosmic rest frame, and thus
serves as a powerful test of the cosmological principle.
Many previous works have measured bulk flow at dif-
ferent scales (e.g., [3–5]; for a recent comprehensive list
of references, see [6]). Consistently over the past two
decades, a number of such studies have found excess
bulk velocities in tension withΛCDM predictions at dis-
tances∼100–300h −1 Mpc[e.g., 7–11]. However, con-
sensus has not yet been reached on what the origin of
this excess might be—systematics, incomplete modeling,
or new physics [for recent discussions of the continued
uncertainty, see 6, 10, 12]. This persistent ambiguity
∗ Email: ssehergandhi@pitp.ca
and its critical implications for the cosmological princi-
ple motivate the use of independent probes that can map
the velocity field out to cosmological distances∼100–
1000h −1 Mpc.
Reachingthesescales, however, presentsafundamental
challenge. Traditionalapproachestomappingoutthepe-
culiar velocity field (and hence measuring bulk flow) rely
on distances, deriving peculiar velocity from observed
redshiftz obs and distancedviav pec ≈cz obs −H 0d. How-
ever, the uncertainties associated with standard distance
indicators (e.g., Tully-Fisher [13] and Fundamental Plane
[14] relatuons, Type Ia Supernovae [15], Cepheids [16],
Tip of the Red Giant Branch [17]) scale proportionately
with distance, thereby limiting bulk flow measurements
toR∼100h −1Mpc.
The kinetic Sunyaev-Zel’dovich (kSZ) distortion of the
cosmicmicrowavebackground(CMB)[18]ispreciselythe
probethatcanovercomethislimitation. ThekSZeffectis
adirect, distance-independent measure of peculiar veloc-
ities, scaling only with the electron density and peculiar
velocity (ΘkSZ ∝n e ve). This is a significant advantage
that allows the extraction of velocity information at dis-
tances far beyond traditional methods.
Physically, the kSZ effect arises from the Doppler
shifting of CMB photons scattering off the free electron
plasma in large-scale structure (LSS), thereby imprinting
the remote peculiar velocity field (i.e., the coherent mo-
tion of remote plasma relative to the cosmic rest frame)
onto the CMB. In this work, we extract the aforemen-
tioned remote velocity signal using a technique known
as kSZ tomography or kSZ velocity reconstruction [e.g.,
19–25]. This approach leverages the cross-correlation be-
arXiv:2605.12499v1  [astro-ph.CO]  12 May 2026

2
102 103 104
RTH [h−1Mpc]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600σVTH [km/s]
1
2 3
b
g
r
WxSCOS 1
WxSCOS 2
WxSCOS 3
unWISE b
unWISE g
unWISE r
ΛCDM
FIG. 1. The main results of this work: 1σupper limits
(marked by downward arrows) on the variance of bulk veloci-
ties as a function of a tophat (‘TH’) distance scale, derived us-
ing kSZ velocity reconstruction across six galaxy subsamples.
We use two galaxy catalogs,WISE×SuperCOSMOS(WxSCOS) [33]
andunWISE[30, 31], split into three bins each (labeled by
{‘1’,‘2’,‘3’,‘b’,‘g’,‘r’}respectively, described in §III).
The shaded vertical colored regions go up to the 2σupper
limit. The horizontal extent of the error-bars is indicative of
the width of the galaxy subsample window functions. The
black curve depicts the theoretical bulk velocity variance ex-
pectation inΛCDM (Eq. (8) with a tophat window function).
The gray shaded region represents the central 68% probability
interval around the theoretical peak velocity inΛCDM [Eqs.
(27–29)]. We provide a detailed discussion in §V A, and a
comparison to other bulk flow measurements in the literature
in Figure 5.
tween the CMB and LSS tracers across multiple tomo-
graphic redshift bins. We implement the velocity recon-
struction via the quadratic estimator formalism (devel-
oped in Ref. [22] and refined in Ref. [25]), utilizing
galaxies as tracers of the free electron distribution. As
demonstrated by multiple previous works, kSZ-based ve-
locities are highly capable of probing the homogeneity
and isotropy of the universe [e.g., 26–28].
Krywonoset al.[29] recently showed the high con-
straining power of the kSZ velocity reconstruction
pipeline of Ref. [25] at low-ℓ, using the data combina-
tion ofunWISE ‘blue’galaxies [30, 31] andPlanckCMB
temperature maps [32]. This demonstration of high sen-
sitivity on large scales with existing datasets motivates
expanding the horizon of cosmological observables—like
bulk flow—that have typically been distance-limited.
One of the main contributions of our work is to formalize
the theoretical link between the dipole (ℓ= 1) of the kSZ-
reconstructed velocity field and bulk flow. Furthermore,
using the galaxy catalogsWISE×SuperCOSMOS(WxSCOS)
[33] andunWISE[30], each divided into three subsamples,
we constrain bulk flow out to∼Gpc scales (Figure 1).
Measuring bulk flow with kSZ was initially proposed in
Refs. [34, 35] via the use of galaxy clusters, and was later
implemented in multiple studies [e.g., 4, 7, 36–38]. There
are two important distinctions between these works and
the kSZ velocity reconstruction approach to bulk flow
used in our work. First, while cluster catalogs are limited
by sparse sky coverage and low number densities, we uti-
lize galaxy catalogs with high number counts that trace
the continuous large-scale structure across large fractions
of the sky. Second, cluster-based bulk flow measurements
that do reach∼Gpc scales (e.g., [4]) are cumulative: esti-
mates of bulk flow at a given distanceRinclude all clus-
ters in the sample within a sphere of that radius. Conse-
quently, they are heavily weighted by the higher sample
density of nearby clusters in the local universe. Whereas
kSZ velocity reconstruction tomographically probes the
remote bulk flow within a redshift shell, and our upper
limits (shown in Figure 1) map these shell-based veloci-
ties to effectively equivalent spheres of radiusR.
Another method of measuring bulk flow with kSZ is
based on forward-modeled templates created from galaxy
catalogs [e.g. 5], thereby mitigating the shot noise in-
herent in cluster samples. While templates are adapt-
able to various velocity models, the kSZ velocity recon-
struction approach lends itself to a highly flexible frame-
work for recovering the detailed structure of the velocity
field. Our data combination—WxSCOSandunWISEgalax-
ies withPlanck[32] CMB maps—also represents a signif-
icant improvement in sample size and cosmological reach
compared to the analysis in [5] based on 2M++ galaxies
[39] and WMAP [40].
However, utilizing galaxy catalogs for velocity recon-
struction (as is done in this work) entails a trade-off
between statistical power and astrophysical uncertainty.
While the hot gas profiles of massive clusters are rela-
tively well-constrained by X-ray and thermal-SZ obser-
vations, the distribution of ionized gas around galax-
ies is more uncertain and sensitive to baryonic feed-
back processes. Consequently, while galaxy-based ve-
locity reconstruction dramatically reduces shot noise, it
introduces a perfect degeneracy between the amplitude
of the velocity field and the uncertain optical depth of
the galaxy sample (also known as optical depth degen-
eracy, and often parameterized as a velocity bias,b v)
[e.g., 23, 41–43]. We account for this degeneracy by
translating the ACT×DESI measurement ofbv from Ref.
[44] intobv-priors applicable to our data combinations of
Planck×WxSCOSandPlanck×unWISE. We then marginal-
ize overb v when deriving bounds on bulk flow.
This paper is organized as follows: we provide theo-
retical background in §II, including a discussion of ideal-
ized window functions and the kSZ velocity reconstruc-
tion window function. §III provides details of the data
products we use. In §IV, we describe how we get con-
straints on bulk flow from kSZ velocity reconstruction.
We describe our results in §V, place them in context and
discuss their implications in §VI, and conclude in §VII.
Appendices B and C review aspects of the kSZ veloc-

3
ity reconstruction procedure. Appendix D details how
we incorporate data-informed constraints on the optical
depth bias. In Appendix E, we explain how we translate
other existing bulk flow measurements to values that can
be consistently compared with our upper limits (summa-
rized in Figure 5 and Table II).
II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
II A. Bulk Flow Theory
The bulk velocity,V, is a volume-average of the pecu-
liar velocity, defined within some volume usually centered
around the Local Group. To calculate this, we begin with
the line-of-sight integral over the peculiar velocity field,
vpec(x, η), weighted by a given window function (writing
comoving spatial coordinates asx=χ ˆn):
V( ˆn) =
Z
dχ W(χ ˆn)v pec(χˆn, η(χ)),(1)
where ˆnis the unit vector along the line of sight,χis the
comoving radial distance,η(χ)is conformal time, and the
range of the integral is determined by the window func-
tionW(χ ˆn). In theory,W(χ ˆn)can be a simple Gaus-
sian or tophat function, and in practice, it can encap-
sulate survey selection functions, geometric projections,
or physically-motivated weights based on galaxy stellar
mass, luminosity, etc [45].
We can express the peculiar velocity field in terms of
its Fourier transform to get
V( ˆn) =
Z
dχ W(χ ˆn)
Z d3k
(2π)3 vpec(k, η(χ))e ik·χˆn,(2)
where, assuming linear perturbation theory,
vpec(k, η(χ)) =if(χ)H(χ)a(χ) δm(k, η(χ))
k
ˆk.(3)
In the above equation,f(χ) =dlnD/dlnais the growth
rate (withD(a)being the linear growth factor of density
fluctuations),H(χ)is the Hubble parameter,a(χ)is the
scale factor, andδm is the matter overdensity field.
The variance of the amplitude of the bulk velocity can
be estimated using the variance of Eq. (2):

|V| 2
=
Z
d2 ˆn
Z
dχ W(χ ˆn)
Z
d2 ˆn′
Z
dχ′ W(χ ′ ˆn′)
×
Z d3k
(2π)3 eik·χˆn
Z d3k′
(2π)3 e−ik′·χ′ ˆn′
×

vpec(k, η(χ))·v ∗
pec(k′, η(χ′))

(4)
≡
Z ∞
−∞
dlnkW 2(k)P mm(k),(5)
where we have used Eq. (3) to write the last line in terms
ofP mm(k), the matter power spectrum at redshiftz= 0.
We have introduced an effective window functionW(k)
(which incorporates the angular average over the 3D sur-
vey window function), whose explicit form will depend on
the technique and survey window used to measure bulk
flow. In this sense, Eq. (5) acts as a template, which we
will return to repeatedly to demonstrate the commonal-
ity between measuring bulk flow with standard methods
and with kSZ velocity reconstruction. The explicit form
ofWis provided in later sections where we discuss the
respective methods [e.g., Eqs. (6), (7), (A10)].
II B. Comparing measurements of bulk flow:
differences in window functions
Differences in the specific form ofW(k)arising
from varying survey selections and/or weight-assignment
methods can give rise to different estimates of the
bulk flow. Importantly, comparison between measure-
ments across surveys and methods (albeit non-trivial)
requires matching the effective window functions in a
self-consistent way. This is a longstanding challenge es-
pecially for tracking the evolution of bulk flow as a func-
tion of increasing redshift, as multiple surveys need to be
patched together to achieve broad redshift coverage. One
way of standardizing comparison is to find a mapping be-
tween a survey-specific window function and a theoreti-
cal, idealized window function. This simplified approach
is the one we adopt. More sophisticated approaches ex-
ist—such as the minimum variance (MV) estimator de-
veloped by [46], which more rigorously addresses observa-
tional mismatches across surveys; we defer such analyses
to future work.
We begin this section by briefly discussing two stan-
dard theoretical forms ofW—spherical top-hat (W TH)
and Gaussian (WG)— that serve as the target (ideal-
coverage) windows for many existing bulk flow measure-
ments[e.g.,3,9,11,45–47]. Wethenintroducetheproce-
dure to measure bulk flow with kSZ velocity reconstruc-
tion, which uses a third window function, qualitatively
distinct fromW TH orW G.
We leverage Eq. (5) as a template that fits each of
these three cases, allowing us to clearly demonstrate that
kSZ can extract the same physical quantity as the other
methods of measuring the bulk flow that useWTH orW G
as their standard. In §IV B 2, we present a method to
map between the kSZ effective window function and the
idealizedW TH orW G.
II B 1. Bulk Flow with Idealized Window Functions
Spherical Top-hat (‘TH’) and Gaussian (‘G’) window
functions [WTH(k;R)andW G(k;R)] are two examples
of idealized window functions that assume isotropic cov-
erage over an associated characteristic scale,R. Peculiar
velocities on scales smaller thanRget averaged over, and
those on larger scales are suppressed, thereby effectively

4
computing the bulk velocity within a given volume, co-
herent on scales∼R.
Explicitly, these two effective window functions take
the following forms in Fourier space:1
 
WTH(k;R)
2
≡ H2
0 f2
0
2π2 k
3 (sinkR−kRcoskR)
(kR)3
2
(6)
 
WG(k;R)
2
≡ H2
0 f2
0
2π2 kexp
 
−k2R2
,(7)
whereH 0 andf 0 are the functionsH(χ)andf(χ)eval-
uated atχ(z= 0) = 0. Eqs. (6) or (7) can then be
used in Eq. (5) to estimate the amplitude of bulk veloc-
ity through the variance [3],
σ2
V (R) =

|V(R)| 2
≡
Z ∞
−∞
dlnk
 
WTH,G(k;R)
2
Pmm(k),(8)
whereRsets the scale over which peculiar velocities are
averaged to compute the bulk flow. Galaxy and galaxy-
cluster surveys (which generally have anisotropic and/or
incomplete coverage) then use this theoretical estimate of
bulk velocity as the benchmark against which to compare
their measurements of bulk flow. Multiple methods exist
to weight measured peculiar velocities in optimal ways to
enable a comparison with theory [e.g., 46, 48], the details
of which are not directly relevant for this discussion. It
is worth emphasizing, however, that such a comparison
between theoretical and measured bulk flow (and hence,
between idealized and realistic window functions) is a
crucial aspect of any study aiming to use bulk flow to
test cosmological models.
II B 2. Bulk Flow with the kSZ Velocity Reconstruction
Effective Window Function
The quantity encoded in kSZ-reconstructed velocity
maps is the peculiar velocity field projected along the
line of sight, averaged over a window function:
v( ˆn)≡
Z
dχ W(χ ˆn) (vpec(χˆn, η(χ))· ˆn).(9)
But this is precisely the velocity projected along the line
of sight, which can be rewritten as [using Eq. (1)],
V( ˆn)· ˆn=
Z
dχ W(χ ˆn)vpec(χˆn, η(χ))

· ˆn.(10)
1 Note we adopt slightly modified definitions of the top-hat
(‘TH’) and Gaussian (‘G’) window functions by including the
H2
0 f2
0 k/(2π2)factor, so as to fit the form of Eq. (5). In
more standard notation, Eqs. (6, 7) can be re-expressed as 
WTH,G(k;R)
2 =H 2
0 f2
0 k/(2π2)
 
W TH,G(k;R)
2.
To then statistically estimate the amplitude of bulk
flow, we can compute the variance of Eq. (10), which is
related the velocity angular power spectrum,Cvv
ℓ , as

|V( ˆn)· ˆn|2
=
X
ℓ
2ℓ+ 1
4π C vv
ℓ .(11)
In Appendix A, we show that Eq. (11) can be writ-
ten as
3

|V( ˆn)· ˆn|2
≡
Z ∞
−∞
dlnk
X
ℓ
 
WkSZ
ℓ (k)
2
Pmm(k),(12)
= 3
X
ℓ
2ℓ+ 1
4π C vv
ℓ ,(13)
whereW kSZ
ℓ (k)is theℓ-component of the kSZ effective
window function, the explicit form of which is given in
Eq. (A10). We underscore here that Eq. (12) is the
harmonic-space kSZ velocity reconstruction counterpart
of Eq. (5), and also has the same form as Eq. (8). The
factor of3on the left-hand-side arises because⟨|V| 2⟩
[Eqs. (5, 8)] is the variance of the 3D bulk velocity vector,
whereas⟨|V( ˆn)· ˆn|2⟩is the variance of the line-of-sight
component alone. The two are related by
⟨|V| 2⟩= 3⟨|V( ˆn)· ˆn|2⟩.
Throughout this work, we simplify Eqs. (12, 13) by
making the approximation that the sum on the right-
hand-side is dominated by theℓ= 1component,
3

|V( ˆn)· ˆn|2
≈
Z ∞
−∞
dlnk
 
WkSZ
1 (k)
2
Pmm(k),(14)
≈ 9
4π C vv
1 .(15)
This is a valid assumption in the regime where the win-
dow function is much wider than the coherence length of
velocities (≳100h −1Mpc), which is true for the galaxy
subsamples we use. Figure B.2 also demonstrates that
the theoretical signalC vv;ΛCDM
ℓ (black curves) is domi-
nated byℓ= 1; for all galaxy subsamples we use, the
theory quadrupole is at least2×smaller than the dipole.
Although we do not measure a statistically significant
detection of the dipole in the kSZ-reconstructed velocity
sky-maps, we can obtain an upper limit on it (we discuss
how this is done in §IV A).
III. DATA
The process of kSZ velocity reconstruction requires
galaxy- and CMB temperature maps. These two types
of data products are then combined to construct veloc-
ity maps.

5
III A. ThreeWISE×SuperCOSMOS(WxSCOS) galaxy
subsamples
We split the∼20×10 6 unmasked galaxies in the
WISE×SuperCOSMOS(WxSCOS) catalog [33] into three bins
labeledWxSCOS ‘1’,‘2’, and‘3’. Each bin has∼6.8×
106 galaxies before masking. After applying the survey
mask,WxSCOS ‘1’,‘2’, and‘3’have∼6×10 6,6.2×10 6,
and6.3×10 6 galaxies, with median redshiftsz med ≈
0.11,0.19, and0.27, respectively. The redshift distribu-
tions and1σredshift errors for the threez-bins are shown
in the top panel of Figure C.1. The sky fraction available
withWxSCOSafter masking isf sky ≈68%.
Wecreategalaxynumber-countmaps,N g(ˆn), forthese
subsamples at NSIDE of2048usinghealpy[49, 50],
whereN g is the number count per pixel. To these raw
number-count maps, we apply empirically-derived cor-
rective weights,W corr(ˆn), to account for systematics as
follows:
Ncorr
g (ˆn) =W corr(ˆn)Ng(ˆn).
Then, we convert them to galaxy overdensity maps,
δg(ˆn) =N corr
g (ˆn)/ ¯Ncorr
g −1,
where ¯Ncorr
g =N corr
gtot /(fskyNpix)is the average number
of galaxies per unmasked pixel in the corrected number-
countmap. Finally, thegalaxyoverdensitymapsareused
in the kSZ velocity reconstruction pipeline [Eq. (B1)].
For more details on the corrective weights, see Ap-
pendix B, §1.
III B. ThreeunWISEgalaxy subsamples
We use the three tomographic galaxy subsamples,
unWISE[30]‘blue’,‘green’, and‘red’created by
Krolewskiet al.[31], at median redshiftsz med ≈0.6,1.1,
and1.5respectively. After applying the catalog mask,
the‘blue’subsample has∼81×10 6 galaxies,‘green’
has∼44×10 6, and‘red’has∼2.5×10 6. The red-
shift distributions and1σredshift errors for the three
z-bins are shown in the bottom panel of Figure C.1.
WithunWISE, the unmasked sky fraction available is
fsky ≈58%.
As mentioned above forWxSCOS, we similarly cre-
ate systematics-corrected galaxy number-count maps,
Ncorr
g (ˆn), for theunWISEsubsamples as well. Then we
generate galaxy overdensity maps [δg(ˆn)] used in the
kSZ velocity reconstruction procedure. For more de-
tails on how the corrective weights are derived, see Ap-
pendix B, §1.
III C.PlanckCMB temperature map
For the CMB temperature mapΘ(ˆn)needed for kSZ
velocity reconstruction, we use the Spectral Matching
Independent Component Analysis (SMICA) map from
Planck[32, 51]. This map was created using a tech-
nique from Ref. [52] that linearly weights eachPlanck
frequency map in harmonic space. The weighting is such
that the variance of a desired spectral component is min-
imized, which in this case is the blackbody spectrum con-
taining the primary CMB and kSZ.
III D. kSZ-reconstructed velocity maps
The derived data product that we use are kSZ-
reconstructed line-of-sight velocity maps,v( ˆn), which
we create by combining the corrected galaxy overdensity
maps [δg(ˆn)] and the CMBSMICAmap [Θ(ˆn)] mentioned
above. We build a velocity map corresponding to each
of the six galaxy subsamples (WxSCOS 1,2,3,unWISE
‘blue’,‘green’, and‘red’) following the kSZ veloc-
ity reconstruction pipeline of Ref. [25]. We review their
pipeline in Appendix B, and show the six reconstructed
velocity maps in Figure B.1. The procedure for deriv-
ing bulk flow constraints that we describe next in §IV is
applied to each of the six velocity maps.
IV. METHODS: CONSTRAINING BULK FLOW
FROM KSZ VELOCITY RECONSTRUCTION
In §II B 2, we explained that the dipole (ℓ= 1) com-
ponent of a kSZ velocity sky-map captures bulk flow
within a survey window. But to place kSZ-derived bulk
flow measurements in a cosmological context, we need
to compare them with theoretical predictions (e.g., from
ΛCDM). One way to do this, starting from a constraint
on bulk velocity derived from kSZ (that usesWkSZ
1 ), is
to place a constraint on the bulk velocity thatwould be
observed with an idealized survey window (e.g.,WTHor
WG).
First, we build velocity maps using the kSZ velocity re-
construction pipeline of Ref. [25] (see Appendix B for an
overview) for our six galaxy subsamples. In this section,
we describe how we obtain a 1σupper limit on the full-
sky dipole variance,C vv;1σ
1 , from the kSZ-reconstructed
velocity maps (§IV A), followed by our procedure for
translating the velocity map dipole to an upper limit on
bulk flow variance (§IV B). Figure 2 gives a graphical
summary of our method.
IV A. Constraint on the full-skyC vv
1 from the
cut-sky kSZ-reconstructed ˆC vv;cut
1
Our analysis must account for the fact that we do not
have access to data that covers the full sky, but rather,
only a masked (or cut) fraction of it. We write down the
following posterior for the full-sky dipoleCvv
1 , given the
cut-sky kSZ-reconstructed velocity map dipole ˆC vv;cut
1

6
kSZ-reconstructed
velocity map
(Figure B.1)
Cvv
1
A
[Eq. (21)]
σ2
VTH(RTH)
[Eq. (22)]
Constrain map
dipole power
§IV A
Eq. (20)
§IV B 1
Eq. (8)
§IV B 2
FIG. 2. Graphical depiction of the methodology to derive tophat bulk flow variance [σVTH(RTH)] upper limits from tomographic
kSZ reconstructed velocity maps. We implement this procedure for each galaxy subsample. For a detailed description, see §IV.
[adapted from Eq. (31) of Ref. 29]:
P(C vv
1 | ˆC vv;cut
1 )∝
Z
dbv P(b v)
Z
dϕ
Z
dθsinθ
× 1
V3/2 exp

− 3
2V

ˆC vv;cut
1 +C vv;cut
1 (bv,C vv
1 )
−2
q
ˆC vv;cut
1 Cvv;cut
1 (bv,C vv
1 ) cosθ

.
(16)
This is a generalized posterior for the full-sky dipole de-
noted by the placeholderC vv
1 , whereC vv
1 can have two
interpretations; it can be:
(i) the underlying theoretical velocity variance, in which
case we shall set the placeholderCvv
1 =C vv
1 in Eq. (16),
or,
(ii)the velocitydipolerealization inourspecific universe,
such thatC vv
1 = ˆC vv
1 .
We will discuss these in more detail below. In either case,
the cut-sky dipole modelCvv;cut
1 is related to the full-sky
dipole via
Cvv;cut
1 (bv,C vv
1 ) =b 2
vM11Cvv
1 ,(17)
whereb v is the optical depth bias parameter, andM11
is theℓ=ℓ ′ = 1element of the mode-mode coupling
matrixM ℓℓ′ [53]. This expression holds when theℓ= 1
component dominates the signal, which is the case for
each of the samples considered here (see Fig. B.2).
When constraining the underlying theory (i.e., case (i)
above), the varianceVincludes both cosmic variance
and the cut-sky reconstruction noise, and thusV=
Cvv;cut
1 (bv, Cvv;ΛCDM
1 )+N cut
rec. TheΛCDM angular power
spectrum is computed as [using Eqs. (14, 15)]
C vv;ΛCDM
ℓ = 4π
9
Z ∞
−∞
dlnk

WkSZ
ℓ (k)
2
P ΛCDM
mm (k),(18)
where
 
WkSZ
ℓ (k)
2
is defined in Eq. (A10), and
P ΛCDM
mm (k)iscomputedusingCAMB[54].N cut
rec =f skyNrec,
wheref sky is the unmasked sky fraction. The explicit
form of the full-sky reconstruction noiseN rec is given
in Eq. (B3). Case (i) is applicable when we constrain
the underlying theoretical bulk flow varianceσV (R)(Fig-
ure 1, §V A), and the matter power spectrumPmm(k)
(Figure 4, §V B).
On the other hand, to get bulk velocity constraints
on the realization of our universe (case (ii) above), the
uncertainty comes solely from the reconstruction noise,
and thus we setV=N cut
rec in Eq. (16). This case is ap-
plicable when we compare our constraints to other mea-
surements of bulk velocity in our Galactic neighborhood
(Figure 5, §VI A).
The other components of Eq. (16) are as follows: the
dipole of the masked kSZ-reconstructed velocity map,
ˆC vv;cut
1 , is obtained withhealpy’s [49, 50]anafastfunc-
tion.P(b v)is a prior onb v (shown in Figure D.3), in-
formed by the high signal-to-noiseb v measurement of
Ref. [44] that used DESI galaxies and ACT CMB data.
We deriveP(b v)by translating the DESI×ACTb v mea-
surement to apply to our galaxy- and CMB-data combi-
nations, i.e.,unWISEandWxSCOS×Planck. More details
on how we implement this translation are in §VI E and
Appendix D.
With the posterior in Eq. (16), we can then find the
1σupper limit on the full-sky dipole,Cvv;1σ
1 , such that:
R Cvv;1σ
1
0 P(C vv
1 | ˆC vv;cut
1 )dC vv
1R ∞
0 P(C vv
1 | ˆC vv;cut
1 )dC vv
1
= 0.68.(19)
IV B. Tophat bulk flow varianceσ2
VTH(RTH)from
the full-sky dipoleC vv
1
In this section, we present our methodology for deriv-
ing a constraint on the tophat (‘TH’) bulk flow variance,
σ2
VTH(RTH)from the full-sky dipoleC vv
1 (which we con-
strain in §IV A). Leveraging the fact that thek-range
probed by our kSZ velocity maps is in the regime where
the matter power spectrum is linear ink, we parametrize
Pmm(k) =Ak(the Harrison-Zel’dovich powerspectrum).
With this parametrization, we implement the following
two-step procedure (for each galaxy survey subsample):
1. Having constrainedC vv
1 , we infer the power spec-
trum amplitude,A, by settingP mm(k) =A kin
Eq. (14).
2. With the amplitudeAobtained above, we com-
puteσ 2
VTH(RTH)using Eq. (8), whereR TH is the
tophat distance scale that effectively matches the
k-sensitivity ofW kSZ
1 (k).
We discuss these two steps in more detail below.

7
IV B 1. Power spectrum amplitudeAfrom the dipoleC vv
1
This step closely resembles what is done in Tegmark
and Zaldarriaga [55, see their §II A] to convert the mea-
sured CMB temperature anisotropy angular power spec-
trum ˆC T T
ℓ into constraints on the linear matter power
spectrumP mm(k). For kSZ velocity reconstruction, the
analogous angular power spectrum isCvv
ℓ , and we further
fixℓ= 1.
With the linear parametrizationP mm(k) =Ak,
Eqs. (14) and (15) can be combined as
9
4π Cvv
1 =A
Z ∞
−∞
dlnk
 
WkSZ
1 (k)
2
k,(20)
and then rearranged to get the matter power spectrum
amplitude
A≡
9
4π Cvv
1
N kSZ (21)
whereN kSZ is theℓ= 1kSZ effective window function
normalization [i.e., the integral in Eq. (20)].
IV B 2.σ 2
VTH(RTH)constraint from the matter power
spectrum amplitudeA
We use our estimate of the matter power spectrum
amplitude from Eq. (21) in Eq. (8) to get
σ2
VTH(RTH) =A
Z ∞
−∞
dlnk
 
WTH(k;R TH)
2
k(22)
≡ 9
4π Cvv
1
N TH
N kSZ ,(23)
whereN TH is the tophat window function normalization,
given by the integral in Eq. (22). We have chosen the
spherical top-hatW TH with a smoothing scaleR TH as
our idealized window function (as opposed toWG).
Eq. (23) gives the bulk flow upper limits as shown
on the vertical axis of Fig. 1. To get the horizontal
axis coordinate, we need to findR TH.R TH has to
be chosen such that
 
WTH(k;R TH)
2
is most strongly
peaked in the samek-range as
 
WkSZ
1 (k)
2
, as this ef-
fectively maps the two weighting functions onto each
other. There is not a unique way to do so; the con-
vention we follow (adapted from Ref. [55]) is to find the
RTH that generates ak-profile of
 
WTH(k;R TH)
2
whose
50th percentilek TH
50 matches the 50th percentilekkSZ
50 of 
WkSZ
1 (k)
2
. Since we knowW kSZ
1 [Eq. (A13)], we can
findk kSZ
50 =k TH
50 ≡k 50. Then, obtainingR TH requires
scanning a range of tophat smoothing scales while hold-
ing fixed the normalized cumulative distribution function
(CDF) of the effective tophat window [Eq. (6)] to be 0.5.
After changing variables toκ≡kR, this amounts to solv-
10−5 10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1
k [Mpc−1]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
CDF(k) = 1
N kSZ,TH
∫ln k
−∞ d ln k′ (
W kSZ,TH)2
k′
1
2
3
b
g
r
unWISE r
unWISE g
unWISE b
WxSCOS 3
WxSCOS 2
WxSCOS 1
tophat (‘TH’)
FIG. 3. The cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of
normalized
 
WkSZ
1 (k)
2
(solid curves) and
 
WTH(k;R TH)
2
(dashed curves), relevant for mapping the kSZ effective win-
dowfunctionontoanequivalentsphericaltop-hatwindow(see
§IV B 2).R TH is the smoothing scale of the spherical top-
hat window function, chosen such that the 50th percentile of 
WTH(k;R TH)
2
matches the 50th percentile of
 
WkSZ
1 (k)
2
.
We do this for the six galaxy subsamples we use (labeled by
the tags{‘1’,‘2’,‘3’,‘b’,‘g’,‘r’}), the details of which
are provided in §III. The CDFs have been vertically offset for
clarity. To guide the eye, the 20th, 50th, and 80th percentile
levels for each galaxy subsample are indicated by light gray
horizontallines. ThegoodnessofthemappingfromthekSZto
tophat window functions can be gauged by the match between
the black and dark gray horizontal line segments. These seg-
ments delineate thek-band corresponding to the 20th–80th
percentile range of the window functions for kSZ (solid, black
with caps) and tophat (thick dashed, dark gray).
ing the following equation for the medianκ50 ≡k 50RTH:
CDF(κ50) =
R lnκ 50
−∞ dlnκ
 
W TH(κ)
2
κ2
R ∞
−∞ dlnκ
 
W TH(κ)
2
κ2
= 0.5,(24)
where
W TH(κ)≡ 3(sinκ−κcosκ)
κ3 (25)
is the Fourier transform of the real-space spherical
tophat window function. (Note thatW TH(k;R) =
H0f0
√
k
 √
2π

W TH(κ)—see footnote 1.) The solution
to Eq. (24) gives
RTH ≈1.738/k 50.(26)
In Figure 3, we show six normalized CDFs of 
WkSZ
1 (k)
2
(solid curves) for the six galaxy subsamples
used in this work. The CDFs have been vertically off-
set for clarity. The dashed curves are the correspond-
ing tophat CDFs of
 
WTH(k;R TH)
2
. Since the tophat

8
smoothing scaleR TH is chosen such thatk TH
50 =k kSZ
50 ,
the dashed and solid curves for each galaxy subsample
coincide when the CDFs cross the 50th percentile mark.
The goodness of the mapping from the kSZ to tophat
window functions can be gauged by the match between
the black and dark gray horizontal line segments in Fig-
ure 3.
V. RESULTS
The kSZ-reconstructed velocity maps obtained for the
masked galaxy subsamples (Figure B.1) yield the cut-sky
angular power spectrum,ˆC vv;cut
ℓ . We findˆC vv;cut
ℓ to sim-
ply be consistent with the expected cut-sky reconstruc-
tion noise,N cut
rec =f skyNrec (Figure B.2 demonstrates
this). Broad consistency with noise means no signal is
detected in the reconstructedˆC vv;cut
ℓ , and consequently,
we place upper limits using the non-detection.
V A. Theoretical bulk flow variance upper limits
(Figure 1)
To constrain the underlying theoretical bulk flow vari-
ance, we first need a constraint onCvv
1 . Thus, we set the
placeholderC vv
1 =C vv
1 andV=C vv;cut
1 (bv, Cvv;ΛCDM
1 ) +
Ncut
rec in Eq. (16). This corresponds to constraining the
underlying theoretical dipole, and thusVincludes cosmic
variance (case (i) discussed in §IV A). With the poste-
rior in Eq. (16) adapted as such, we obtain a1σupper
limitC vv;1σ
1 using Eq. (19). Finally, withCvv
1 →C vv;1σ
1
in Eq. (23), we obtain 1σupper limits on the tophat bulk
flow variance,σ1σ
VTH, for six galaxy subsamples.
Figure 1 shows these six upper limits as a function
of the tophat scale, comprising the main results of this
work. Each downward arrow in the figure is plotted at
its respective smoothing scaleRTH of the tophat (‘TH’)
window function that we find to be effectively equivalent
to the kSZ window function [see discussion of Eq. (26)].
The width of the horizontal line segment attached to each
arrow indicates the 20th–80th percentile width of the re-
spective tophat window. Specifically, the left edge (min-
imum)R min =R TH k50/kTH
80 , and the right edge (maxi-
mum)R max =R TH k50/kTH
20 . Thek-valuesk TH
20 ,k 50, and
kTH
80 , are where, in Figure 3, the tophat CDF (dashed)
crosses the 20th, 50th, and 80th percentiles, respectively.
The shaded vertical colored bands in Figure 1 extend up
to the 2σupper limit.
The trend in upper limits seen in Figure 1 is gov-
erned by Eq. (23). TheWxSCOSupper limits get tighter
(lower) from bin‘1’→bin‘3’driven byC vv;1σ
1 getting
progressively smaller, as reconstruction noise decreases
(compare the gray horizontal lines across the top pan-
els of Figure B.2). TheunWISEupper limits get weaker
(higher) from‘b’→‘g’→‘r’dominantly becauseC vv;1σ
1
increases significantly due to higher reconstruction noise
(comparethegrayhorizontallinesacrossthebottompan-
els of Figure B.2). This is becauseNgtot decreases and
shot noise (Nshot = 4πfsky/Ngtot) gets higher.
For comparison to theory, we also show theΛCDM
expectation for bulk flow,σ ΛCDM
VTH (black curve). This
ΛCDM theoretical expectation comes from Eq. (8), com-
puted with a tophat window function, and with the mat-
ter power spectrum fromCAMB[54]. The gray shaded
region around the black curve encompasses 68% of the
Maxwellian probability distribution of velocities around
its peak value,V p =
p
2/3σΛCDM
VTH . To find the interval
covered by the gray region we require [45],
Z Vp+∆V
Vp−∆V
p(V)dV= 0.68,(27)
where the Maxwellian distribution of velocities with a
varianceσ V is [56]
p(V)dV=
r
2
π
 3
σ2
V
3/2
V 2 exp

−3V 2
2σ2
V

dV.(28)
This results in the grey shaded range in Figure 1
[Vp −∆V, V p + ∆V]≈[0.43σ ΛCDM
VTH ,1.20σ ΛCDM
VTH ].(29)
V B. Matter power spectrum upper limits
(Figure 4)
A by-product of our procedure (described in §IV B)
is that we can also constrain the linear matter power
spectrum on large scales. To do this, we first need to
constrainC vv
1 . We set the placeholderC vv
1 =C vv
1 and
V=C vv;cut
1 (bv, Cvv;ΛCDM
1 ) +N cut
rec in Eq. (16). Once
again, as forσ VTH constraints above, this corresponds
to constraining the underlying theoretical dipole (i.e.,
case (i) discussed in §IV A), and thusVincludes cos-
mic variance. With Eq. (16) adjusted to be the appro-
priate posterior, we get the1σupper limitC vv;1σ
1 using
Eq. (19). For each of the six galaxy catalog bins, we set
Cvv
1 →C vv;1σ
1 in Eq. (21) to get an upper limit on the
amplitude of the matter power spectrum,A1σ. Then, we
finally compute
P 1σ
mm(k50) =A 1σ k50,(30)
wherek 50 is thek-value corresponding to the 50th per-
centile of
 
WkSZ
1 (k)
2
(the same as the 50th percentile of 
WTH(k;R TH)
2
).
In Figure 4, the downward arrows mark the 1σupper
limits,P 1σ
mm(k50)derived using Eq. (30). The width of
the horizontal line segment on each downward arrow cor-
responds to the 20th–80th percentile range of the respec-
tive kSZ window function. Specifically, the line segment
extends from the left edge (minimum)kkSZ
20 to the right
edge (maximum)kkSZ
80 . The values ofkkSZ
20 , k 50,andk kSZ
80
are where, in Figure 3, the kSZ CDFs (solid curves) reach

9
101102103
RTH [h−1Mpc]
10−3 10−2 10−1
k [Mpc−1]
104
105
106
107
Pmm(k) [Mpc 3]
123
b
g
r
unWISE r
unWISE g
unWISE b
WxSCOS 3
WxSCOS 2
WxSCOS 1
ΛCDM
FIG. 4. The 1σupper limits (marked by downward arrows)
on the matter power spectrumP mm(k)today, derived us-
ing Eq. (30) for the six galaxy subsamples used in this work.
The vertical shaded colored bands extend up to the 2σlevel.
Where each downward arrow falls along the bottom horizon-
tal axis (k50) corresponds directly to median of each effective
window function, i.e., where the respective CDF in Figure 3
crosses the 50th percentile mark. The width of each upper
limit corresponds to thek-range spanning the 20th–80th per-
centiles of each kSZ effective window function. To help map
between this figure and Figure 1, the top horizontal axis is the
corresponding smoothing scale of the spherical tophat effec-
tive window function,RTH [h−1Mpc]≈1.738h/(k[Mpc −1]),
obtained by solving Eq. (24). The black curve is theΛCDM
matter power spectrum.
the 20th, 50th, and 80th percentiles, respectively. The
vertical shaded colored bands extend up to the 2σup-
per limit. Also shown for comparison with theory is the
ΛCDM matter power spectrum at redshiftz= 0(black
curve), computed withCAMB[54].
The trend seen in the upper limits in Figure 4 is de-
termined largely by Eq. (21). TheWxSCOSupper lim-
its get weaker (higher) as we go from bin‘1’→bin‘3’
dominantly becauseN kSZ gets smaller. The decrease
inN kSZ is stronger than the slight decrease inC vv;1σ
1
from bin‘1’→bin‘3’. TheunWISEupper limits get
weaker (higher) from‘b’→‘g’→‘r’, too, but driven
most strongly by the increase inC vv;1σ
1 due to the re-
construction noise getting higher (compare the gray hor-
izontal lines across the lower panels of Figure B.2), as
Ngtot decreases and shot noise gets higher.
We recognize that the window of scales probed by the
WxSCOS 1sample is close tok eq ∼10 −2 Mpc−1, where
the theoretical parametrizationPmm(k) =A kbegins to
break down (turnover of the black curve in Figure 4).
A more accurate treatment in thisk-regime would be
to constrain the amplitude ˜Aof a theoretical transfer
102 103 104
RTH [h−1Mpc]
0
100
200
300
400
500
ˆVTH [km/s] 1
2 3
b
g
r
W09
S15
P18
W23-i
W23-ii
P13-i
P13-ii
P13-iii
WxSCOS 1
WxSCOS 2
WxSCOS 3
unWISE b
unWISE g
unWISE r
ΛCDM
FIG. 5. A visual comparison of various 1σmeasurements and
upper limits of bulk flow in the literature (gray circles with
error bars) with our kSZ-derived 1σupper limits (marked by
colored downward arrows). To enable self-consistent compar-
ison with the bulk flow realization (ˆV) constraints in the lit-
erature, we convert our kSZ-derived tophatˆσVTH upper limits
to ˆVTH =
p
2/3 ˆσVTH. We also translate the various distance
scales the other works probe to an equivalent tophat scale,
RTH. How we do this is described in Appendix E. The mea-
surements quoted here are from: Watkinset al.[11] (‘W23-i–
ii’), Watkinset al.[46] (‘W09’), Peeryet al.[9] (‘P18’), Scrim-
geouret al.[3] (‘S15’), and Planck Collaboration [4] (‘P13-i–
iii’). (Error bars are omitted for ‘P18’, as they report a 3Dχ2
rather than the marginalized error on the amplitudeˆV.) The
original values published by these works and their equivalents
plotted here are compiled in Table II. There is some tension
betweenourupperlimitfromWxSCOS 1andthe‘W23-i–ii’[11]
and ‘W09’ [46] measurements atRTH ∼100h −1Mpc. Our
upper limits fromunWISE ‘blue’and‘green’are among the
tightest in the literature at∼Gpc scales.
function, such thatP mm(k) = ˜A T(k). However, we do
not expect the upper limits forWxSCOS 1to change by
muchwiththismodifiedparametrization. Thisisbecause
even though the ˜A1σ inferred from a modified Eq. (21)
would increase (asN kSZ would decrease), the inferred
P 1σ
mm(k50) = ˜A1σT(k 50)would in turn be suppressed,
thereby keeping the upper limit largely unchanged. The
upper limit forσ VTH(RTH)is even more robust against
the parametrization of the matter power spectrum (as
long asW TH andW kSZ probe similark-ranges) due to
the ratio of normalizations,NTH/N kSZ, in Eq. (23).

10
VI. DISCUSSION
VI A. Comparison with other bulk flow realization
measurements (Figure 5)
Direct comparison with the raw bulk flow measure-
ments of other studies is challenging due to the highly
varied survey selection functions and weighting schemes
used. However, as suggested in Ref. [45], we can use
the theoretical bulk flow expectation as a standardiz-
ing bridge. This expectation (i.e.,σ V in Eq. (8) com-
puted with an idealized window function) is the baseline
to which studies compare their results. For instance, if
a study reports a bulk velocity measurement compared
against a theoretical expectationσ VG(RG)based on a
Gaussian window function of scaleRG, we can map this
onto an equivalent tophat smoothing scale,RTH, by re-
quiringσ VTH(RTH) =σ VG(RG). The way we map the
different scales ontoR TH is described in Appendix E,
and summarized in Table II.
In Figure 5, we collect several measurements of bulk
velocity in the literature, having mapped their respec-
tive scales to an equivalentRTH. All works quoted in
this figure constrain the bulk flow realizationˆV, which
weplotas-is. Tomakeacomparisonwithourconstraints,
we find the tophat equivalent of our kSZ-derived upper
limits on the realization-specific bulk flow of our uni-
verse, ˆVTH =
p
2/3 ˆσVTH. We use this relationship be-
tween the bulk flowˆVand its varianceˆσV because for a
Maxwellian distribution of velocities Eq. (28), the most
likely (or peak) velocityVp is related to the variance as
Vp =
p
2/3σ V. To first getˆσVTH, we derive constraints
on the realization dipole power,ˆC vv
1 , by setting the place-
holderC vv
1 = ˆC vv
1 andV=N cut
rec in Eq. (16) (case (ii) dis-
cussedin§IVA).WiththeposteriorfromEq.(16)appro-
priatelyadaptedtoconstrainarealization(i.e., nocosmic
variance included inV), we get the1σupper limitˆC vv;1σ
1
with Eq. (19). Finally, using Eq. (23) withCvv
1 → ˆC vv;1σ
1
gives the requisite1σbulk flow realization upper limit
ˆV 1σ
TH =
p
2/3 ˆσ1σ
VTH .(31)
ThisiswhereweplotourupperlimitsinFigure5(colored
downward arrows).
For comparison of all bulk flow realization constraints
against underlying theoretical bulk flow, we also plot the
ΛCDM bulk flow expectation (black curve)V ΛCDM
TH =p
2/3σ ΛCDM
VTH , whereσ ΛCDM
VTH is Eq. (8) computed with a
tophat window and theΛCDM matter power spectrum
fromCAMB[54]. The grey shaded region is the1σcredible
intervalofthetheoreticalbulkflowgivenbyEqs.(27–29).
We note that there is∼2σtension between our
WxSCOS 1upper limit and the ‘W09’ [46] and ‘W23-i–ii’
[11] measurements atRTH ∼100h −1Mpc. Since we con-
strain the tophat bulk flow realization, our upper limits
are weaker than what a more rigorous method of com-
paring window functions (e.g., the Minimum Variance
method mentioned earlier) would yield. Thus, we an-
ticipate that the current upper limits are a conservative
indicator of the tension at∼100h −1Mpc, and the true
tension might be stronger. Furthermore, withWxSCOS
‘1’–‘3’, we do not find evidence of the large coherent
bulk flows of 600-1000kms−1 out to∼300h −1 Mpc as
measured by Refs. [7, 36]. Lastly, our upper limits from
unWISE ‘blue’and‘green’are among the tightest in
the literature at∼Gpc scales.
VI B. Velocity components ˆVx, ˆVy, ˆVz (Table I)
We also constrain the velocity components ˆVi (i∈
{x, y, z}) in Galactic Cartesian coordinates using the
cut-sky dipole power ˆC vv;cut
1 measured from our kSZ-
reconstructed velocity maps. To do so, we create a spa-
tial template for each of the three orthogonal directions,
corresponding to the Cartesian components of the radial
unit vector ˆn, defined as:
ˆnx =
r
2π
3 (Y1,−1 −Y 1,1) (l= 0 ◦, b= 0 ◦)
ˆny =i
r
2π
3 (Y1,−1 +Y 1,1) (l= 90 ◦, b= 0 ◦)
ˆnz =
r
4π
3 Y1,0 (b= 90 ◦).
These templates are masked with the appropriate galaxy
subsample mask, and then we compute their auto-power
spectrum dipoleC ii;cut
1 . (On the full sky, these templates
would have a dipole power ofCii
1 = 4π/9.) The cut-sky
theoretical auto-power dipole of the templates is scaled
by the squared model amplitudeb2
vV 2
i . The posterior for
Vi can then be written as,
P(V i| ˆC vv;cut
1 )∝Z
dbv P(b v) 1
V3/2 exp

− 3
2V

ˆC vv;cut
1 +b 2
vV 2
i C ii;cut
1
−2bvVi ˆC vi;cut
1

.(32)
This approach was also taken in Ref. [29] to place con-
straints on the intrinsic CMB dipole by marginalizing
over the direction of the template.P(bv)in Eq. (32) is a
prior on the optical depth bias parameterbv (the same as
that used in Eq. (16), shown in Figure D.3), and the vari-
anceV=N cut
rec. ˆC vi;cut
1 is the dipole of the cut-sky cross-
power spectrum between the kSZ-reconstructed velocity
map and thei-direction template. Conceptually, the ex-
ponential in Eq. (32) acts as a least-squares template
fit. It determines how much of the observed dipole signal
( ˆC vv;cut
1 ) can be explained by a model where the flow is
oriented solely along thei-axis (b2
vV 2
i C ii;cut
1 ). The like-
lihood is maximized by the preferred amplitudeVi that
best accounts for the measured cross-correlationˆC vi;cut
1 .

11
RTH ˆVx ˆVy ˆVz
[h−1 Mpc] kms −1 kms −1 kms −1
WxSCOS 1 174 −90±100 −35±87 −17±55
WxSCOS 2 258 −72±78 33±67 −40±42
WxSCOS 3 349 120±75 −25±64 −13±40
unWISE ‘b’ 703 −8±29 −12±25 19±15
unWISE ‘g’ 997 41±35 10±30 −18±18
unWISE ‘r’ 1045 77±99 36±87 −34±52
TABLE I. Velocity components in Galactic Cartesian coor-
dinates derived from the credible intervals of the posterior in
Eq. (32). These velocity constraints are based on the raw kSZ
velocity reconstruction, distinct from the tophat-converted
velocitiespresentedinFigures1and5. Consequently, combin-
ing these individual 1D component limits in quadrature will
systematically yield a lower total velocity magnitude than the
formal 3D tophat upper limits shown in those figures.
The median values and1σcredible intervals are re-
ported in Table I. We note that these constraints are
based on the raw kSZ velocity reconstruction, distinct
from the tophat-converted velocities presented in Fig-
ures 1 and 5. Consequently, combining these individual
1D component limits in quadrature will systematically
yield a lower total velocity magnitude than the formal
3D tophat upper limits shown in those figures.
VI C. Implications for the CMB dipole vs.
number-count dipole anomaly
Several recent studies of quasars and distant radio
sources [e.g., 57–60] have claimed anomalous dipoles,D,
in the number counts of these objects. The expectation
is that these sources are sufficiently distant that their in-
trinsic clustering dipole is negligible: they are essentially
expected to be isotropic as seen by an observer at rest
with respect to the sample. However, as pointed out by
Ellis and Baldwin [61], an observer moving with respect
to the sample will see a “kinematic” dipole due to their
own motion. Assuming a purely kinematic origin, this
number-count dipole is proportional to the amplitude of
the relative velocity between the Solar system (atR= 0)
and the bulk motion of the distant shell of sources, i.e.,
D(R)∝ |v ⊙ −V shell(R)|,(33)
wherev ⊙ is the velocity of the Sun with respect to the
CMB, andV shell(R)is the CMB-frame velocity of a dis-
tant shell of sources at a typical distanceR. The motion
of a distant shell of sources with respect to the cosmic
rest frame is precisely the bulk flow we probe with kSZ.
Thus, our kSZ-derived upper limits on the tophat bulk
flow—ˆVTH in Figure 5— constrain|Vshell(R)|, and allow
us to compare with the number-count dipole measure-
ments.
The dipole in the CMB measured by the Planck Col-
laborationet al.[32] gives
|v⊙|= (369.82±0.11) km s −1.
InΛCDM, the expectation is that, for large volumes,
Vshell(R)will be small and uncorrelated withv ⊙. Be-
cause the direction of the bulk flow on very large scales
is random relative tov ⊙, adding their amplitudes in
quadrature gives aΛCDM theoretical expectation for the
number-count dipoleD[Eq. (33)],
DΛCDM(RTH)∼
q
|v⊙|2 +
V ΛCDM
TH (RTH)
2
≈ |v ⊙|,(34)
where the second step is follows inΛCDM ifRis suffi-
ciently large that|V ΛCDM
TH (RTH)
 ≪ |v ⊙|. The quasar
number count dipole anomaly lies in the discrepancy
between thisΛCDM expectation and the measured ˆD,
where the latter has been observed to be up to∼
2D ΛCDM [e.g., withCatWISEquasars, 62].
Of the six galaxy subsamples used in this work, the
onewhoseredshiftdistributionoverlapsmostcloselywith
CatWISE(‘CW’) isunWISE ‘green’(compare Figure 3 in
Ref. [62] with Figure C.1 in this work). Thus we can set
RCW
TH ≈R ‘green’
TH ≈1h −1Gpc.
The black curve in Figure 5 gives the theoreti-
cal prediction for the tophat bulk flow, which yields
|V ΛCDM
TH (RCW
TH)| ≈30 kms −1 atR ‘green’
TH ≈1h −1Gpc,
confirming the expectation in Eq. (34). However, the
CatWISEobservation implies a measured dipole ampli-
tude of
ˆD(RCW
TH)≈2D ΛCDM(RCW
TH) = 740 kms −1.
The direction of this anomalously large dipole is consis-
tent with being aligned with the CMB dipole. If we in-
terpret this as being due to a bulk motion of theCatWISE
quasar sample with respect to the CMB, the sample’s ve-
locity ˆVTH(RCW
TH)must be roughly anti-aligned with the
Solar velocity, implying [Eq. (33)]
ˆD(RCW
TH)∼ |v ⊙ − ˆVTH(RCW
TH)| ≈ |v ⊙|+
 ˆVTH(RCW
TH)
,
whichgivesanimpliedbulkflowestimatefortheCatWISE
quasar shell,
 ˆVTH(RCW
TH)
 ∼ ˆD(RCW
TH)− |v ⊙|= 370 kms −1.
This bulk flow implied by theCatWISEnumber-count
dipole measurement would be in strong tension with
ourunWISE ‘green’upper limit of ˆVTH(R‘green’
TH )<
115 kms −1, and even stronger tension with theunWISE
‘blue’upper limit of ˆVTH(R‘blue’
TH )<72 kms −1 in Fig-
ure 5.
Our upper limits on bulk flow do not indicate any ten-
sion withΛCDM, and establish the sensitivity and reach
of kSZ velocity reconstruction on∼Gpc scales.

12
VI D. Low-k, low-z P mm(k)withunWISE ‘blue’
The upper limit onPmm(k)withunWISE ‘blue’(la-
beled ‘b’ in Figure 4) is, to our knowledge, one of the
few informative constraints obtained from low-redshift
(z≲1)LSS tracers atk≲10 −3 Mpc−1 (the other com-
parable one being in Macaulayet al.[63]). Almost all
constraints on the matter power spectrum at such low-k
come from the CMB, which probesz≫1. We find that
unWISE ‘blue’, with a median redshift ofz med ≈0.6,
can constrain matter clustering at low-k. The limit is not
stringent enough to constrain beyond-ΛCDM scenarios.
However, it demonstrates the promise of kSZ velocity re-
construction as a probe of large scales, which will only
improve with upcoming data.
VI E. Data-informed optical depth degeneracy
error
The optical depth bias is a survey-dependent quan-
tity, which can make it challenging to directly compare
bv constraints or use existing constraints to set a prior for
a specific analysis. In Appendix D, we present a method
to translate ACT×DESI measurements ofb v into con-
straints on our gas-halo model parameters. This proce-
dure is general and can be applied to any measurement
ofb v, provided the corresponding fiducialCτ g
ℓ ,C gg
ℓ , and
C T T
ℓ used in that analysis are available. Once constraints
on the gas–halo model parameters are obtained, they can
be propagated to compute a survey-specific prior onbv
for any kSZ velocity reconstruction dataset. This method
therefore enables constraints from high signal-to-noise
measurements to inform analyses with different survey
characteristics.
In the context of this work, ACT×DESI provides rela-
tively high signal-to-noise measurements ofbv, while the
Planck×unWISEandWxSCOScombinations probe larger
angular scales relevant for bulk-flow constraints. This is
a convenient way of leveraging the constraining power
of deep surveys like ACT, while also benefiting from the
large sky coverage ofPlanckfor cosmological measure-
ments. More broadly, this framework provides a con-
sistent way to translate optical depth bias information
between different kSZ velocity reconstruction analyses,
and is therefore useful for a wide range of cosmological
studies using kSZ velocity reconstruction.
VII. CONCLUSION
Using the technique of kSZ velocity reconstruction laid
out in Ref. [25], we have derived some of the tightest up-
per limits on bulk flow at200≲R[h −1Mpc]≲2000
(Figures 1, 5). This not only bridges the theoretical di-
vide between kSZ-reconstructed velocities and bulk flow,
but also extends the landscape of bulk flow measure-
ments to distances∼10×larger than those tradition-
ally probed by peculiar velocity surveys using distance
estimators. We find that the kSZ-reconstructed velocity
field also yields informative upper limits on the large-
scale (k≲10 −3Mpc−1) matter power spectrum,Pmm(k)
(Figure 4), withz≲1tracers. To obtain both of these
types of cosmological constraints, we used two galaxy
catalogs that maximize sky coverage and number den-
sity (WxSCOSandunWISE) divided into threez-bins each,
in combination with theSMICACMB temperature map
fromPlanck.
Given our resulting sensitivity on Gpc scales, the kSZ-
reconstructed velocity field is well-suited for testing the
Cosmological Principle. Specifically, constraints on the
bulk flow realizationˆVatR∼Gpcserve as an indepen-
dent check of the anomalously large number-count dipole
measurement [59, 62]. OurunWISE ‘blue’and‘green’
upper limits (marked‘b’and‘g’in Figure 5) do not
indicate the presence of any anomalous bulk motion of
LSS tracers, and are in strong tension with theCatWISE
number-count dipole measurement. We find results con-
sistent with the large-scale statistical homogeneity and
isotropy expected inΛCDM (§VI C).
To ensure the robustness of our constraints, we also
implement a novel analysis to account for the optical
depth degeneracy (inherent in kSZ velocity reconstruc-
tion, parametrized by the bias parameterbv) in a data-
informed manner. We translate the high signal-to-noise
measurement ofbv from ACT×DESI data [44] to a range
ofb v values for the data combinations used in this work
(i.e., forPlanck×WxSCOSandPlanck×unWISE; see §VI E,
Appendix D).
Although the kSZ velocity reconstruction pipeline
yields a full map of velocities (Figure B.1), the dipole
(ℓ= 1) alone suffices for the stringent constraints de-
rived in this work. We outline the theoretical relationship
between the dipole of the kSZ-derived velocity angular
power spectrum,C vv
1 , and the more familiar bulk veloc-
ity variance—⟨|V|2⟩orσ 2
V (§II B 1–II B 2). We illustrate
that the two quantities fit the same template of Eq. (5),
and hence differ mainly by their respective effective win-
dow functions. Leveraging this relationship, we formu-
late a procedure for mapping between the two types of
window functions in §IV B. We also put our upper limits
in the context of other existing bulk flow measurements
by mapping various idealized window functions used in
the literature to a tophat (see Figure 5, §VI A, and Ap-
pendix E).
Future directions
We have demonstrated the continued promise of kSZ
velocity reconstruction to constrain cosmology on the
largest scales with existing datasets. As galaxy and CMB
surveys with large sky-coverage collect even more pris-
tine data, the reconstruction will become more sensitive
to the underlying signal,C vv
ℓ , especially at low-ℓ. The
noise can be driven down with the higher galaxy number

13
densities projected for SPHEREx [64, 65], Euclid [66, 67],
and LSST [68], and higher resolution CMB data from Si-
mons Observatory [69] and CMB-HD [70]. Consequently,
as current upper limits improve, we can begin to validate
or eliminate beyond-ΛCDM scenarios.
Future work involving more sophisticated window-
function matching, such as the Minimum Variance
method, will be essential to investigate the emergent
∼2σtensionbetweenourWxSCOS ‘1’kSZ-derivedtophat
bulk flow and the ‘W09’ [46] and ‘W23’ [11] measure-
ments at∼100h −1Mpc (Figure 5). Doing so could
also help clarify the poorly-understood origin of the
∼600 kms −1 bulk flow of the Local Group.
Tighter constraints would be valuable for bulk flow at
≳Gpc scales as well, to explore the tensions within exist-
ing measurements that test the Cosmological Principle.
Similarly, for the matter power spectrum, it would be
interesting to check for any indications of excess power
at low-kin low-ztracers with kSZ. Furthermore, reach-
ing the necessary sensitivity atk∼10 −2 Mpc−1 would
allow us to probe the turnover scale (keq) of the matter
power spectrum. Measuring this primordial feature with
low-redshift samples (e.g., withz med ≈0.1similar to
WxSCOS 1) would provide an independent standard ruler
for cosmological constraints. Ultimately, kSZ velocity re-
construction stands poised to transition from providing
competitive upper limits today to acting as a precision
probe of fundamental cosmology in the next generation
of surveys.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Roya Mohayaee for conversations that in-
spired this project, in particular for suggesting a compar-
ison between kSZ remote dipole field reconstruction and
other bulk-flow measurements via Figure 1. We thank
Selim Hotinli for helpful conversations, Alex Krolewski
for access tounWISEgalaxy maps, and Dustin Lang for
valuable support in optimizing the computational analy-
ses for this work on the Perimeter Institute’s Symmetry
HPC cluster. JK acknowledges support from the Natu-
ral Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC) through the Vanier Canada Graduate Scholar-
ship. This research was supported in part by Perimeter
Institute for Theoretical Physics. Research at Perime-
ter Institute is supported by the Government of Canada
through the Department of Innovation, Science and Eco-
nomic Development Canada and by the Province of On-
tario through the Ministry of Colleges and Universities.
MCJ and MJH are supported through NSERC by Dis-
covery grants.
Software
The computational analyses for this research utilized
thePythonprogramminglanguage, specificallytheNumPy
[71],SciPy[72], andMatplotlib[73] libraries.
AI Usage Declaration
During the preparation of this manuscript, we used
ChatGPT (OpenAI) and Gemini (Google) to facilitate
literature searches, assist with conceptual ideation, cod-
ing, debugging code, formatting, and copyediting. The
authors have reviewed and edited the output from these
tools and take full responsibility for the accuracy and
integrity of the content of this work.
Appendix A: kSZ-derived bulk flow variance
In this appendix, we work out how the kSZ-derived
bulk flow variance [Eq. (12)] can be expressed in terms
of the quantities analogous to the more standard bulk
flow variance [e.g., Eq. (8)].
We start by using Eq. (2) to write Eq. (10) as
V( ˆn)· ˆn=
Z
dχ W(χ ˆn)
Z d3k
(2π)3 vpec(k, χ)
×( ˆk· ˆn)eikχ(ˆk·ˆn),(A1)
wherewehaveexpressedv pec(k, η(χ)) =v pec(k, χ)ˆk, and
vpec(k, η(χ))is explicitly defined in Eq. (3). With the
plane-wave expansion, we can write the combination in
the last line of Eq. (A1) in terms of spherical harmonics
(ˆk· ˆn)eikχ(ˆk·ˆn) = 4π
X
ℓm
iℓ−1Y ∗
ℓm(ˆk)Yℓm(ˆn)j′
ℓ(kχ),
(A2)
where
j′
ℓ(kχ)≡ ∂jℓ(kχ)
∂(kχ) = ℓjℓ−1(kχ)−(ℓ+ 1)j ℓ+1(kχ)
(2ℓ+ 1) .(A3)
This gives
V( ˆn)· ˆn= 4π
X
ℓm
iℓ−1Yℓm(ˆn)
Z d3k
(2π)3 Y ∗
ℓm(ˆk)
×
Z
dχ W(χ ˆn)v pec(k, χ)j ′
ℓ(kχ).(A4)
The variance of Eq. (A4) is then,

|V( ˆn)· ˆn|2
= (4π)2X
ℓm
X
ℓ′m′
iℓ−ℓ′
Yℓm(ˆn)Y ∗
ℓ′m′(ˆn)
×
Z dk
(2π)3 k2
Z
d2ˆkY ∗
ℓm(ˆk)
Z d3k′
(2π)3 Yℓ′m′(ˆk′)
×
Z
dχ W(χ ˆn)j′
ℓ(kχ)
Z
dχ′ W(χ ′ ˆn)j′
ℓ′(k′χ′)
×

vpec(k, χ)v∗
pec(k′, χ′)

.(A5)

14
The auto-correlation of peculiar velocities that appears
in the last line of Eq. (A5) can be written as

vpec(k, χ)v∗
pec(k′, χ′)

= (2π) 3Dv(k, χ)Dv(k′, χ′)
×δ (3)
D (k−k ′)P vv(k),(A6)
where we have defined
Dv(k, χ)≡v pec(k, χ)/vpec(k, χ= 0).
The velocity power spectrumPvv(k)is evaluated atχ=
χ(z= 0) = 0, and can be expressed in terms of the
matter power spectrum today [using Eq. (3)] as
Pvv(k) =H 2
0 f2
0 Pmm(k)/k2,
withH 0 =H(χ= 0), andf 0 =f(χ= 0). The
Dirac delta function allows us to integrate overk′ when
computing⟨|V( ˆn)· ˆn|2⟩, set
R
d2ˆkY ∗
ℓm(ˆk)Yℓ′m′(ˆk) =
δℓℓ′δmm′, and thenP
m |Yℓm(ˆn)|2 = (2ℓ+ 1)/(4π). Plug-
ging all of this into Eq. (A5), we can write

|V( ˆn)· ˆn|2
=
X
ℓ
2ℓ+ 1
4π
Z
dk Pmm(k)
× 2
π H2
0 f2
0
Z
dχ W(χ ˆn)D v(k, χ)j ′
ℓ(kχ)
2
(A7)
= 1
3
Z ∞
−∞
dlnk
X
ℓ
 
WkSZ
ℓ (k)
2
Pmm(k)(A8)
=
X
ℓ
2ℓ+ 1
4π C vv
ℓ .(A9)
Eq. (A8) ties back to Eq. (12). By comparing Eqs. (A7)
and (A8), we can read off theℓ-component of the full kSZ
effective window function to be,
 
WkSZ
ℓ (k)
2
= 3(2ℓ+ 1) H2
0 f2
0
2π2 k
×
Z
dχ W(χ ˆn)D v(k, χ)j ′
ℓ(kχ)
2
.
(A10)
The integral on the right-hand side of Eq. (A10) con-
tains the same generic weighting or window function
W(χ ˆn)that appears in Eq. (10). For kSZ velocity re-
construction specifically,W(χ ˆn)reduces to a purely ra-
dial velocity window function,W v(χ)[defined below in
Eq. (C3)].
When the window functionW(χ ˆn)is wide enough
compared to the coherence length of cosmic velocities
(i.e.,≳100h −1Mpc), as is the case for our galaxy sub-
samples,V( ˆn)· ˆnis dominated by the largest scale
anisotropy—the dipole (ℓ= 1). This is because inte-
grating over the wide window function averages out the
small-scale peculiar velocity field. We make this approx-
imation in computingV( ˆn)· ˆnthroughout this work.
Settingℓ= 1simplifies Eqs. (A8–A10) to give

|V( ˆn)· ˆn|2
≈ 1
3
Z ∞
−∞
dlnk
 
WkSZ
1 (k)
2
Pmm(k)(A11)
≈ 3
4π C vv
1 ,(A12)
where
(WkSZ
1 (k))2 = 9 H2
0 f2
0
2π2 k
×
Z
dχW(χ ˆn)Dv(k, χ)j′
1(kχ)
2
.
(A13)
These approximate forms enter in Eqs. (14) and (15).
Figure B.2 also demonstrates the validity of this approx-
imation: the theoretical signalC vv;ΛCDM
ℓ (black curves)
is dominated byℓ= 1; for all galaxy subsamples we use,
the theory quadrupole is at least2×smaller than the
dipole.
Appendix B: kSZ-reconstructed velocity maps
Our velocity reconstruction procedure closely fol-
lows what Ref. [25] developed forunWISE ‘blue’×
PlanckSMICA, which we review below. In addition to
unWISE ‘blue’, we apply the same procedure tounWISE
‘green’and‘red’, and to the threeWxSCOSgalaxy sub-
samples as well, while usingPlanck’sSMICAmap in all
six cases.
Theline-of-sightvelocityfieldisreconstructedfromthe
CMB temperature fieldΘ(ˆn)and the galaxy overdensity
fieldδ g(ˆn)using a quadratic estimator
ˆv(ˆn) =−N rec
" ℓmaxX
ℓ=ℓmin
ℓX
m=−ℓ
Θℓm
C T T,obs
ℓ
Yℓm(ˆn)
#
×
" ℓmaxX
ℓ=ℓmin
ℓX
m=−ℓ
C τ g
ℓ δg
ℓm
C gg,obs
ℓ
Yℓm(ˆn)
#
,
(B1)
whereℓ∈(ℓ min, ℓ max) = (500,4000)imposes a high-pass
filter,C T T,obs
ℓ andC gg,obs
ℓ are the observed CMB tem-
perature and observed galaxy overdensity power spectra,
respectively.C τ g
ℓ is directly related to the optical depth-
galaxy cross-spectrum (C˙τ g
ℓ ) as follows
C τ g
ℓ =C ˙τ g
ℓ (¯χ)
R
dχ C ˙τ g
¯ℓ (χ)
C ˙τ g
¯ℓ (¯χ)
,(B2)
where¯χ=χ(z med)is the comoving distance at the me-
dian redshift of the galaxy subsample, and¯ℓ= 2000.C ˙τ g
ℓ
[Eq. (D6)] uses the optical depth window functionWτ(χ)
[Eq. (D7)], and the galaxy window functionWg(χ)[Eq.
(C2)].

15
WxSCOS 1 × smica
-900 900
ˆv [km s−1]
WxSCOS 2 × smica
-900 900
ˆv [km s−1]
WxSCOS 3 × smica
-900 900
ˆv [km s−1]
unWISE b × smica
-300 300
ˆv [km s−1]
unWISE g × smica
-300 300
ˆv [km s−1]
unWISE r × smica
-900 900
ˆv [km s−1]
FIG. B.1. The six kSZ-reconstructed velocity maps with weights that account for systematics applied. We have removed
the monopole, and smoothed with a5◦ Gaussian kernel.
1 2 3 4 5
ℓ
10−9
10−8
10−7
ˆC vv;cut
ℓ [(v/c)2]
WxSCOS 1 × smica
N cut
rec
ℓ = 1
fskyC vv;ΛCDM
ℓ
1 2 3 4 5
ℓ
WxSCOS 2 × smica
N cut
rec
ℓ = 1
fskyC vv;ΛCDM
ℓ
1 2 3 4 5
ℓ
WxSCOS 3 × smica
N cut
rec
ℓ = 1
fskyC vv;ΛCDM
ℓ
1 2 3 4 5
ℓ
10−10
10−9
10−8
10−7
ˆC vv;cut
ℓ [(v/c)2]
unWISE b × smica
N cut
rec
ℓ = 1
fskyC vv;ΛCDM
ℓ
1 2 3 4 5
ℓ
unWISE g × smica
N cut
rec
ℓ = 1
fskyC vv;ΛCDM
ℓ
1 2 3 4 5
ℓ
unWISE r × smica
N cut
rec
ℓ = 1
fskyC vv;ΛCDM
ℓ
FIG. B.2. The main point of this figure is to show that the reconstructed cut-skyˆC vv;cut
ℓ is consistent with the expected
cut-sky reconstruction noise,N cut
rec =f skyNrec [Eq. (B3)], at the∼1σlevel. This is evident in all the colored 1σerror-bars
being consistent with the dark gray horizontalNcut
rec line. The colored circles mark ˆC vv;cut
ℓ , and the error-bars extend out to
ˆC vv;cut
ℓ ±σ ˆCvv;cut
ℓ
, whereσ ˆCvv;cut
ℓ
≡
q
2/
 
(2ℓ+ 1)f sky

Ncut
rec is the 1σcosmic variance error on the cut-sky reconstruction noise.
We highlight theℓ= 1dipole with a vertical light gray band as that is the only multipole used in this work for derivingσV (R)
andP mm(k)upper limits. For reference, we show the cut-skyΛCDM angular power spectrum signalfskyC vv;ΛCDM
ℓ (thin black
curves), whereC vv;ΛCDM
ℓ is given by Eq. (18).

16
The normalization coefficient in Eq. (B1) is given by
the full-sky reconstruction noise,
Nrec ≡
" ℓmaxX
ℓ′=ℓmin
2ℓ′ + 1
4π
(C τ g
ℓ′ )2
C T T,obs
ℓ′ C gg,obs
ℓ′
#−1
,(B3)
where, once again, the rangeℓ ′ ∈(ℓ min, ℓmax) =
(500,4000)imposes a high-pass filter.
The output from the reconstruction comprises six 2-D
skymaps of velocities, corresponding to the six galaxy
subsamples used in this work. We show these recon-
structed velocity maps in Figure B.1.
From these 2-D velocity maps, we obtain the cut-sky
angular power spectrum,ˆC vv;cut
ℓ . We find that the recon-
structed ˆC vv;cut
ℓ is consistent within∼1σwith the ex-
pected cut-sky reconstruction noise,Ncut
rec, as illustrated
by Figure B.2 for1≤ℓ≤5. This implies that we do
not detect the signalC vv
1 , which is why our constraints
on bulk flow and the matter power spectrum are in the
form of upper limits, and not measurements. Only the
ℓ= 1multipole is used for theσV (R)andP mm(k)upper
limits derived in this work.
1. Corrective weights
As pointed out in Ref. [25], since the quadratic es-
timator is built to detect statistically anisotropic corre-
lations between the galaxy and CMB fields, it is highly
sensitive to spatially varying survey systematics (e.g., ex-
tinction, redshift calibration errors, survey depth varia-
tions, bright stars). These anisotropic physical effects
[P( ˆn)] introduce a spurious fluctuation into the observed
galaxy overdensity,δ P
g (ˆn) =P( ˆn)ΘP (ˆn), whereΘ P (ˆn)
is the underlying component correlated with the CMB.
This directly alters the true galaxy-CMB correlation and
contaminates the velocity signals that the estimator mea-
sures.
ThecorrelationbetweenthegalaxymapsandtheCMB
data is the strongest in the high frequency maps from
Planck(e.g., 545 GHz, 857 GHz), which are overwhelm-
ingly dominated by the Cosmic Infrared Background
(CIB) rather than the primary CMB. While the stan-
dard reconstruction procedure uses cleaned CMB data
and the galaxy map to estimate the velocity field [Eq.
(B1)], we assess potential contamination by applying
the same estimator to thePlanck857 GHz (CIB domi-
nated) map instead to recover a map of systematics. This
857 GHz×galaxy reconstruction of velocities [denoted by
ˆv857(ˆn)] captures the strong correlation between the CIB
and the large-scale structure, and the output traces the
spatial variations of the systematics [P(ˆn)] that we want
to target.
To isolateP( ˆn)from the reconstructedˆv857(ˆn)map,
we divide by the monopole (see Eq. (59) in [25]),
P( ˆn) = ˆv857(ˆn)
ˆv857
00
−1.(B4)
AsP( ˆn)is noise-dominated on small scales, we smooth
it with a28◦ FWHM Gaussian kernel to isolate the large-
scale features.
The smoothedP( ˆn)can then be converted to a map
of corrective weights,
W corr(ˆn) = 1
1 +P( ˆn) .(B5)
Figure B.3 shows theWcorr(ˆn)maps for all six galaxy
subsamples.
These maps are then applied to the galaxy number-
count maps as follows,
Ncorr
g (ˆn) =W corr(ˆn)N g(ˆn).(B6)
As mentioned in §III A–III B, it from is these corrected
maps that we obtain the galaxy overdensity maps,
δg(ˆn) =N corr
g (ˆn)/ ¯Ncorr
g −1,
where ¯Ncorr
g =N corr
gtot /(fskyNpix)is the average number
of galaxies per unmasked pixel in the corrected number-
count map. Theδg(ˆn)maps enter the velocity estimator
[Eq. (B1)] to create the velocity maps in Figure B.1.
Appendix C: Galaxy catalog redshift distributions
and window functions
1.b g dN/dz
Here we discuss the galaxy bias-limited redshift
distributions—shown in Figure C.1—for the galaxy sub-
samples used in this work. We use the clustering-based
redshift inference tool,tomographer.org[74], which is
built on the concepts and techniques developed in Refs.
[75, 76].
Given a 2-Dhealpymap of a galaxy subsample,
tomographer.orguses a reference sample of∼2×10 6
spectroscopic objects from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
to compute the galaxy bias-limited, intensity-weighted
redshift distribution of the input sample,bI dI/dz. The
“intensity”,I, is in map units of number count per pixel.
The bias-limited number density distribution we are in-
terested in is obtained by rescaling as follows:
bg
dN
dz = 1
¯ng

bI
dI
dz

= fskyNpix
Ngtot

bI
dI
dz

,(C1)
wheref sky is the unmasked fraction of the sky in the
input galaxy map,N pix is the number of pixels in the
input map, andN gtot is the total number of galaxies in
the subsample. The combination¯ng =N gtot /(fskyNpix)
is the average number of galaxies per unmasked pixel.
2.W g(χ)andW v(χ)
The quantityb g dN/dz[Eq. (C1)] is used for comput-
ing two crucial window functions that we describe next:

17
WxSCOS 1
0.8 1.2
W corr(ˆn)
WxSCOS 2
0.8 1.2
W corr(ˆn)
WxSCOS 3
0.8 1.2
W corr(ˆn)
unWISE b
0.9 1.1
W corr(ˆn)
unWISE g
0.9 1.1
W corr(ˆn)
unWISE r
0.9 1.1
W corr(ˆn)
FIG. B.3. The empirical corrective weights applied to the galaxy subsample maps to correct for systematics. See §B1 for
details.
the galaxy window functionWg(χ), and the velocity win-
dow functionW v(χ). The galaxy window function,
Wg(χ) =

bg
dN
dz

H(χ),(C2)
enters into the reconstruction throughC τ g
ℓ [Eq. (B2)].
Wg(χ)(and henceb g dN/dz) also enters the velocity win-
dow function (throughC ˙τ g
ℓ ) [25],
Wv(χ)≈ C ˙τ g
¯ℓ (χ)
R
dχ C ˙τ g
¯ℓ (χ)
,(C3)
whereC ˙τ g
ℓ is defined in Eq. (D6), and¯ℓ= 2000.W v(χ)
is what effectively determines the volume over which pe-
culiar velocities are averaged over to obtain the bulk ve-
locity of a galaxy subsample, e.g., in Eq. (10). It also
determines the effective kSZ window function defined in
Eq. (A10).
Appendix D: Data-informed prior on optical depth
bias parameterb v
This appendix is relevant to §IV A, §VI B, and §VI E.
1. Optical depth bias modeling
Any modeling uncertainties in kSZ velocity reconstruc-
tion results in a bias of the reconstructed velocities,
known as the optical depth biasbv:
ˆC vv
ℓ =b 2
v

C vv
ℓ
t
,(D1)
where the superscript “t” denotes the unknown “true”
velocity angular power spectrum. This discrepancy be-
tween the measurement and truth can arise due to in-
correct modeling of the gas-halo connection, galaxy-halo
connection, uncertainties in the redshift distribution of
the galaxy survey, and environmental/selection effects,
but has been shown to be scale-independent on large-
scales [23, 24, 41, 77, 78]. The optical depth bias is given
by [25]
bv(χ)≃
P
ℓ1
2ℓ1+1
4π
Cτ g
ℓ1 [Cτ g
ℓ1 ]t
CT T
ℓ1 Cgg
ℓ1
P
ℓ2
2ℓ2+1
4π
(Cτ g
ℓ2 )2
CT T
ℓ2 Cgg
ℓ2
[C ˙τ g
ℓ=¯ℓ(χ)]t
C ˙τ g
ℓ=¯ℓ(χ)
C τ g
ℓ=¯ℓ
[C τ g
ℓ=¯ℓ]t (D2)
in the squeezed limit where the reconstructed velocities
(ℓ)are on much larger scales than the primary CMB
(ℓ1) and galaxy spectra (ℓ2)—i.e.,ℓ≪ℓ 1, ℓ2—making
bv scale-independent [25]. TheC ℓ’s marked with a su-
perscript “t” are our range of models for what the un-
known “true” quantities are, and all the other angular
power spectra in Eq. (D2) represent fiducial models. The
galaxy angular power spectra are modeled as
C gg
ℓ =
Z dχ
χ2 Pmm

χ, k= ℓ+ 1
2
χ

W 2
g (χ) +N shot(D3)
where the shot noise isNshot =
 
Ngtot /(4πfsky)
−1
, the
galaxy window functionW g(χ)is given by Eq. (C2),
and we calculate the non-linear matter power spectrum
Pmm usingCAMB. We calculateb g(z)anddN/dzusing
tomographer.orgas outlined in Appendix C. Since the
velocity reconstruction only uses the small angular scales
of the galaxy survey, we neglect additional contributions
from redshift space distortions and magnification.

18
0.2 0.4 0.6
z
0
2
4
6
8bg dN/dz
1
2
3
WxSCOS
mean
1σ error
1 2 3
z
0
1
2
3bg dN/dz
b g
r
unWISE
mean
1σ error
FIG. C.1. The redshift distributions (rescaled by galaxy
biasb g) fromtomographer.org[74] of theWxSCOS(top) and
unWISE(bottom) subsamples used in this work. The solid
curves are the mean distributions, and the colored bands rep-
resent the 1σerrors. These errors propagate to the posteriors
on the full-sky dipoleCvv
1 [Eq. (16)] and velocity components
Vi [Eq. (32)] via the priorP(bv), as explained in Eqs. (D11)
and (D12).
The fiducialC T T
ℓ is modeled asCT T,ΛCDM
ℓ +N ℓ where
CAMBcalculates the theory spectra andN ℓ is the survey
specific noise curve. As we do not have theoretical noise
curves for the temperature maps we consider, we end up
using the temperature power spectra computed directly
from the data.
TheC τ g
ℓ in Eq. (D2) is defined in Eq. (B2), and we
explain howC ˙τ g
ℓ (χ)is constructed next. Our model
for how the electrons trace the underlying dark matter
field is given by a scale-dependent linear biasδe(k, χ) =
be(k, χ)δm(k, χ), following Ref. [79]:
be(z, k) =b ∗(z)
"
1 +
 k
k∗(z)
γ(z)#−1/2
.(D4)
Here, the parameters are
b∗(z) =
√
−0.013z+ 0.971
γ(z) = 0.10z 2 −0.59z+ 1.91(D5)
k∗(z) = (−0.42z 3 + 3.10z2 −3.24z+ 4.36) Mpc −1.
This then allows us to compute the optical depth-galaxy
cross-power spectrum as
C ˙τ g
ℓ (χ) = 1
χ2 Wg(χ)W τ(χ)b e

χ, k= ℓ+ 1/2
χ

(D6)
×P mm

χ, k= ℓ+ 1/2
χ

where the optical depth window function is
Wτ(χ)≡σ T ¯ne,0(1 +z(χ)) 2 (D7)
withσ T as the Thomson scattering cross section and¯ne,0
as the present-day average number density of electrons.
We model the latter by
¯ne,0 = fgas XΩ b,0 ρcrit,0
µe mp
,(D8)
wheref gas is the ionized gas mass fraction of baryons,X
is the fraction of the total electrons that are ionized,Ωb,0
is the baryon density parameter today,ρcrit,0 is the criti-
cal density today, andµemp is the mean baryon mass per
electron. For our fiducial model, we follow the modeling
assumptions of Ref. [25], settingX= 1,µ e = 1.14, and
fgas = 0.9. We also use a reference scaleℓ= ¯ℓ= 2000
and reference redshiftχ= ¯χwhich is the median redshift
of thedN/dz. This allows us to calculateC τ g
ℓ given by
Eq. (B2).
2. Obtain data-informedb v prior,P(b v)
To obtain cosmological constraints from kSZ velocity
reconstruction, we need to marginalize over the optical
depth bias parameter,bv. We use the high signal-to-noise
measurements ofb v from the recent ACT×DESI analy-
sis [44] to inform the prior,P(bv), in Eqs. (16) and (32).
Sinceb v depends on the specific galaxy sample and CMB
experiment, these measurements cannot be directly ap-
plied to other surveys. Instead, we use them to constrain
our gas-halo connection model parameters [in Eqs. (D4–
D8)], which can then be used to determine a range of
allowedb v for the surveys we use.
The ACT×DESI analysis of Ref. [44] provides mea-
surements ofb v for 16 redshift bins, evaluated with their
model ofC τ g
ℓ . In Eq. (D2), we use theirC τ g
ℓ as the
fiducial model. In the limit of narrow redshift bins,
[C ˙τ g
ℓ=¯ℓ(χ)]t/C ˙τ g
ℓ=¯ℓ(χ)andC τ g
ℓ=¯ℓ/[C τ g
ℓ=¯ℓ]t →1, so we can ig-
nore these terms in Eq. (D2) for DESI. The fiducialCgg
ℓ
is modeled as in Eq. (D3).C T T
ℓ is calculated using the

19
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
z
0
5
10
15
20bgdN/dz
WxSCOS 1
WxSCOS 2
WxSCOS 3
unWISE b
unWISE g
unWISE r
DESI
FIG. D.1. The galaxy bias scaled redshift distributions for
unWISEandWxSCOScompared to three of the DESI bins.
public ACT DR6+Planckneedlet internal linear combi-
nation (NILC) blackbody temperature map2 made using
the method of Ref. [80]. We use the data power spec-
trum here since we do not have theoretical noise curves
for the temperature. The quantities in Eq. (D2) with su-
perscript “t” are the unknown “true” quantities we want
to constrain. We use our gas-halo model described above
in Eqs. (D4–D8) for the true quantities, but leave the pa-
rametersf gas andk ∗ free. Our aim is to determine which
fgas andk ∗ values yield true spectra consistent with the
observedb v values. We varyf gas because it represents
the fraction of gas in the universe which is ionized, so it
is physical, andk ∗ is varied becauseb e is very sensitive
to changes ink ∗ as it shifts the scale at which feedback
suppresses structure. We varyk∗ [Eq. (D5)] through an
additive parameter,k ′
∗, as
k∗ =−0.42z 3 + 3.10z2 −3.24z+ 4.36 +k ′
∗,
in order to keep the same redshift dependent functional
form for all redshift bins.
For each DESI redshift binα, we compute a model pre-
dictionb pred
v (k′
∗, fgas)using Eq. (D2). We assume Gaus-
sian errors and define the joint likelihood
logL(k ′
∗, fgas) =− 1
2
X
α
"
bpred
v (k′
∗, fgas)−b obs,α
v
σbobs,α
v
#2
.(D9)
We use 3 out of the 16 redshift bins (specifically indices
0, 6, 14 in Ref. [44]) to minimize overlap in their red-
shift distributions and hence reduce bin-to-bin covari-
ance. These bin choices, and their overlap with the
2 https://lambda.gsfc.nasa.gov/product/act/act_dr6.02/
act_dr6.02_nilc_info.html
0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00
fgas
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
k′
∗
95%
95%
68%
68%
0.00
0.12
0.24
0.36
0.48
0.60
0.72
0.84
0.96
P (k′
∗, fgas)
FIG. D.2. The ACTxDESI posterior overk′
∗ andf gas, includ-
ing the 68% (red) and 95% (white) credible regions.
unWISEandWxSCOSbins we use, is illustrated in Fig-
ure (D.1). We evaluate the likelihood on a 2D grid of
(k′
∗, fgas), using flat priors over the rangesfgas ∈[0.6,1]
andk ′
∗ ∈[−3, <2]. The resultant 2D posterior is shown
in Figure (D.2) with the 68% and 95% credible regions.
To determine the prior onb v appropriate for
unWISE×PlanckandWxSCOS×Planck, we propagate the
2D posterior on the gas parameters through to the
survey-specific predictions forb v. We draw10 5 pairs of
{k′
∗, fgas}values from the posteriorP(k ′
∗, fgas)and for
each pairi, computeb (i)
v =b v(k′(i)
∗ , f(i)
gas). Here,b v is
again calculated using Eq. (D2).CT T
ℓ is calculated using
the publicPlanckSMICAtemperature map, not a the-
ory model, since we do not have theoretical noise curves
forSMICA. We use our fiducialC ˙τ g
ℓ (χ)model defined by
Eqs. (D4–D6), and for the unknown “truth” we use the
sampled{k ′(i)
∗ , f(i)
gas}values in the gas-halo model. This
procedure yields a Monte Carlo representation ofP(bv)
which effectively performs:
P(b v) =
Z
dk′
∗ d fgas P(k ′
∗, fgas)P(b v|k′
∗, fgas).(D10)
The optical depth bias encompasses not just astro-
physical modeling uncertainty, but also redshift distri-
bution uncertainties. To incorporate these errors into
ourb v prior, we use the 1σerrors onb gdN/dzfrom
tomographer.org(shown in Figure C.1). We follow
the above procedure for calculatingP(b v)given sam-
ples{k ′(i)
∗ , f(i)
gas}, but repeat it three times: once us-
ing the meanb gdN/dz, and then twice using the mean
(bgdN/dz)±1σerror. The marginalized posterior distri-

20
bution,
P(b v) =
Z
dk′
∗ d fgas d(bgdN/dz)P(k ′
∗, fgas)P(b gdN/dz)
×P(b v|k′
∗, fgas, bgdN/dz)
=
Z
P(b v|bgdN/dz)P(b gdN/dz)d(b gdN/dz),
(D11)
is approximated by resampling the threeP(b v)’s with
Gaussian weightsw i ∈[0.16,0.68,0.16]as
P(b v)≈
X
i
wiP(b v|bgdN/dzi).(D12)
From this distribution, we compute the mean and credi-
ble intervals onbv that are used as priors in our cosmo-
logical analysis. The resulting posteriors for eachunWISE
andWxSCOSredshift bin are shown in Figure D.3.
Appendix E: Comparison with other bulk flow
measurements
This appendix is relevant to §VI A and Figure 5.
Since different survey window functions filter the cos-
mic density field differently, the physical scales probed by
each study can vary significantly. One way around this
hurdle was proposed by Ref. [45]— to use the theoretical
bulk flow expectation (σV) as a standardizing bridge. If
a study reports a bulk velocity measurement to be com-
pared against a theoretical expectationσVI(RI)based on
some idealized window function of scaleRI, we can map
this onto an equivalent tophat smoothing scale,RTH, by
requiringσ VTH(RTH) =σ VI(RI). By matching the the-
oretical variancesσ V, we map disparate literature mea-
surements onto a common tophat equivalent, enabling
a consistent comparison against our kSZ-derived tophat
upper limits.
In the subsections below, we describe how we map the
scales of the idealized window functions used by various
studies onto a tophat scale,RTH, in order to make Fig-
ure 5. All works quoted in this figure constrain bulk flow
amplitude realization ˆV, which we plot as-is. For a self-
consistent comparison, we find tophat equivalents of our
kSZ-derived upper limits [ˆV 1σ
TH, Eq. (31)] as described in
§VI A. Table II summarizes the original data published
by these works, and the values that we plot in Figure 5.
1. From Gaussian scaleR G to tophat scaleRTH
To do this, we need to solve forRTH that satisfies
σ2
VTH(RTH) =σ 2
VG(RG),(E1)
provided the study we want to compare to quotes a Gaus-
sian window function scale,RG. Using Eq. (8), writing
Pmm(k) =A k, 3 and definingκ=kR, the equivalence in
Eq. (E1) implies
1
R2
TH
Z ∞
−∞
dlnκ κ 2 
W TH(κ)
2
= 1
R2
G
Z ∞
−∞
dlnκ κ 2 
W G(κ)
2
,(E2)
whereW TH(κ)is defined in Eq. (25), and
W G(κ) = exp
 
−κ2/2

.(E3)
The integrals in Eq. (E2) are analytically computable,
and lead to the solution
RTH = 3√
2 RG ≈2.12R G.(E4)
This is the conversion we use for Refs. [3, 46] (‘W09’,
‘S15’ in Figure 5 and Table II).
2. FromR 1/r2 scale to tophatRTH
Some of the works we compare to (Refs. [9, 11]) com-
pute their theoretical expectation ofσV using the ideal-
ized window function
W(r;R 1/r2) =R 2
1/r2 /r2.(E5)
As Ref. [9] shows [see their Figure 3 and Eq. (34)], this
window function matches fairly well with a Gaussian win-
dow with the Gaussian averaging scaleRG →R 1/r2 /3.
Thus, with this substitution in Eq. (E4), we can map
between their reportedR1/r2 and our targetRTH as
RTH = 3√
2 RG ≈0.707R 1/r2 .(E6)
This is the conversion we use when reporting values
(‘P18’, ‘W23-i’, ‘W23-ii’) in Figure 5 and Table II.
3. From the Planck Collaboration [4] tophat-based
95% UL to 68%
The ‘P13-i–iii’ points in Figure 5 and Table II from
Ref. [4] are already reported at a tophat scale equivalent
toR TH. However, Ref. [4] reports 95% upper limits
(UL) on bulk velocity realizationˆV. For consistency with
the our 68% ULs and the other1σmeasurements that
we compare with, we halve their reported 95% UL bulk
velocity values to get a 68% UL.
3 The formP mm(k) =Akis only valid forR TH >100h −1Mpc.
Thus we only select measurements from works that probe an
equivalent scale that meets this criterion.

21
0
1
2
3
4
5P (bv)
bv = 0.62+0.10
−0.10
WxSCOS 1
bv = 0.64+0.09
−0.09
WxSCOS 2
bv = 0.66+0.08
−0.09
WxSCOS 3
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25
bv
0
1
2
3
4
5P (bv)
bv = 0.70+0.08
−0.08
unWISE blue
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25
bv
bv = 0.75+0.10
−0.09
unWISE green
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25
bv
bv = 0.76+0.14
−0.12
unWISE red
FIG. D.3. The optical depth bias posteriors forWxSCOS(upper row) andunWISE(lower row) redshift bins. The meanb v is
shown in black and the 68% credible intervals in red.
TABLE II. Summary of literature bulk flow realization measurements mapped to equivalent tophat scales. The original
measurements denote the quoted scale and realized bulk flow (ˆV) under each work’s assumed window function. We plot these
in Figure 5 at their equivalent tophat scale (RTH).
Published Values Tophat Equivalent
Reference Fig. 5 Tag Scale[h −1 Mpc] ˆV[km/s]R TH [h−1 Mpc] ˆV[km/s]
Gaussian Window[R TH ≈2.12R G, Eq. (E4)] (unchanged)
Watkins (2009) [46]‘W09’R G = 50 407±81 106 407±81
Scrimgeour (2015) [3]‘S15’R G = 55.6 243±58 118 243±58
1/r2 Weighting[R TH ≈0.707R 1/r2, Eq. (E6)] (unchanged)
Peery (2018) [9]‘P18’R 1/r2 = 150 282 106 282
Watkins (2023) [11]‘W23-i’R 1/r2 = 150 387±28 106 387±28
‘W23-ii’R 1/r2 = 200 419±36 141 419±36
Tophat Window(unchanged) (95%→68% UL)
Planck (2013) [4]‘P13-i’R TH = 200<600(95%)200<300
‘P13-ii’R TH = 500<400(95%)500<200
‘P13-iii’R TH = 1000<300(95%)1000<150

22
[1] Y. B. Zeldovich and S. R. A. Sunyaev, Peculiar velocities
of galaxy clusters, and the mean density of matter in
the universe, Pisma v Astronomicheskii Zhurnal6, 737
(1980).
[2] P. J. E. Peebles,The large-scale structure of the universe
(1980).
[3] M. I. Scrimgeour, T. M. Davis, C. Blake, L. Staveley-
Smith, C. Magoulas, C. M. Springob, F. Beutler, M. Col-
less, A. Johnson, D. H. Jones, J. Koda, J. R. Lucey, Y.-Z.
Ma, J. Mould, and G. B. Poole, The 6df galaxy survey:
bulk flows on 50-70h-1mpc scales, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society455, 386–401 (2015).
[4] a. Planck Collaboration, Planck2013 results. xvi. cosmo-
logical parameters, Astronomy & Astrophysics571, A16
(2014).
[5] G. Lavaux, N. Afshordi, and M. J. Hudson, First mea-
surement of the bulk flow of nearby galaxies using the
cosmic microwave background, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society430, 1617–1635 (2013).
[6] R. Watkins and H. A. Feldman, The origins of the bulk
flow (2025), arXiv:2512.03168 [astro-ph.CO].
[7] A. Kashlinsky, F. Atrio-Barandela, D. Kocevski, and
H. Ebeling, A measurement of large-scale peculiar ve-
locities of clusters of galaxies: Results and cosmological
implications, The Astrophysical Journal686, L49–L52
(2008).
[8] R. Watkins and H. A. Feldman, Large-scale bulk flows
from the Cosmicflows-2 catalogue, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society447, 132 (2015),
arXiv:1407.6940 [astro-ph.CO].
[9] S. Peery, R. Watkins, and H. A. Feldman, Easily inter-
pretable bulk flows: continuing tension with the standard
cosmological model, Monthly Notices of the Royal As-
tronomical Society481, 1368 (2018), arXiv:1808.07772
[astro-ph.CO].
[10] A. M. Whitford, C.Howlett,and T. M.Davis,Evaluating
bulk flow estimators for CosmicFlows-4 measurements,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society526,
3051 (2023), arXiv:2306.11269 [astro-ph.CO].
[11] R. Watkins, T. Allen, C. J. Bradford, A. Ramon,
A. Walker, H. A. Feldman, R. Cionitti, Y. Al-Shorman,
E. Kourkchi, and R. B. Tully, Analysing the large-scale
bulk flow using cosmicflows4: increasing tension with
the standard cosmological model, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society524, 1885–1892 (2023).
[12] R. J. Turner, Cosmology with Peculiar Velocity
Surveys, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2411.19484 (2024),
arXiv:2411.19484 [astro-ph.CO].
[13] R. B. Tully and J. R. Fisher, A new method of determin-
ing distances to galaxies., Astronomy and Astrophysics
54, 661 (1977).
[14] A. Dressler, D. Lynden-Bell, D. Burstein, R. L. Davies,
S. M. Faber, R. Terlevich, and G. Wegner, Spectroscopy
and Photometry of Elliptical Galaxies. I. New Distance
Estimator, Astrophys. J.313, 42 (1987).
[15] M. M. Phillips, The Absolute Magnitudes of Type IA
Supernovae, ApJ Letters413, L105 (1993).
[16] H. S. Leavitt and E. C. Pickering, Periods of 25 Variable
Stars in the Small Magellanic Cloud., Harvard College
Observatory Circular173, 1 (1912).
[17] M. G. Lee, W. L. Freedman, and B. F. Madore, The
Tip of the Red Giant Branch as a Distance Indicator for
Resolved Galaxies, Astrophys. J.417, 553 (1993).
[18] R. A. Sunyaev and Y. B. Zeldovich, The velocity of clus-
ters of galaxies relative to the microwave background -
The possibility of its measurement., Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society190, 413 (1980).
[19] J. Shao, P. Zhang, W. Lin, Y. Jing, and J. Pan, Kinetic
sunyaev-zel’dovich tomography with spectroscopic red-
shift surveys: Kinetic sz tomography, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society413, 628–642 (2011).
[20] D. Munshi, I. T. Iliev, K. L. Dixon, and P. Coles, Ex-
tracting the late-time kinetic sunyaev–zel’dovich effect,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society463,
2425–2442 (2016).
[21] A. Terrana, M.-J. Harris, and M. C. Johnson, Analyzing
the cosmic variance limit of remote dipole measurements
of the cosmic microwave background using the large-scale
kinetic sunyaev zel’dovich effect, Journal of Cosmology
and Astroparticle Physics2017(02), 040–040.
[22] A.-S. Deutsch, E. Dimastrogiovanni, M. C. Johnson,
M. Münchmeyer, and A. Terrana, Reconstruction of the
remote dipole and quadrupole fields from the kinetic
sunyaev zel’dovich and polarized sunyaev zel’dovich ef-
fects,PhysicalReviewD98,10.1103/physrevd.98.123501
(2018).
[23] K. M. Smith, M. S. Madhavacheril, M. Münchmeyer,
S. Ferraro, U. Giri, and M. C. Johnson, Ksz tomogra-
phy and the bispectrum (2018), arXiv:1810.13423 [astro-
ph.CO].
[24] J. Cayuso, R. Bloch, S. C. Hotinli, M. C. Johnson, and
F.McCarthy,Velocityreconstructionwiththecosmicmi-
crowave background and galaxy surveys, Journal of Cos-
mology and Astroparticle Physics2023(02), 051.
[25] R. Bloch and M. C. Johnson, Kinetic sunyaev zel’dovich
velocity reconstruction from planck and unwise (2024),
arXiv:2405.00809 [astro-ph.CO].
[26] P. Zhang, The dark flow induced small-scale kinetic sun-
yaev–zel’dovich effect, Monthly Notices of the Royal As-
tronomical Society: Letters407, L36–L40 (2010).
[27] P. Zhang and A. Stebbins, Confirmation of the coper-
nican principle at gpc radial scale and above from the
kinetic sunyaev-zel’dovich effect power spectrum, Physi-
cal Review Letters107, 10.1103/physrevlett.107.041301
(2011).
[28] J. I. Cayuso and M. C. Johnson, Towards testing
cmb anomalies using the kinetic and polarized sunyaev-
zel’dovich effects, Physical Review D101, 10.1103/phys-
revd.101.123508 (2020).
[29] J. Krywonos, S. C. Hotinli, and M. C. Johnson,
Constraints on cosmology beyondλcdm with ki-
netic sunyaev zel’dovich velocity reconstruction (2024),
arXiv:2408.05264 [astro-ph.CO].
[30] E. F. Schlafly, A. M. Meisner, and G. M. Green, The un-
wise catalog: Two billion infrared sources from five years
of wise imaging, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement
Series240, 30 (2019).
[31] A. Krolewski, S. Ferraro, E. F. Schlafly, and M. White,
unwise tomography of planck cmb lensing, Journal
of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics2020(05),
047–047.

23
[32] Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami, F. Ar-
roja, M. Ashdown, and Aumont, Planck 2018 results. I.
Overview and the cosmological legacy of Planck, Astron.
Astrophys.641, A1 (2020), arXiv:1807.06205 [astro-
ph.CO].
[33] M. Bilicki, J. A. Peacock, T. H. Jarrett, M. E. Clu-
ver, N. Maddox, M. J. I. Brown, E. N. Taylor, N. C.
Hambly, A. Solarz, B. W. Holwerda, I. Baldry, J. Love-
day, A. Moffett, A. M. Hopkins, S. P. Driver, M. Al-
paslan, and J. Bland-Hawthorn, WISE×SuperCOS-
MOS Photometric Redshift Catalog: 20 Million Galaxies
over 3/pi Steradians, Astrophys. J. Suppl.225, 5 (2016),
arXiv:1607.01182 [astro-ph.CO].
[34] M. G. Haehnelt and M. Tegmark, Using the kinematic
sunyaev-zeldovich effect to determine the peculiar veloc-
ities of clusters of galaxies, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society279, 545–556 (1996).
[35] A. Kashlinsky and F. Atrio-Barandela, Measuring Cos-
mological Bulk Flows via the Kinematic Sunyaev-
Zeldovich Effect in the Upcoming Cosmic Microwave
Background Maps, Astrophys. J. Lett.536, L67 (2000),
arXiv:astro-ph/0005197 [astro-ph].
[36] A. Kashlinsky, F. Atrio-Barandela, D. Kocevski, and
H. Ebeling, A measurement of large-scale peculiar ve-
locities of clusters of galaxies: Technical details, The As-
trophysical Journal691, 1479–1493 (2009).
[37] A. Kashlinsky, F. Atrio-Barandela, H. Ebeling, A. Edge,
and D. Kocevski, A new measurement of the bulk flow
of x-ray luminous clusters of galaxies, The Astrophysical
Journal712, L81–L85 (2010).
[38] S. J. Osborne, D. S. Y. Mak, S. E. Church, and E. Pier-
paoli, Measuring the galaxy cluster bulk flow fromwmap-
data, The Astrophysical Journal737, 98 (2011).
[39] G. Lavaux and M. J. Hudson, The 2m++ galaxy red-
shift catalogue: The 2m++ galaxy redshift catalogue,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society416,
2840–2856 (2011).
[40] N. Jarosik, C. L. Bennett, J. Dunkley, B. Gold, M. R.
Greason, M. Halpern, R. S. Hill, G. Hinshaw, A. Kogut,
E. Komatsu, D. Larson, M. Limon, S. S. Meyer, M. R.
Nolta, N. Odegard, L. Page, K. M. Smith, D. N.
Spergel, G. S. Tucker, J. L. Weiland, E. Wollack, and
E. L. Wright, Seven-year wilkinson microwave anisotropy
probe ( wmap ) observations: Sky maps, systematic er-
rors, and basic results, The Astrophysical Journal Sup-
plement Series192, 14 (2011).
[41] N. Battaglia, The tau of galaxy clusters, Journal of Cos-
mology and Astroparticle Physics2016(08), 058–058.
[42] S. Flender, D. Nagai, and M. McDonald, Constraints
on the Optical Depth of Galaxy Groups and Clusters,
Astrophys. J.837, 124 (2017), arXiv:1610.08029 [astro-
ph.CO].
[43] M. S. Madhavacheril, N. Battaglia, K. M. Smith, and
J. L. Sievers, Cosmology with the kinematic sunyaev-
zeldovich effect: Breaking the optical depth degener-
acy with fast radio bursts, Physical Review D100,
10.1103/physrevd.100.103532 (2019).
[44] F. McCarthyet al., The Atacama Cosmology Telescope:
Cross-correlation of kSZ and continuity equation velocity
reconstruction with photometric DESI LRGs, (2025),
arXiv:2511.15701 [astro-ph.CO].
[45] M. Li, J. Pan, L. Gao, Y. Jing, X. Yang, X. Chi, L. Feng,
X. Kang, W. Lin, G. Shan, L. Wang, D. Zhao, and
P. Zhang, Bulk flow of halos in lcdm simulation, The
Astrophysical Journal761, 151 (2012).
[46] R. Watkins, H. A. Feldman, and M. J. Hudson, Consis-
tently large cosmic flows on scales of 100 mpc/h: a chal-
lenge for the standard lcdm cosmology, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society392, 743–756 (2009).
[47] H. A. Feldman, R. Watkins, and M. J. Hudson, Cos-
mic flows on 100 h−1 Mpc scales: standardized mini-
mum variance bulk flow, shear and octupole moments,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society407,
2328 (2010), arXiv:0911.5516 [astro-ph.CO].
[48] N. Kaiser, Theoretical implications of deviations from
Hubble flow, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomi-
cal Society231, 149 (1988).
[49] K. M. Górski, E. Hivon, A. J. Banday, B. D. Wan-
delt, F. K. Hansen, M. Reinecke, and M. Bartelmann,
HEALPix: A Framework for High-Resolution Discretiza-
tionandFastAnalysisofDataDistributedontheSphere,
Astrophys. J.622, 759 (2005), arXiv:astro-ph/0409513.
[50] A. Zonca, L. Singer, D. Lenz, M. Reinecke, C. Rosset,
E. Hivon, and K. Gorski, healpy: equal area pixeliza-
tion and spherical harmonics transforms for data on the
sphere in python, Journal of Open Source Software4,
1298 (2019).
[51] Y. Akrami, M. Ashdown, and J. Aumont, Planck2018
results: Iv. diffuse component separation, Astronomy &;
Astrophysics641, A4 (2020).
[52] M.Tegmark, A.deOliveira-Costa,andA.J.S.Hamilton,
High resolution foreground cleaned cmb map from wmap,
Phys. Rev. D68, 123523 (2003).
[53] E. Hivon, K. M. Gorski, C. B. Netterfield, B. P. Crill,
S. Prunet, and F. Hansen, Master of the cosmic mi-
crowave background anisotropy power spectrum: A fast
method for statistical analysis of large and complex cos-
mic microwave background data sets, The Astrophysical
Journal567, 2–17 (2002).
[54] A. Lewis and A. Challinor, CAMB: Code for anisotropies
in the microwave background (2002), maintained by
Antony Lewis.
[55] M. Tegmark and M. Zaldarriaga, Separating the early
universe from the late universe: Cosmological parameter
estimation beyond the black box, Physical Review D66,
10.1103/physrevd.66.103508 (2002).
[56] N. A. Bahcall, R. Cen, and M. Gramann, Probing the
Large-Scale Velocity Field with Clusters of Galaxies, ApJ
Letters430, L13 (1994), arXiv:astro-ph/9405075 [astro-
ph].
[57] A. K. Singal, Large Peculiar Motion of the Solar System
from the Dipole Anisotropy in Sky Brightness due to Dis-
tant Radio Sources, The Astrophysical Journal742, L23
(2011), arXiv:1110.6260 [astro-ph.CO].
[58] C. Gibelyou and D. Huterer, Dipoles in the sky, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society427, 1994
(2012), arXiv:1205.6476 [astro-ph.CO].
[59] N. J. Secrest, S. von Hausegger, M. Rameez, R. Mo-
hayaee, and S. Sarkar, A challenge to the standard cos-
mological model, The Astrophysical Journal Letters937,
L31 (2022).
[60] J. D. Wagenveld, S. von Hausegger, H.-R. Klöckner, and
D. J. Schwarz, The kinematic contribution to the cosmic
number count dipole, Astronomy & Astrophysics697,
A112 (2025).
[61] G. F. R. Ellis and J. E. Baldwin, On the expected
anisotropy of radio source counts, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society206, 377 (1984).

24
[62] N. J. Secrest, S. v. Hausegger, M. Rameez, R. Mohayaee,
S. Sarkar, and J. Colin, A test of the cosmological princi-
ple with quasars, The Astrophysical Journal Letters908,
L51 (2021).
[63] E. Macaulay, H. Feldman, P. G. Ferreira, M. J. Hud-
son, and R. Watkins, A slight excess of large-scale power
from moments of the peculiar velocity field, Monthly No-
tices of the Royal Astronomical Society414, 621 (2011),
arXiv:1010.2651 [astro-ph.CO].
[64] O. Doré, J. Bock, M. Ashby, and P. Capak, Cosmol-
ogy with the spherex all-sky spectral survey (2015),
arXiv:1412.4872 [astro-ph.CO].
[65] J. J. Bock, A. M. Aboobaker, and J. Adamo, The spherex
satellite mission, The Astrophysical Journal999, 139
(2026).
[66] R. Laureijs, J. Amiaux, S. Arduini, J. L. Auguères,
J. Brinchmann, and R. Cole, Euclid definition study re-
port (2011), arXiv:1110.3193 [astro-ph.CO].
[67] L. Amendola, S. Appleby, A. Avgoustidis, D. Bacon,
T. Baker, M. Baldi, N. Bartolo, A. Blanchard, C. Bon-
vin, S. Borgani, E. Branchini, C. Burrage, S. Camera,
C. Carbone, L. Casarini, M. Cropper, C. de Rham, J. P.
Dietrich, C. Di Porto, R. Durrer, A. Ealet, P. G. Ferreira,
F. Finelli, J. García-Bellido, T. Giannantonio, L. Guzzo,
A. Heavens, L. Heisenberg, C. Heymans, H. Hoekstra,
L. Hollenstein, R. Holmes, Z. Hwang, K. Jahnke, T. D.
Kitching, T. Koivisto, M. Kunz, G. La Vacca, E. Lin-
der, M. March, V. Marra, C. Martins, E. Majerotto,
D. Markovic, D. Marsh, F. Marulli, R. Massey, Y. Mel-
lier, F. Montanari, D. F. Mota, N. J. Nunes, W. Percival,
V. Pettorino, C. Porciani, C. Quercellini, J. Read, M. Ri-
naldi, D. Sapone, I. Sawicki, R. Scaramella, C. Skordis,
F. Simpson, A. Taylor, S. Thomas, R. Trotta, L. Verde,
F. Vernizzi, A. Vollmer, Y. Wang, J. Weller, T. Zlos-
nik, and The Euclid Theory Working Group, Cosmology
and fundamental physics with the Euclid satellite, Liv-
ing Reviews in Relativity21, 2 (2018), arXiv:1606.00180
[astro-ph.CO].
[68] Ž. Ivezić, S. M. Kahn, J. A. Tyson, B. Abel, and
E. Acosta, LSST: From Science Drivers to Reference De-
sign and Anticipated Data Products, Astrophys. J.873,
111 (2019), arXiv:0805.2366 [astro-ph].
[69] P. Ade, J. Aguirre, Z. Ahmed, S. Aiola, A. Ali, D. Alonso,
andM.A.Alvarez,Thesimonsobservatory: sciencegoals
and forecasts, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle
Physics2019(02), 056–056.
[70] N. Sehgal, S. Aiola, Y. Akrami, K. moni Basu,
M. Boylan-Kolchin, S. Bryan, and C. M. Casey, Cmb-hd:
Astro2020 rfi response (2020), arXiv:2002.12714 [astro-
ph.CO].
[71] C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt,et al., Ar-
ray programming with NumPy, Nature585, 357 (2020).
[72] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant,et al., SciPy
1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in
Python, Nature Methods17, 261 (2020).
[73] J. D. Hunter, Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment,
Computing in Science & Engineering9, 90 (2007).
[74] Y.-K. Chiang, B. Ménard, and M. Taghizadeh-Popp, To-
mographer: Estimating Redshift Distributions,http:
//tomographer.org/(2020), accessed: 2026-03-01.
[75] B. Ménard, R. Scranton, S. Schmidt, C. Morrison,
D. Jeong, T. Budavari, and M. Rahman, Clustering-
based redshift estimation: method and application
to data, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:1303.4722 (2013),
arXiv:1303.4722 [astro-ph.CO].
[76] Y.-K. Chiang, B. Ménard, and D. Schiminovich, Broad-
band Intensity Tomography: Spectral Tagging of the
Cosmic UV Background, Astrophys. J.877, 150 (2019),
arXiv:1810.00885 [astro-ph.CO].
[77] Y. Kvasiuk and M. Münchmeyer, Autodifferentiable
likelihood pipeline for the cross-correlation of CMB
and large-scale structure due to the kinetic Sunyaev-
Zeldovich effect, Phys. Rev. D109, 083515 (2024),
arXiv:2305.08903 [astro-ph.CO].
[78] U. Giri and K. M. Smith, Exploring KSZ velocity recon-
struction with N-body simulations and the halo model,
JCAP09, 028, arXiv:2010.07193 [astro-ph.CO].
[79] R. Takahashi, K. Ioka, A. Mori, and K. Funahashi, Sta-
tistical modelling of the cosmological dispersion measure,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society502,
2615 (2020), arXiv:2010.01560.
[80] W. Coultonet al.(ACT), Atacama Cosmology Tele-
scope: High-resolutioncomponent-separatedmapsacross
one third of the sky, Phys. Rev. D109, 063530 (2024),
arXiv:2307.01258 [astro-ph.CO].