Title: On the Nature of Candle-Flame-Shaped Solar Flares and Sub-Alfvénic Supra-Arcade Plasma Downflows
Authors: Ivan Oparin, Sabastian Fernandes, Bin Chen, Chengcai Shen, Xiaocan Li, Fan Guo, Sijie Yu
Published: 2026-05-16
Categories: astro-ph.SR

DRAFT VERSIONJUNE5, 2026
Typeset using LATEXtwocolumnstyle in AASTeX631
On the Nature of Candle-Flame-Shaped Solar Flares and Sub-Alfv´enic Supra-Arcade Plasma Downflows
IVANOPARIN
 ,1 SABASTIANFERNANDES
 ,1 BINCHEN
 ,1 CHENGCAISHEN
 ,2 XIAOCANLI
 ,3 FANGUO
 ,3 AND
SIJIEYU
 1
1Center For Solar-Terrestrial Research, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102, USA
2Center for Astrophysics — Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA
3Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
(Dated: May 16, 2026)
ABSTRACT
Certain solar flares exhibit a distinctive candle-flame or cusp-shaped feature above the bright flare arcade
visible in extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and X-ray channels sensitive to high-temperature plasma. The presence of
a cusp-like structure is generally regarded as a key piece of morphological evidence for magnetic reconnection
to power explosive energy release in solar flares. In addition, downward-propagating plasma flows above the
flare arcade have often been interpreted as outflows driven by magnetic reconnection. However, the relation-
ship between the observed candle-flame-shaped morphology and the underlying magnetic field geometry for
reconnection remains unclear. Likewise, the observed speed of the plasma downflows has been found to be too
low compared to the upstream Alfv´en speed predicted by reconnection theories. With the help of a recently de-
veloped three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamics model, we examine the locations where magnetic topology
changes from antiparallel to closed (Y-points) in a candle-flame-shaped flare, compare the observational emis-
sion features with synthetic EUV images generated from the model, and analyze their time evolutions. We also
investigate the role of projection effects and line-of-sight integration in the measurements of plasma downflow
speeds. Our analysis reveals that the Y-points do not necessarily coincide with the apparent cusp tip. Also, the
apparent speeds of the supra-arcade downflows, as derived from tracks in the time–distance plots, underestimate
the true Alfv´en speeds in the reconnection inflow region by at least a factor of 2 up to an order of magnitude.
Keywords:Sun: flares, coronal mass ejections (CMEs) — Magnetic reconnection, plasmas, turbulence
1.INTRODUCTION
Solar flares are known as fast and explosive energy re-
lease phenomena, in which magnetic energy accumulated in
nonpotential fields is suddenly released, causing immense
plasma energization through heating, compression, and ef-
ficient acceleration of electrons and ions. The standard flare
model suggests that the explosive energy release is driven
by magnetic reconnection occurring in the solar corona (see,
e.g., Yamada et al. 2010; Shibata & Magara 2011; Drake
et al. 2025 for review).
Observations of extended bright cusps in soft X-rays
(SXRs), formed by a series of highly bent magnetic field
lines in long-duration events (LDEs) well after the flare peak
(Tsuneta et al. 1992), indicate that magnetic reconnection is
not only occurring in a bursty fashion during the impulsive
phase, but also can sustain the energy release in the gradual
phase.
Early works attempting to explain observed cusp shape and
flare energy release (Tsuneta 1996) used the Petschek recon-
nection picture (Petschek 1964). The observed visual tip of
the cusp was interpreted to be associated with the primary
reconnection X-point—a magnetic null point where mag-
netic connectivity breaks and field lines are reconnected to
form closed loop configurations, allowing plasma inflow into
the small-scale diffusion region and bidirectional high-speed
outflows to either end of the latter. Attached to the diffu-
sion region are slow-mode shocks that constrain the half-
opening angle of the outflow jet to the dimensionless recon-
nection rateθ/2≈M≈v in/vA (see Tsuneta 1996; Longcope
et al. 2018). However, modern SXR and extreme ultraviolet
(EUV) imaging shows that this region is full of intermittent
plasma downflows and evolving “fan” emission in three di-
mensions, which is more consistent with an unsteady recon-
nection outflow region than a stable pair of Petschek slow
shocks forming a neat wedge in the idealized 2D picture.
Observational evidence of the formation of large-scale cur-
rent sheets during eruptive flares and coronal mass ejec-
tions (CMEs; Ciaravella et al. 2002; Lin et al. 2015) has
arXiv:2605.17195v2  [astro-ph.SR]  3 Jun 2026

2
revived the applications of theoretical models featuring a
long and thin reconnection current sheet (RCS), based on
Sweet–Parker (Sweet 1958; Parker 1957) and Syrovatskii
(Syrovatskii 1971) theories. In the idealized analytical pic-
ture, the current sheet bifurcates at both ends, where the cur-
rent density is decaying (Forbes & Priest 1995; Lin & Forbes
2000; Bezrodnykh et al. 2011; Forbes et al. 2018). The cur-
rent sheet bifurcation sites, known as Y-points, are associ-
ated with local magnetic null points that mark the junctions
between the RCS and the overlying and underlying closed
magnetic field structures.
The quasi-laminar reconnection current sheet in the ideal
model is unstable to various instabilities and becomes frag-
mented, potentially significantly altering the reconnection
rate and magnetic geometry. Indeed, 2D numerical exper-
iments that include resistivity and dissipation mechanisms
have already shown that the current sheet is highly dynamic
and structured (e.g., Shen et al. 2011, 2018; Mondal et al.
2025). More recent 3D numerical experiments (Ye et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023; Ruan et al. 2024; Ren et al. 2025)
demonstrate that the thickness of the current sheet may vary
with height due to the expansion of reconnection outflows
and associated turbulence. In addition, the presence of fine
structures in the current sheet, such as magnetic islands and
secondary reconnection sites, further complicates the topol-
ogy, forming multiple microscopic X, O, and Y-points. In
this scenario, the Y-points relevant to the macroscopic cur-
rent sheet structure can not simply be regarded as the bifur-
cation point of the current sheet itself as in the idealized an-
alytical 2D model (such as Lin & Forbes 2000), but instead,
need to be regarded as the locations with a general topolog-
ical transition from quasi-parallel field geometry formed by
highly bent field lines to closed magnetic loops in the ejecta
or the flare arcade.
Since the macroscopic Y-point is defined as a site of mag-
netic topology change, it implies that a definite determina-
tion of its position requires detailed knowledge of magnetic
field geometry. However, the lack of vector coronal mag-
netic field measurements makes it challenging to make such
a determination. One of the promising observational meth-
ods to determine the rapidly evolving magnetic field dur-
ing flares is microwave imaging spectroscopy observations
of gyrosynchrotron radiation from flare-accelerated energetic
electrons (Gary et al. 2013). Recently, using microwave data
obtained by the Expanded Owens Valley Solar Array (Gary
et al. 2018), a local minimum of the magnetic field strength
is revealed in the above-the-loop-top cusp region (Chen et al.
2020). This local minimum, referred to as the “magnetic bot-
tle,” naturally arises near the bottom of the large-scale current
sheet just above the closed flare arcade, and can be used to
pinpoint the macroscopic Y-point (Chen et al. 2024).
In the absence of direct magnetic field measure-
ments, cusp-like features observed in EUV/SXR images—
particularly in passbands sensitive to plasma temperatures of
several million Kelvin and above—have frequently been used
to infer the location of the macroscopic Y-point in eruptive
flares (Sui & Holman 2003; Liu et al. 2010; Liu 2013; Gou
& Reeves 2024). This practice is motivated by the expecta-
tion that newly reconnected field lines retract and accumulate
beneath the RCS, producing a hot, cusp-shaped morphology
whose apex roughly traces the lower boundary of the recon-
nection outflow region. As a result, the apparent “tip” of the
cusp is often taken as a proxy for the Y-point or the base of
the reconnecting current sheet. However, this interpretation
is inherently indirect and subject to potentially large uncer-
tainties. EUV/SXR emission depends on plasma tempera-
ture, density, and line-of-sight integration, rather than mag-
netic topology alone, such that the visually identified cusp
tip may reflect the region of strongest emission measure or
heating rather than the true magnetic null. In addition, pro-
jection effects, foreground and background coronal emission,
as well as inherent 3D structures, can all shift the apparent
cusp apex relative to the actual reconnection geometry. Con-
sequently, the location of the macroscopic Y-point inferred
from EUV/SXR cusp morphology should be regarded as an
approximate, emission-weighted indicator, rather than a pre-
cise tracer of the underlying magnetic geometry.
Another method to infer the positions of Y-points comes
from the expected deceleration of plasma flows across the
Y-point. Particularly, plasma downflows are expected to de-
celerate sharply near the lower Y-point, where they encounter
the closed magnetic loops of the postflare arcade. Such a de-
celeration arises from the conversion of the downflows’ ki-
netic energy into thermal and magnetic energy as the plasma
is deflected and compressed by the strong magnetic and gas
pressure gradients at the top of the flare arcade (Forbes &
Priest 1983; Yokoyama & Shibata 1997; Reeves et al. 2010).
In observations, the speeds of the plasma downflows are usu-
ally measured using time–distance stack plots derived from
time series EUV or SXR imaging observations. By placing
a slit in the direction of the current sheet and the underly-
ing flare arcade, one can visualize the plasma downflows as
tracks with different slopes. A significant deceleration is usu-
ally found near the top of the flare arcade and has been inter-
preted as plasma flows passing the Y-point (Liu et al. 2013a;
Yu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2024).
The measurements of plasma downflow speeds not only
serve as an important tool to constrain the location of the
Y-points, but also may be used to quantify the energy release
rate. Reconnection theories predict that the reconnection out-
flow speed is a substantial fraction of the Alfv ´en speed of
the reconnecting magnetic field in the plasma inflow region
vout ≈v in
A. Using the observed downflow speed as a proxy for

3
primary
X-point
macroscopic
Y-point
newly reconnected 
ﬁeld lines
Closed ﬁeld lines
Above-the-looptop 
region ALT
(magnetic bottle)
Open ﬁeld lines
B, G
Quasi-separatrix 
layer
0
5
10
15
Figure 1.Magnetic field geometry during the gradual phase of the
solar flare, as derived from the numerical model (Shen et al. 2022).
Black lines indicate a streamline plot of the magnetic field for the
X-Y slice at coordinatez=0. Background color map represents
the magnitude of the magnetic field at time stept=3.0t 0. The
black dashed circle represents the above-the-loop-top region where
a topological transition from quasi-parallel to closed geometry oc-
curs.
vin
A , and the observed speed of plasma flowing into the current
sheet as the reconnection inflow speedvin, one may constrain
the dimensionless reconnection rate asM A =v in/vin
A.
However, using this method, the reported reconnection
rates in flares are often very large (Lin et al. 2005; Nagashima
& Yokoyama 2006; Takasao et al. 2012; Su et al. 2013),
which sometimes approach or exceed the theoretical limit
ofM max
A ≈0.1 (Liu et al. 2017, 2022; Cassak et al. 2017).
One possibility that could account for this discrepancy is that
some of the tracked plasma flows may not be the true re-
connection outflows. It has been shown in observations that
plasma flows above the flare arcade sometimes have a fast
and slow population (Liu et al. 2013a; Yu et al. 2020). The
former, which has speeds of∼200–1000 km s −1, is usually
located at high altitudes, and may be more representative of
the true reconnection outflows. The latter, which is consid-
erably slower with speeds of≲100 km s −1, may represent
the already slowed-down plasma flows or contracting loops
below the Y-point. These plasma downflows, sometimes re-
ferred to as supra-arcade downflows (SADs) or supra-arcade
downflowing loops (McKenzie & Hudson 1999; Savage et al.
2010), have been argued to be the signatures of the wakes of
the contracting flux tubes (Savage et al. 2012) or complex
plasma flows developed in the turbulent “interface region”
where fast reconnection outflows impinge upon the under-
lying flare arcade (Shen et al. 2022). In either case, a sub-
set of the observed plasma downflows may be substantially
slower than the true reconnection outflows. Consequently,
when using their speeds as the proxy forv out, the inferred re-
connection rates may be a factor of a few to nearly an order
of magnitude greater than the true values.
Another caveat is that the speeds of the reconnection out-
flowsv out may also be nonuniform and can be substantially
smaller than the Alfv ´en speed in the inflowing regionv in
A
itself. Numerical simulations andin situmeasurements in
space plasmas indicate that even within the exhaust region,
the bulk outflow speed typically reaches only a fraction of
the upstream Alfv ´en speed, around 0.3–0.8v in
A, rather than
the ideal Alfv ´enic value expected from simplified reconnec-
tion models (e.g., Paschmann et al. 1986; Linton & Long-
cope 2006; Haggerty et al. 2018). This reduction has been
attributed to finite guide fields, pressure anisotropy, and en-
ergy partition into thermal heating and instabilities within the
exhaust. Moreover, once reconnection outflows exit the dif-
fusion region (extremely small in the solar flare context), ad-
ditional deceleration can occur due to interaction with the
ambient plasma. It has been suggested that an aerodynamic
drag force may be responsible for slowing down the recon-
nection outflows (Savage & McKenzie 2011), which was
subsequently modeled by Unverferth & Longcope (2021) to
compare with observations of the 2017 September 10 flare
(Longcope et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2020). Also, numerical ex-
periments have shown that structures in the reconnection out-
flow region, such as macroscopic plasmoids, can also be sub-
stantially slower than the surrounding outflows by as much as
80% (Shen et al. 2011). As a result, speeds inferred from re-
motely observed plasma motions, even if they represent true
flow dynamics in the RCS, may substantially underestimate
the intrinsic Alfv´en speed in the reconnection inflow region,
which, in turn, leads to an overestimate of the reconnection
rate.
Finally, it could be the case that the indirect velocity mea-
surement inferred from time–distance diagrams derived from
the EUV/SXR time series images may not truthfully repre-
sent the highest achievable speeds of the reconnection out-
flows. In fact, due to the projection and integration of all the
complex dynamic and fine structures along the line of sight,
the derived speeds may be skewed to lower values by the
denser and relatively slower-moving structures in the current
sheet.

4
Taking advantage of a recently developed 3D numerical
model of flare reconnection by Shen et al. (2022), our study
explores the role of line-of-sight integration effects in (a) lo-
calizing the macroscopic reconnection Y-point by using the
observed cusp structure and (b) interpreting the observed
speeds of the plasma downflows using the time–distance plot
method. We will use the 3D model to produce temporally
resolved synthetic EUV and SXR images, and compare the
results to observations of the prominent candle-flame-shaped
solar flare of 2012 July 19, with a focus placed on the cusp tip
location and plasma downflow speeds. Section 2 briefly in-
troduces the 3D magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) model and
an example flare event. In Section 3, we discuss the identi-
fication of the macroscopic Y-point in the numerical model
and compare the morphology of the cusp-shaped structure in
the synthetic and observed EUV/SXR images. In Section 4,
we investigate the apparent speeds of the plasma downflows
acquired from the synthetic time–distance maps and find that
they strongly underestimate the actual speeds of the recon-
nection outflows. We then summarize and discuss the impli-
cations in Section 5.
2.OVERVIEW OF THE 3D MHD MODEL AND FLARE
EVENT
To gain insights into the three-dimensional dynamics of re-
connecting magnetic fields in the flare current sheet and the
above-the-loop region, we analyze the results of a resistive
3D MHD model developed by Shen et al. 2022. More de-
tailed descriptions of the model can be found in Shen et al.
(2022). Here we only provide a brief overview. The 3D
MHD model is initialized from a 2.5D model of reconnection
in the solar corona based on a standard Harris current sheet
with the lower boundary of the simulation domain character-
ized by photospheric density (n e =10 12 cm−3) and line-tied
magnetic field at the bottom, which further leads to the for-
mation of closed post-flare loops or Kopp–Pneumann con-
figuration once the magnetic reconnection occurs within this
vertical current sheet following an initial perturbation. After
the closed postflare loops are formed in a 2.5D setup, physi-
cal parameters are extended uniformly along the third dimen-
sion, and the simulation is run self-consistently in 3D, which
leads to the development of new reconnection sites within the
current sheet and formation of plasmoids, as well as gener-
ating turbulence and plasma instabilities. Since the classic
flare geometry is well established in the 2.5D model, the ap-
proach extending from 2.5D to 3D allows us to explore the
flare cusp region in the classic flare framework. However, it
is noted that this method does not include an eruption nor a
full 3D representation of plasma evolution along the guide-
field direction (z-axis). Future work will require full 3D sim-
ulations to address these system-scale dynamics. The model
includes treatments of anisotropic thermal conduction, ap-
proximation of coronal heating function, and radiative cool-
ing. Such treatments are crucial for a proper description of
thermodynamical processes that involve intense plasma heat-
ing and cooling in the above-the-loop-top region (Yokoyama
& Shibata 1997), which are necessary for producing realistic
EUV and SXR time series images and comparing them to the
observations.
The plasma conditions in the initial run of the MHD sim-
ulation are defined with the Lundquist numberS=5×10 4
and plasmaβ=0.1 in the ambient coronal plasma. The
characteristic physical parameters that were used to nor-
malize MHD equations to the nondimensional form cor-
respond to the typical values in the solar corona: length
Lchar =150 Mm, magnetic fieldB char =10 G, densityn 0 =
2.5×10 8 cm−3, temperatureT 0 =1.13×10 8 K, Alfv ´en
speedV A =1366 km/s and time scalet 0 =109.8 s. Simu-
lation was performed using a 3D uniform Cartesian grid with
[579,576,288]cells alongx,y,andz. The simulation domain
is defined as−0.5⩽x⩽0.5, 0⩽y⩽1, and−0.25⩽z⩽0.25
in code units.
Figure 1 shows the magnetic field configuration after the
reconnection in the current sheet has been established, which
corresponds to the gradual phase of an LDE that hosts a
bright candle-flame-shaped feature. The time step of interest
is selected in a way that the magnetic field in the above-the-
loop-top region would undergo a steady three-dimensional
evolution by developing plasma instabilities and forming a
wavy, irregular reconnection X-line, thus resulting in a con-
figuration substantially distinct from the initially symmetric
extension from the two-dimensional setup.
To perform a model-to-data comparison, we use observa-
tions of a well-studied long-duration eruptive solar flare that
occurred on 2012 July 19. This flare occurred on the south-
western region of the solar limb and provides a favorable
viewing geometry with the current sheet viewed nearly edge-
on. It allows us to study the candle-flame-shaped morphol-
ogy and plasma downflows with minimal impediment caused
by projection effects due to event orientation. Bright SXR
and EUV emission from the cusp feature above the postflare
arcade is observed over the course of almost 12 hr during the
gradual phase (from 06:00 UT until about 18:00 UT), which
featured enduring high-altitude plasma downflows. For a de-
tailed summary of EUV and X-ray observations of the im-
pulsive and gradual phase of the event, we refer interested
readers to other papers (Krucker & Battaglia 2013; Liu 2013;
Liu et al. 2013a). In this work, we select several 20 minute
time intervals during the gradual phase, considerably long af-
ter the flare impulsive phase, when the associated CME (also
mentioned as the erupted flux rope) has propagated to a large
distance. The time selection is to ensure that the geometry of
the flare aligns with our model assumptions, which feature

5
0.4
 0.2
 0.0 0.2 0.4
x, code length
Y-line
b
jz map, z=0.0920, t = 5.5t0
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
jz (normalized)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0y, code length
jz
a
10 6
 10 4
 10 2
 100
B2 (normalized)
B2
0.2
 0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2
z, code length
termination
shock
c
jz in RCS plane (y-z), x=-0.002
0.02
 0.01
 0.00 0.01 0.02
Y-point x coordinate, code length
Figure 2.RCS geometry and magnetic field configuration at a selected time,t=5.5t 0, during the MHD model evolution. Central panel (b)
shows the two-dimensional distribution of current densityj z calculated for the singlex–yslice of the simulation dataset. Overlaid in light gray
are the streamlines of the magnetic field derived in the cutting plane. Blue and black markers show the bifurcation of the current sheet and
the local magnetic field minimum closest to the bifurcation site. The pink dashed vertical line in panel (a) marks the position of the RCS and
defines thex-coordinate of they–zplane, where the cut across the RCS was taken, shown in panel (c). The cyan dashed vertical line in panel (c)
shows thez-coordinate where thex–yslice shown in panel (a) was taken. The red patch shows the contours of the highest velocity convergence
max(−∇·v)that is expected to trace the position of the termination shock in they–zplane. Panel (a) shows thej z distribution along thez-axis
extracted from the vertical slice along the RCS (shown in the central panel). Panel (a) shows local current densityjz (purple) and magnetic field
B2 profiles (cyan) extracted along the RCS. A dashed blue line corresponds to the height of the bifurcation point, while the black line highlights
the local magnetic field minimum closest to the RCS bifurcation site. Panel (c) shows the associated current density distributionj z computed
along they–zslice chosen along the vertical dashed line shown on the central panel. Stars trace the position of the Y-points in thez-direction
identified from the RCS bifurcation and local magnetic minimum. The color indicates the displacements of Y-points along thexdirection.
a long current sheet with an underlying reconnected flare ar-
cade system, but without a flux rope.
We use observations from the Atmospheric Imaging As-
sembly (AIA) onboard the Solar Dynamics Observatory
(SDO; Lemen et al. 2012) in the 94 and 131 ˚A channels,
which contain the main contribution from the FeXV IIIand
FeXXIemission lines with temperature response peaking
at 6.3 MK and 10 MK, respectively (O’Dwyer et al. 2010;
Zanna 2013). SDO/AIA data are available over the entire du-
ration of the event at a time cadence of 12 s. Full-disk images
are calibrated and processed using the standardaia prep
routine (updated pointing and registration) included in the
SunPyanalysis software (SunPy Community et al. 2015;
Barnes et al. 2020).
Imaging observations by the X-ray Telescope (XRT) on
board the Hinode spacecraft (Golub et al. 2008) instrument
with the Open-Al thick filter pair are the closest in resem-
bling the candle-flame brightness distribution observed in the
AIA 131 ˚A channel. The Al thick filter has a peak of its tem-
perature response function in a similar temperature range as
AIA 131 ˚A, atT∼10 MK. XRT observations are calibrated
to Level 1 using thexrt prepprocedure available in the
SolarSoftIDL package (sswIDL) (Freeland & Handy
1998). The XRT images are normalized to display output in
units of DN per second. To perform joint analysis with AIA
observations, the coalignment routinexrt read coaldb
is used to update instrument coalignment using a reference
AIA 335 ˚A image and XRT coalignment database1 to apply
rotation corrections to the XRT image.
3.THE RECONNECTION Y-POINTS
In this section, our goal is to examine how we can use
the observed cusp geometry in EUV and SXR imaging to
constrain the site where the transition between the RCS and
1 http://ylstone.physics.montana.edu/yosimura/hinode/coalignment/

6
1200"
1100"
1000"
-100" -200" -300"
 
Helioprojective Longitude (Solar-X)
AIA 94 A 2012-07-19 10:41:49
slit 1
slit 2
AIA 131 A 2012-07-19 10:41:44
 XRT Open-Al thick 2012-07-19 10:41:48
1200"
1100"
1000"
-100" -200" -300"
Helioprojective Latitude (Solar-Y)
Helioprojective Longitude (Solar-X)
Synthetic AIA 94.0 Angstrom
-100" -200" -300"
 
Synthetic AIA 131.0 Angstrom
-100" -200" -300"
 
Synthetic XRT Open-Al thick
1100
 1125
 1150
 1175
 1200
Slit 1 projection (Solar-X), arcsec
100
101
Intensity, [DN cm5 pix 1 s 1]
AIA 94.0 Å
Synthetic
1100
 1125
 1150
 1175
 1200
Slit 1 projection (Solar-X), arcsec
100
101
102
 
AIA 131.0 Å
Synthetic
1100
 1125
 1150
 1175
 1200
Slit 1 projection (Solar-X), arcsec
10 3
10 1
101
103
 
XRT  Open-Al thick
Synthetic
100
101
102
100
101
102
100
101
102
[DN cm5 pix1 s1]
100
101
102
100
101
102
100
101
102
[DN cm5 pix1 s1]
Figure 3.Observed and modeled EUV images of the candle-flame-shaped flare that occurred on 2012 July 19. The top three panels, from
left to right, show images in the high-temperature EUV (94 ˚A, 131 ˚A) and SXR (Al thick) channels obtained by SDO/AIA and Hinode/XRT.
Observation time was chosen in the gradual phase of the flare at 10:41 when data from XRT is available. The middle panel row presents
synthetic images computed from the 3D MHD simulation dataset by Shen et al. (2022) using temperature response functions for corresponding
channels in AIA and XRT detectors. Red markers indicate projected positions of Y-points as derived from the numerical model. An upside-
down white “Y” marker indicates the mean position of the model-derived Y-points projected on the vertical slit #1. White arrows indicate the
location of the “visual” tip of the cusp based on a 5σlevel relative to the coronal background. Double-headed arrows mark the approximate
widths of postflare loops for observed (green solid) and synthetic images (purple dashed) as derived from brightness profiles extracted along
orange horizontal slits. Bottom panel features synthetic (dashed) and observational (solid) brightness profiles extracted along the vertical slit #1
aligned with the position of the RCS in the numerical model (blue dashed lines). Slit #1 is centered at the position of the macroscopic Y-point.
The white dashed line placed close to the right edge of the image indicates the slit used to extract the brightness profile in the background
coronal region. Coronal background brightness profiles (gray) shown on the bottom panels are extracted along the white dashed slit. Plotted in
purple is the histogram showing the distribution of projected Y-points on the slit plane. Vertical red line in each of the bottom panels indicates
where the transition from exponential decay to plateau occurs.

7
closed magnetic field line configurations occurs, namely, the
lower reconnection Y-point. This is first done by identifying
the location of the Y-points based on the known magnetic
field configuration in the simulated data. Then, by synthe-
sizing EUV and SXR emission from the model, we compare
the morphology of the apparent cusp feature to the identified
locations of Y-points. Such a comparison, in turn, allows us
to inform the interpretation based on the observations.
To generalize the 2D concept of a Y-point in the ideal
Sweet–Parker reconnection model to more realistic 3D re-
sistive numerical simulations, additional criteria to locate the
macroscopic Y-points in the 3D MHD model are required. In
our study, we reconstruct a three-dimensional Y-line in the
simulation output by locating a Y-point inside each 2D slice
extracted at differentzcoordinates along the RCS. For each
slice, the identification of the lower macroscopic Y-point at
the bottom of the current sheet is done by using two comple-
mentary methods: (1) finding where the current sheet shows
a bifurcation; (2) identifying magnetic null points, which ex-
hibit as the local minima of the magnetic field strength|B|.
The current sheet bifurcation is due to the transition in topol-
ogy from nearly anti-parallel field lines in the current sheet to
cusp-shaped, closed field lines above the flare arcade. The lo-
cal minimum of|B|, or the magnetic bottle, is due to the field
line divergence at this location (see Fig. 2(a), (b)), which nat-
urally arises due to the presence of a large-scale current sheet
above the flare loop top (see Chen et al. 2024 for a more de-
tailed discussion). To find the bifurcation site, we identify a
branch point of the skeletonized structure of the current den-
sity distribution in each 2D slice (in thex-yplane). We fur-
ther mark the local magnetic minimum, closest to the bifurca-
tion site, as the Y-point. Details about the Y-point recognition
algorithm are given in Appendix A.
Figure 2(c) shows the distribution of identified Y-points
from 90x-yslices extracted at differentzcoordinates. We
show positions of identified Y-points in they−zplane with
color-coding indicating displacement along thex-axis. The
identified Y-points are localized below the bottom of the cur-
rent sheet, seen as a sharp transition inj z, and above the
termination shock. Sometimes, fine structures such as plas-
moids (or magnetic flux tubes) could spontaneously develop
within the current sheet and modulate the fine structures near
the Y-point. The evolution of the Y-points at all simulation
time steps is shown in Fig. 8 (see Appendix B). It demon-
strates that the perturbation of the current sheet structures
could result in a complex spatiotemporal distribution of the
Y-points.
To carry out model observation comparisons, we first de-
termine the viewing geometry by matching the orientation
of the observed postflare arcade. This is done by combining
multiperspective observations by SDO/AIA and the EUVI in-
strument on board the STEREO observatory (Wuelser et al.
2004) in the late gradual phase using lower temperature
(T∼1.5 MK) 193 ˚A and 195 ˚A channels, respectively. We
infer the angleθbetween the AIA line of sight and the plane
of the current sheet to be 5 ◦–10◦ using the observed orienta-
tions of several postflare EUV loops shown in Figure 9. This
angle may contribute, at least in part, to the apparent thick-
ness of the hot plasma spikes observed by AIA and XRT at
the tip of the cusp, and the width of the postflare arcade in
the synthetic images. The details of the alignment procedure
and coordinate transformations are given in the Appendix C.
From this viewing perspective, we further compute syn-
thetic EUV and SXR emissions from the plasma parameters
available in the 3D MHD model and create synthetic emis-
sion maps using therushlightpackage 2. To derive syn-
thetic EUV/SXR brightness distributions, for each location
in the plane of the sky (x′,y ′), we first compute the EUV and
SXR emissivity in each simulation celldI i =n 2
i Rm(Ti)dz′
i,
wheren i andT i are the plasma density and temperature of
each cellilocated along the line of sight (denoted as thez ′
axis after rotating the 3D simulation cube),dz ′
i is the pro-
jected grid size in the line-of-sight direction, andR m(Ti)is
the instrumental response function of the selected filterm
for a given instrument (SDO/AIA or Hinode/XRT). For opti-
cally thin EUV and SXR emission, the final intensity at the
(x′,y ′) location is the direct summation of all contributions
from these cells along the line of sight
Im(x′,y ′) = ∑
i
dIi(x′,y ′) = ∑
i
n2
i Rm(Ti)dz′
i.(1)
When deriving temperature response functions using
aia get response.proandmake xrt temp resp.pro
routines insswIDL, we assume ionization equilibrium and
the standard coronal abundance model from theCHIANTI
database (Dere et al. 1997; Del Zanna et al. 2021).
Synthetic images are projected into the observer’s image
plane and aligned using the derived position of a postflare
loop midpoint location (from inter-footpoint distance) and
the current observer’s coordinate derived from the SDO/AIA
FITS file header. The image in each synthetic SDO/AIA and
Hinode/XRT filter is then resampled into the corresponding
pixel grid of the reference image to the corresponding pixel
scale for AIA and XRT (0.6 ′′pix−1 for AIA and 1.02 ′′pix−1
for XRT).
Figure 3 shows the results of our model-to-data compar-
isons for AIA 94 ˚A (left column), AIA 131 ˚A (middle col-
umn), and XRT Al thick (right column). The synthetic im-
ages successfully reproduce most main features of the ob-
servations, including the correct intensity level and the cusp-
shaped flare arcade in all three EUV/SXR filter bands. The
best agreement is observed for AIA/131 ˚A channel, since the
2 https://rushlight.readthedocs.io/

8
0.2
 0.1
0.0 0.1 0.2
Length z , code length
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Height y, code length
upflows
downflows
SADs
250 500 750
abs. Velocity |vy|, km/s
 Alfvén speed in the inflow region
max / slice
max / slit
EM weighted
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Time from start, t0
X−line
500
 0 500
Velocity vy, km/s
 0 200 400 600 800
Max abs. velocity max|vy|, km/s
a b c
Figure 4.Distribution of plasma flow velocities derived for an oblique slice through the plane of the RCS. Panel (a) shows an oblique slice
through the 3D MHD dataset (alongz ′) that was chosen to be aligned with the slit #2 defined in Fig. 3. This slice shows the distribution of the
vertical component of plasma velocityvy and illustrates the geometry of plasma flows inside the RCS. The central panel (b) shows EM-weighted
⟨v⟩EM (light green) and maximum velocity profiles (purple) with height for each one of 20 2D slices parallel to the slice #10 (shown on panel
(a)). Blue profile shows the maximum velocity at each height calculated for slice #10. The red line is an envelope curve calculated from all
maximum velocity profiles extracted from each slice. Maximumv y(y)profiles of plasma flows in the slit plane computed for every simulation
timeframe were stacked into a single time–distance diagram shown on the right panel (c). The color map represents the maximum instantaneous
plasma velocity of the reconnection downflowv y(y,t)picked along the line of sight to identify individual downflows.
original version of the model (Shen et al. 2022) was de-
signed to reveal the dynamical structures in high-temperature
current sheets and flare loop-top regions (∼10 7 K) associ-
ated with fast magnetic reconnection. We note that, how-
ever, the postflare arcade in the synthetic images is notably
different from the observations. Its bottom portion appears
brighter and wider, while the loop top lacks a prominent en-
hancement, as in the observations. Reproducing the realistic
brightness of the closed loops at lower coronal heights would
require more rigorous treatment of radiative cooling and real-
istic chromospheric evaporation driven by accelerated parti-
cles, which are not included in this model. Another morpho-
logical difference lies in the slight asymmetry seen in the ob-
served cusp feature, which is not reproduced in the synthetic
images because our model is set to start from a symmetric
reconnection geometry.
After calculating the alignment and scaling of the MHD
model for the 2012 July 19 event, we re-project the 3D co-
ordinates of the identified Y-points positions in the model on
the synthetic images. The distribution of the derived Y-points
is shown in Figure 3. Most of the projected Y-points corre-
spond to those along a continuous Y-line; therefore, we es-
timate the mean position of the projected cluster of Y-points
in the plane of sky (x ′,y ′), which would represent a “macro-
scopic” Y-point (shown as a white upside-down “Y” on Fig.
3).
Next, we examine how these Y-point locations compare
with the apparent “tip” of the cusp feature. We note that the
visual estimate of the tip location is inherently subjective,
which is very sensitive to the color map/color scale selection
and, additionally, affected by the dynamic range and back-
ground noise level of the EUV/SXR instruments. To make
such a determination more objective, we determine the loca-
tion of the visual “tip” based on the coronal background level
extracted outside of the cusp structure along the slits shown
as white dashed lines on Fig. 3. We set the lower limit for
the brightness of the “tip” to be at 5 times the rms of the
background coronaσ, to confidently separate the brightness
levels within the current sheet region from the ambient coro-
nal levels and noise inherent to AIA and XRT measurements
in the background regions (as shown by white arrows on Fig.
3). It can be seen that for all synthetic images, the distribu-
tions of the projected Y-points are clustering well below the
visual tip. In fact, the extended spike features in the cusp re-
gion, or extensions of cusp peaks to higher altitudes (as can
be seen in the observed AIA 131 ˚A image) may represent the
lower portion of the RCS, but not necessarily the newly re-
connected highly bent loops below the macroscopic Y-point.

9
To further elucidate the relative connection between the Y-
point locations and the observed EUV/SXR intensity distri-
bution, we analyze brightness profiles extracted along a ver-
tical slit and overplot the histogram of the projected Y-point
coordinates on the slit. While the Y-points are distributed in
a variety of heights, the majority of them are located in the
transition region from a steep exponential drop of the inten-
sity profile toward a “plateau” that eventually merges into the
coronal background at larger heights.
From the MHD model, we see that the sections of the
brightness profile featuring the steep exponential drop and
the shallow plateau correspond to the closed flare arcade and
the RCS regions, respectively. The steep exponential profile
in the closed flare arcade is due to the strong tension force
exerted on the flare arcade plasma by the highly bent, closed
loops below the Y-point. This extra downward force strongly
compresses the plasma, resulting in a steep exponential den-
sity profile with a small density scale height. In contrast, in
the RCS region above the Y-point, the plasmaβis high. As
such, the magnetic tension force there does not play a key
role, and the density gradient is mainly governed by the hot,
∼10 MK plasma in a quasi-equilibrium state, which sets a
much greater density scale height and hence a less steep den-
sity profile.
Thus, compared to using the visual tip of the cusp, the tran-
sition region between these two brightness profile regimes
may be a better indication of the location of the macroscopic
Y-point based on the EUV/SXR images.
4.PLASMA DOWNFLOW SPEEDS
4.1.Plasma downflows inside the RCS
As introduced earlier, measurements of plasma downflow
velocities from the apparent motions of brightness features in
the EUV and SXR time series images using the time-distance
method could be confounded by projection effects and the
complicated interplay of multiple overlapping plasma flows
along the line of sight. In this section, we use the 3D MHD
model to investigate these effects.
First, to characterize the velocity distribution of the plasma
downflows within the RCS, we extract the instantaneous ver-
tical velocity distributions (v y) in the oblique slit plane that
crosses the RCS in the MHD model under an angle ofθ∼5 ◦
(as shown in Fig. 9). Figure 4 shows the velocity distri-
butions in the slit plane, featuring reconnection downflows
originating at theX-line in the upper part of the simulation
domain aty∼0.9, and impinging on the postflare arcade at
y∼0.6. From the velocity distribution in they-z ′ plane (Fig-
ure 4(a)), we can tell that the fastest downflows with typical
vy ∼ −700 km/s appear in the center of the oblique slice
that intersects with the center of RCS atz ′ ∼0 (orx=0).
These fastest plasma downflows are enclosed by the back-
ground coronal plasma that has a dramatically lowerv y com-
ponent (see Fig. 5).
Reconnection theories and numerical experiments suggest
that, due to the presence of complex structures and dynam-
ics in the RCS, the plasma speeds in the RCS have a wide
range of distribution, with only the fastest ones approach-
ing the Alfv ´en speed in the inflow region (Liu et al. 2012;
Haggerty et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2025). In order to identify
velocity peaks at a giveny-z ′ slice corresponding to the re-
connection downflows, we collapsed the velocity distribution
alongz ′ axis and derived a one-dimensional profile ofvmax
y (y)
with height, where peaks are expected to correspond to the
fastest downflow in the slice. To simulate the finite thick-
ness of the AIA 131 ˚A slit (about 5 pixels with a resolution
of 0.6 ′′pix−1, or∼2 Mm in physical width), we extracted
Nslc =20 slices that are contained within this slit thickness
range. We then computed av max
y (y)profile for eachy-z ′
slice (shown in blue in Figure 4(b)), and determined an en-
velope curve for all slices (shown in red). To find correspon-
dence between individual downflows and their time–distance
response that will be further compared with synthetic EUV
signatures, we stacked allv max
y (y,t)profiles in a single time–
distance diagram (right panel on Figure 4). This map allows
one to identify the fastest reconnection downflows as they
propagate from the X-line, seen as a dark region aty≈0.9,
downward to the upper part of the above-the-loop-top region,
which grows fromy≈0.3 at the beginning toy≈0.55 at
t=7.
Further, since the observed apparent plasma downflows in-
volve all the reconnection outflows weighted by the density
and temperature distributions along the line of sight, we also
compute emission measure EM=
Z
n2dz′ weighted veloc-
ity profiles⟨v⟩ EM(y,t):
⟨v⟩EM(y,t) =
R
n2 T v y(y,z′)H(j z −j min
z )dz′
R
n2 T H(j z −j minz )dz′ ,(2)
whereHis a Heaviside step function that filters out the grid
cells with a current density lower than a threshold valuej min
z .
This is to ensure that the integration does not include back-
ground plasma outside the current sheet region, which usu-
ally has a lower temperature and does not contribute much
to the observed EUV intensity in, e.g., the 94 and 131 ˚A
passbands. For eachy-z ′ slice within the 5 ′′ thick slit (along
x′), we compute an EM-weighted vertical velocity profile
⟨v⟩EM(y), shown as light green curves in Figure 4(b). We
then average the EM-weighted vertical velocity over all slices
⟨v⟩slit
EM(y,t) = 1
Nslc
∑
i
v(x′
i)
EM(y,t). The averaged height profile
of⟨v⟩ slit
EM is shown as a green curve in Figure 4(b). As can be
seen from Figure 4(b), for all oblique 2D slices parallel to the
slit plane, EM-weighted velocity does not exceed one-half of
the maximum downflow velocity within the slit plane.

10
0.2
 0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2
Length z , code length
2.50
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50
3.75
4.00
4.25
4.50density, cm 3
1e8
n(z )
T(z )
vy(z )
jz(z )
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
T, 1e7 K- vy, km/s
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
jz, norm
Figure 5.Plasma parameters distribution along the line of sight determined for the horizontal slice alongz ′ shown in Fig. 4. The red line
shows the vertical velocityv y inside the slit plane. Blue and magenta lines correspond to the density and temperature within the current sheet,
respectively. Gray profile represents the normalized current densityj z profile and determines the extent of the RCS intersection with the slit
plane. The red dashed line indicates EM-weighted velocity⟨v⟩ EM.
Figure 5 illustrates density and temperature profiles within
the oblique cut across the RCS, defined by slit position and
line-of-sight direction. It can be seen that temperature and
density distributions do not show similar behavior to the ve-
locity profile. More notably, the highest velocity regions do
not necessarily have a higher density or temperature. There-
fore, plasma flows with different velocities can all contribute
to the observed EUV brightness weighted by the density
and temperature along the line of sight, rendering the EM-
weighted velocity at nearly one-half of the maximum down-
flow velocities.
Comparisons of⟨v⟩ EM withv max shown in figures 5 and
4(b) indicate that without taking into account the plasma ma-
terial distribution along the line of sight, the measurements
of apparent velocity of plasma downflow may lead to a large
underestimation of the reconnection outflow velocity, and
Alfv´en speed in the inflow region.
4.2.Apparent Downflow Speeds in the Time–Distance Plots
In this subsection, we further simulate synthetic EUV
131 ˚A time series images using the time-dependent 3D MHD
simulations, and then produce running ratio time–distance
maps to best replicate the observational practice of track-
ing the plasma downflows. The synthetic AIA 131 ˚A time–
distance map made at the same slit #2 shown in Figure 3 is
displayed in Figure 6(a). The running ratio time–distance
map, in which the intensities shown at each time are pro-
duced by dividing the current image by the preceding one
12 s before, is shown in Figure 6(b).
We choose a 12 minute time interval that features multi-
tudes of plasma downflows in the reconnection current sheet
above the Y-points. We have identified 18 plasma downflows
that manifest themselves as distinct bright tracks in the run-
ning ratio time–distance plot. The downflow tracks are iden-
tified by detecting local intensity peaks at a given time step
within the height range of interest. To determine the speeds
of the apparent downflows, we perform linear fits to derive
the slopes of the tracks, which are translated into speeds. We
note that there are also many tracks below the Y-points with
less steep slopes (Figure 6(b), magenta). They represent the
contracting loops in the above-the-loop-top region with much
slower speeds, with a median around 100 km s −1. Knowing
the exact location of the Y-points from the 3D MHD model
helps us conclusively remove the possibility of tracking flows
that are not associated with the reconnection outflows.
The time–distance derived speeds of plasma downflows
(black triangles on Fig. 6(c) are distributed in the range from
200 km s −1 to 600 km s −1, peaking approximately around
400 km s−1, as can be seen from the histogram shown in the
figure 6(d). We then compare these results with the instanta-
neous velocities extracted directly from the MHD dataset. By
utilizing previously calculated maximum and EM-weighted
downflow velocities, we derive stacked time–distance maps,
such as one shown in Fig. 4 (c) for maximumv y(y,t)along
the slit. On that plot, the maximum velocity corresponds to
the fastest downflow.
In a related manner, we compute a time–distance map for
EM-weighted slit average⟨v⟩ slit
EM using equation 2, for all

11
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Time from start, s
0
50
100
150
200
250
300Height, arcsec
downflows
Y-line
c  o  n  t  r  a  c  t  i  n  g     l  o  o  p  s
a
Synthetic AIA 131Å height-time stack plot
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Time from start, s
b
Synthetic AIA 131Å running ratio
400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
Time from start, s
800
600
400
200
0
Downflow velocity, km/s
Alfvén speed in the inflow region
c
0 5
Counts
d
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Time from start, t0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Time from start, t0
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Ratio
3 4 5 6 7
Time from start, t0
Figure 6.Comparison between plasma flow speeds estimated from height–time stack plots and the model-derived maximum and EM-weighted
speeds. Panel (a) features a height–time stack plot of synthetic AIA 131 ˚A brightness extracted along the slit #2 defined in Fig. 3. The red
shading illustrates the histogram of Y-point positions as projected on the slit for each timestep of the simulation. (b) Time–distance diagram
computed from the running ratio of synthetic AIA 131 ˚A images featuring fast plasma downflows in the upper part of the plot (dark gray lines),
and slow plasma downflows (magenta lines) corresponding to contracting loops. The red vertical line shows the time step analyzed previously
in Figures 2, 3, 4. The lower panel (c) shows inferred velocities of the fast and slow plasma downflows from the linear fits (black and magenta
triangles). Green diamonds indicate the EM-weighted speed of all fast downflows intersecting the selected line of sight at a given height. Red
diamonds indicate the maximum speed of the downflow that intersects the line of sight. The purple line indicates the value of local Alfv ´en
speed calculated in the vicinity of the reconnection X-point, seen as the origin of bidirectional outflows at a height of about 300 ′′in panels
(a) and (b). Histogram on panel (d) shows maximum (red), EM-weighted (green), and time–distance–derived (black) speed distributions of all
analyzed downflows.
downflows that cross the line of sight at a given height along
the slit. From the histogram showing distribution of down-
flow speeds (Fig. 6(d)), we could see that the EM-weighted
speeds⟨v⟩ slit
EM generally agree with the time–distance-map-
derived speeds, demonstrating that the brightness features in
the time–distance analysis are EM weighted.
4.3.Comparison with the observed downflows
To validate the plasma downflow speeds derived using the
synthetic time–distance plots based on the numerical model,
we applied an identical fitting approach to measure the down-
flow speeds in the observations of the 2012 July 19 solar
flare, which we have used to tune the model parameters. We
selected three 20 minute long time windows in the gradual
phase of the event that host multitudes of detectable plasma
downflows. The last time interval (10:35–10:55 UT) also
overlaps with the time interval used for analysis of imag-
ing observations in Section 3. Earlier windows at 7:00 UT
and 8:00 UT feature more downflows, which are also faster,
possibly indicating more intense and dynamic reconnection
processes earlier in the flare energy release.
To estimate velocities of the downflows from SDO/AIA
observations, we adapted an approach from Yu et al. (2020),
which uses the running ratio of consecutive frames that is de-
trended over a period exceeding the characteristic time of the
downflow appearance, in order to improve the contrast of the
time–distance diagram. We also used an expanding slit with
an opening angleα≃3 ◦ to increase the signal-to-noise ratio

12
05:00 06:00 07:00 08:00 09:00 10:00 11:00
0
200Distance, arcsec
Running ratio (AIA 131 Å)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300Vertical distance along the slit, arcsec
07:05 07:10 07:15 07:20
Time, UT (2012-07-19)
102
101
Vertical velocity vy
08:05 08:10 08:15 08:20
Time, UT (2012-07-19)
10:40 10:45 10:50 10:55
Time, UT (2012-07-19)
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.02
1.04
Ratio
5 10
Counts
vmed = -20 km/s
vmed = -276 km/s
Figure 7.The evolution of the plasma flows and flare loops in the 2012 July 19 flare. The upper panel covers the time period from the impulsive
phase of the flare, including flux rope eruption at around 5:00 UT, and demonstrates a sustained reconnection process in the gradual phase and
production of downward reconnection jets up to 11:00 UT. The three subpanels below are detrended 20 minute windows, chosen to match
the time coverage of the numerical model. The running ratio time–distance diagram in the right-most panel is extracted from the vertical slit
introduced in figure 3, while the central and left-most subpanels are extracted using the slit # 2 defined in Liu et al. 2013b to reach better
alignment with the RCS position at earlier times. Linear fits of fast and slow plasma flows are shown in red and magenta triangles (lines),
respectively. The lower panel shows velocity estimates for fast and slow downflows. The histogram on the right side shows the distribution of
fast and slow downflows and median velocity estimates, shown on all panels as dashed horizontal lines.
at higher altitudes. Results of the downflow fits are shown in
Figure 7. The downflow speeds generally fall into the range
of 200–400 km s −1, consistent with those derived from the
synthetic AIA 131 ˚A images. In addition to that, we deter-
mined median velocities of contracting loops, which appear
to be of the order of magnitude less than the faster plasma
flows located higher in the corona.
It should be noted that the model-derived time–distance
plot clearly demonstrates more downflow tracks, as com-
pared to the observational ones. The more abundant down-
flows are because the synthetic EUV images are computed
directly from the simulation output, which have almost infi-
nite dynamic range to show a much larger number of varying
features in the running ratio images.
5.DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The above-the-loop-top region at the bottom of the RCS,
where the macroscopic Y-point is located, hosts numerous
dynamic structures, including fast-mode termination shocks
and a variety of plasma flows and oscillations (Chen et al.
2015; Takasao & Shibata 2016; Shen et al. 2018, 2022). In
particular, its “magnetic bottle” configuration (Chen et al.
2020, 2024) may help facilitate its key role in particle ac-
celeration and confinement (Krucker et al. 2010; Krucker &
Battaglia 2013; Kong et al. 2019; Arnold et al. 2021; Li et al.
2022; Fleishman et al. 2022; Li et al. 2025), and plasma heat-
ing (Reeves et al. 2020; Gou & Reeves 2024) in flares. This
location also features plasma downflows, whose speeds have
been used to infer the rate of magnetic reconnection. As such,
the Y-points serve as an important anchor to relate the energy

13
release and particle acceleration processes and plasma dy-
namics to the underlying magnetic geometry. Reliable obser-
vational diagnostics of the Y-point locations and a correct in-
terpretation of the associated plasma outflows are thus highly
desirable.
In this work, we have examined how the observed candle-
flame-shaped structure and apparent plasma downflows as
measured in the time–distance plots can be used to inform
the location of the reconnection Y-points and reconnection
outflow speeds, by utilizing the state-of-the-art numerical 3D
MHD simulation developed by Shen et al. (2022). Compar-
isons to actual observations are made using EUV and SXR
time series imaging observations of the candle-flame-shaped
eruptive flare on 2012 July 19 obtained by SDO/AIA and
Hinode/XRT. Our main findings include the following:
1. By directly examining the current density and mag-
netic field in the 3D numerical model, we pinpoint
the location of the Y-points derived from both cur-
rent sheet bifurcation and local magnetic field min-
imum.We then produce realistic synthetic EUV and
SXR images by adjusting the model to match the flare
parameters and viewing geometry of the 2012 July
19 flare, which successfully reproduces the observed
candle-flame-shaped flare morphology. We find that
most of the projected Y-points are, in fact, distributed
well below the apparent tip of the cusp feature. This
location corresponds to the region where the current
sheet in the model bifurcates and broadens, and plasma
density rises at a sharper exponential rate.
2. The RCS hosts flows with a broad distribution of
speeds, with the fastest ones reaching about 80% of the
Alfv´en velocity in the inflow regionv in
A . However, in
agreement with the observations, the speeds of appar-
ent plasma downflows above the Y-points, as derived
from the synthetic AIA 131 ˚A time–distance plots, are
only∼0.5v in
A . For downflows below the Y-points, they
are much slower, at only∼0.1v in
A (see Fig. 4(b)).
Our results show that the apparent tip of the cusp is not
a reliable means for determining the location of the macro-
scopic Y-points. In fact, in our experiment, a large portion
of the spike feature at the very tip corresponds to the bottom
part of the RCS, and the actual Y-points are “buried” well be-
low the visible tip. A better and more qualitative means for
identifying the general location of the macroscopic Y-points
based on EUV/SXR imaging is to make a brightness profile
along the direction of the RCS. From the profile, we can then
use the transition region from an exponential brightness drop
at lower heights to a slow-varying “plateau” at higher alti-
tudes as the proxy for the general Y-point location. However,
this method can only be used for flare events with its current
sheet viewed nearly edge-on. Also, any nonuniformity in 3D
may play a role in altering the brightness distribution.
Alternatively, to determine the location of the bottom of
the RCS, time-resolved measurements of plane-of-sky mo-
tions could be used. Time–distance diagrams provide a clear
visualization of the transition from fast plasma downflows
to slow contracting motion of postflare loops. This apparent
break in plasma flow speed identifies the topological transi-
tion from quasi-parallel magnetic field geometry to closed,
and traces the height and temporal development of the Y-
line. This method works well for flares close to the limb and
appears less sensitive to the current sheet orientation (edge-
on/face-on).
Another key aspect of our study is to investigate whether
the apparent plasma downflow speeds, as derived from the
time–distance plots of the synthetic EUV time series images,
can be used as a reliable proxy for the Alfv ´en speeds in the
reconnection inflow regionv in
A . Although previous obser-
vational studies have alluded that they may be slower than
the presumed Alfv´en speeds by up to an order of magnitude
(Savage & McKenzie 2011; Longcope et al. 2018), our re-
sults, which are based on “ground truth” parameters derived
from the 3D MHD model, not only provide a solid confirma-
tion, but also offers physical insights into the origin of such
a discrepancy.
First and foremost, where we track the supra-arcade
plasma downflows matters. If the tracked plasma downflows
are located below the Y-points and do not reside in the RCS,
the plasma motions are much slower due to the greater cross-
sectional area as they exit the narrow current sheet and the
strong resistance they experience from the underlying flare
loops. Our simulation results show that these flows are only
∼0.1v in
A . As a result, the inflow Alfv ´en speed can be under-
estimated by an order of magnitude just because the “wrong”
plasma outflows are tracked.
Second, the flows in the RCS region are modulated by var-
ious structures and complex dynamics associated with, e.g.,
non-laminar flows, flows originating at different heights due
to the meandering X-line in 3D, and also the plasmoid for-
mation that interrupts the outflow structure and leads to the
fragmentation of the outflows. Analogous behavior of recon-
nection outflows was observed in MHD and particle-in-cell
simulations of general reconnection geometries (Huang &
Bhattacharjee 2016; Guo et al. 2021). Our 3D MHD simula-
tions in an eruptive flare context show that these flow speeds
show a large range of variation, with a maximum speed of
∼0.8v in
A , but the slowest ones approach zero. The apparent
plasma downflow speeds measured in the time–distance plots
are contributed by all such flows in the line of sight, weighted
by their density and temperature. As a result, the line-of-sight
integration renders the measured speeds in our experiment to
be substantially lower than the highest achievable speed, at

14
only around 0.5v in
A . We also need to emphasize that, due to
the sensitivity of the observed EUV brightness to the detailed
thermodynamic processes, this figure may vary on a case-by-
case basis.
Last but not least, we note that projection effects can fur-
ther reduce the apparent speeds of the plasma downflows by a
factor of sinα(whereαis the angle between the line of sight
and the direction of the downflowsy). In the case of the 2012
July 19 event, with an estimated small tilt angle toward the
observer, the projection effect is negligible. However, this
effect can be more profound for events with a much greater
tilt.
For reasons discussed above, in sum, the practice of using
apparent plasma downward speedsv d as a proxy of Alfv ´en
speed can easily lead to a severe underestimation of up to an
order of magnitude, which, in turn, gives an artificially high
dimensionless reconnection rate. As such, special care must
be taken when performing this type of analysis. Also, our
results suggest that the reconnection rate reported in the lit-
erature using this method may be overestimated by at least
a factor of 2 in the best-case scenario, to more than an or-
der of magnitude if they used the “wrong” type of plasma
downflows as the proxy. It may explain why sometimes the
reported reconnection rate exceeds the theoretically achiev-
able value ofM A ≈0.1.
I.O. carried out the majority of the work during his
participation in the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa-
tory (SAO) Predoctoral Program. I.O. would like to
thank Drs. Yuhao Chen and Jun Lin for useful dis-
cussions and comments. I.O., S.F., B.C., and S.Y .
acknowledge support by NSF grants AST-2108853 and
AGS-2334931 to the New Jersey Institute of Technol-
ogy (NJIT), NASA grant 80NSSC20K1318 to NJIT, and
NASA grant NNH240B72A through subcontract C5509
from DOE/LANL. In addition, S.Y . acknowledges sup-
port by NASA grant 80NSSC24K1242 to NJIT. C.S.
acknowledges the support from NASA through grant
Nos. 80NSSC21K2044 and 80NSSC25K7707. X.L.
and F.G. acknowledge support from NASA through grant
NNH240B72A and from the National Science Foundation
through grants AST-2107745 and AGS-2334930.
Facilities:SDO (AIA), STEREO (EUVI), Hinode
(XRT)
Software:sunpy, scikit-image, SolarSoft
APPENDIX
A.IDENTIFICATION OF Y-POINTS
We extracted 90x-yplane slices ofj z along thez-axis and computed the topological structure of the current density distribution
to pinpoint the bifurcation site. The binary image representing the geometry of the current sheet cross section was obtained after
applying the skeletonization algorithm (Zhang & Suen 1984) available in thescikit-imageimage processing library (Walt
et al. 2014) 3. For the skeletonized image of the current density, we identified branching points and picked the uppermost one
that has no branches intersecting a horizontal line at the sameycoordinate. The lines with unconnected ends within the ALT
region were excluded from the binary images to avoid recognition artifacts. To avoid interferences from the fine structures within
the RCS (such as plasmoids and geometry disturbances) detectable at the full resolution of the initial dataset, the slices were
extracted from current density distributions determined from the simulation output and further image resolution reduction with a
factor ofn=3.
The profiles of the simulated magnetic field extracted along the current sheet typically show a flat minimum region that could
host multiple local minima. To extract 1D profiles of the magnetic field along the vertical direction, we used a Gaussian profile
to fit the thickness of the RCS in the vicinity of the RCS bifurcation point and determine its central coordinate for a particular
simulation timeframe. To account for the finite thickness of the RCS, we extracted several vertical slices and found the mean
value of the magnetic field along thex-coordinate, and then identified the local magnetic field minimum along the vertical profile
ofB(y). To associate the local magnetic field minimum with a reconnection Y-point, we picked the detections of the minima
approaching the bifurcation site from the lower side.
3 https://scikit-image.org/docs/stable/

15
B.Y-POINT EVOLUTION AND FINE PLASMA STRUCTURES INSIDE THE RCS
Here we consider the temporal evolution of Y-points and the formation of magnetic perturbations and plasmoids in the devel-
oping RCS (see Fig. 8).
Figure 8.This animation (available in the HTML version) shows the evolution of the Y-line (in they−zplane) and development of perturbations
inside the RCS. The left panel shows they−zslice of current density extracted alongx=0 throughout the MHD simulation at the time step
shown in the panel legend. Y-points are overplotted over the current density map (purple). Color code displays Y-point displacement alongx.
The right panel shows the corresponding slice in thex−yplane. The red dashed vertical line in the left panel demonstrates thez-coordinate at
which the correspondingx−yslice is extracted and plotted in the right panel.

16
C.ALIGNMENT OF MHD MODEL TO 2012 JULY 17 EVENT GEOMETRY
In order to perform accurate model-to-data comparisons, the MHD model was projected into the viewing geometry, accounting
for observed arcade location on the solar surface and orientation towards the observer (SDO/Hinode observatories). Additionally,
the three-dimensional MHD model utilized in this study is defined with a coordinate system as follows:
xaxis–parallel to the loop plane, connecting loop footpoints
yaxis–parallel to the loop plane, running up through the flare cusp
zaxis–perpendicular to the loop plane, running through the flare arcade
To determine components of the line-of-sight vector, we first define the location of the flare arcade in a Heliographic Stonyhurst
coordinate frame. An array of coordinates in the Stonyhurst heliographic frame (Thompson 2006) representing points along a
single flare loop was aligned to visually match the observable flare loop geometry in two perspectives of the 2012 long-duration
event: one from the SDO/AIA instrument and the other from the STEREO/EUVI instrument (see fig. 9). These coordinates are
generated using the software moduleCoronal Loop Builder 4 (CLB).
Once these loop coordinates were secured and converted to the Heliocentric-Cartesian frame using thesunpypackage, the
principal axes of the loop plane could be derived. The coordinates for both footpoints of the CLB loop become vectors pointing
out from the solar center. A third vector is introduced, pointing from the solar center to the top of the CLB loop. The cross
product of these two in-plane vectors is chosen to align with thez-axis of the MHD coordinate frame. Next, the vector connecting
loop footpoints is defined along thex-axis of the simulation domain, and they-axis is chosen along the vertical direction defined
by the cross product between thezandx-axes.
800" 900" 1000" 1100"
-100"
-200"
-300"
-400"
Helioprojective Longitude (Solar-X)
Helioprojective Latitude (Solar-Y)
yz
x
AIA 193 A 2012-07-19 10:40:30
-600" -500" -400" -300"
-100"
-200"
-300"
-400"
Helioprojective Longitude (Solar-X)
Helioprojective Latitude (Solar-Y)
slit plane
EUVI-A 195 A 2012-07-19 10:40:30
y z
x
z'x'
Figure 9.Aligning the MHD simulation dataset with the observations of postflare loop configuration using joint SDO and STEREO EUV data.
The red line indicates the geometry of the postflare loop derived from the fit and used to determine the line-of-sight direction for synthetic
imaging. Loops shown in pink show fits of adjacent EUV loops used to estimate the range of angles that the line of sight makes with the flare
arcade. The colored line segments (blue, green, red) indicate the MHD coordinate system principal axes (x,y,z), and the white box indicates
the orientation of the MHD simulation volume. The magenta-colored filling shows the slit plane as seen from the STEREO perspective, which
is bordered by AIA lines of sight that define a vertical slice along the flare current sheet. The slit is aligned with the vertical axis of the MHD
datasety ′ ≡y. Thex ′ axis is perpendicular to they-z ′ plane.
4 https://github.com/sageyu123/CoronalLoopBuilder

17
With the principal axes of the MHD frame resolved, a transformation matrix was constructed so that the Heliocentric-Cartesian
coordinates for the observer of the projection could be easily converted into the MHD frame. Observer’s coordinates are defined
from the header of the FITS file used for model-to-data comparison. The observer is defined to be located in the negative direction
of thez-axis of the Heliocentric Cartesian coordinate system (similarly, negativeζin Helioprojective Cartesian). Taking the
product of the observer’s location vector with the transformation matrix provides the line-of-sight vector expressed in MHD
simulation domain coordinates.
With the line-of-sight vector defined in the MHD coordinate frame, we compute a synthetic image projection with the help
of the 3D data visualization packageyt(Turk et al. 2011). The final step of creating a properly aligned synthetic map was to
scale and translate the synthetic data to the correct location in the final Helioprojective-Cartesian frame. This was accomplished
by projecting the origin of the MHD box into the Helioprojective-Cartesian frame and displacing the image by the difference in
pixels between the MHD origin and the CLB loop coordinates, also projected into the Helioprojective-Cartesian frame. Scale
factor was determined using the ratio between the physical distance between flare footpoints and the related distance between
footpoints in the MHD model (in Mm) after conversion, assuming characteristic length scaleL char =150 Mm. Derived physical
units, including the timescale, were scaled accordingly, preserving the Alfv´en speed.
REFERENCES
Arnold, H., Drake, J., Swisdak, M., et al. 2021, Physical Review
Letters, 126, 135101, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.135101
Barnes, W., Cheung, M., Bobra, M., et al. 2020, Journal of Open
Source Software, 5, 2801, doi: 10.21105/joss.02801
Bezrodnykh, S. I., Vlasov, V . I., & Somov, B. V . 2011, Astronomy
Letters, 37, 113, doi: 10.1134/S1063773710110040
Cassak, P. A., Liu, Y .-H., & Shay, M. A. 2017, Journal of Plasma
Physics, 83, 715830501, doi: 10.1017/S0022377817000666
Chen, B., Bastian, T. S., Shen, C., et al. 2015, Science, 350, 1238,
doi: 10.1126/science.aac8467
Chen, B., Shen, C., Gary, D. E., et al. 2020, Nature Astronomy, 4,
1140, doi: 10.1038/s41550-020-1147-7
Chen, B., Kong, X., Yu, S., et al. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal,
971, 85, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad531a
Ciaravella, A., Raymond, J. C., Li, J., et al. 2002, The
Astrophysical Journal, 575, 1116, doi: 10.1086/341473
Del Zanna, G., Dere, K. P., Young, P. R., & Landi, E. 2021, The
Astrophysical Journal, 909, 38, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abd8ce
Dere, K. P., Landi, E., Mason, H. E., Fossi, B. C. M., & Young,
P. R. 1997, Astronomy and Astrophysics Supplement Series,
125, 149, doi: 10.1051/aas:1997368
Drake, J. F., Antiochos, S. K., Bale, S. D., et al. 2025, Space
Science Reviews, 221, 27, doi: 10.1007/s11214-025-01153-x
Fleishman, G. D., Nita, G. M., Chen, B., Yu, S., & Gary, D. E.
2022, Nature, 606, 674, doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04728-8
Forbes, T. G., & Priest, E. R. 1983, Solar Physics, 84, 169,
doi: 10.1007/BF00157455
Forbes, T. G., & Priest, E. R. 1995, ApJ, 446, 377,
doi: 10.1086/175797
Forbes, T. G., Seaton, D. B., & Reeves, K. K. 2018, The
Astrophysical Journal, 858, 70, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aabad4
Freeland, S. L., & Handy, B. N. 1998, Solar Physics, 182, 497,
doi: 10.1023/A:1005038224881
Gary, D. E., Fleishman, G. D., & Nita, G. M. 2013, Solar Physics,
288, 549, doi: 10.1007/s11207-013-0299-3
Gary, D. E., Chen, B., Dennis, B. R., et al. 2018, The Astrophysical
Journal, 863, 83, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aad0ef
Golub, L., DeLuca, E., Austin, G., et al. 2008, in The Hinode
Mission, ed. T. Sakurai (New York, NY: Springer), 27–50,
doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-88739-5 5
Gou, T., & Reeves, K. K. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal, 972,
164, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad5d61
Guo, F., Li, X., Daughton, W., et al. 2021, The Astrophysical
Journal, 919, 111, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac0918
Haggerty, C. C., Shay, M. A., Chasapis, A., et al. 2018, Physics of
Plasmas, 25, 102120, doi: 10.1063/1.5050530
Huang, Y .-M., & Bhattacharjee, A. 2016, The Astrophysical
Journal, 818, 20, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/818/1/20
Kong, X., Guo, F., Shen, C., et al. 2019, The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 887, L37, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab5f67
Krucker, S., & Battaglia, M. 2013, The Astrophysical Journal, 780,
107, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/780/1/107
Krucker, S., Hudson, H. S., Glesener, L., et al. 2010, The
Astrophysical Journal, 714, 1108,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/714/2/1108
Lemen, J. R., Title, A. M., Akin, D. J., et al. 2012, Solar Physics,
275, 17, doi: 10.1007/s11207-011-9776-8
Li, X., Guo, F., Chen, B., Shen, C., & Glesener, L. 2022, The
Astrophysical Journal, 932, 92, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac6efe
Li, X., Shen, C., Xie, X., et al. 2025, The Astrophysical Journal,
991, 202, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adfcd5
Lin, J., & Forbes, T. G. 2000, Journal of Geophysical Research:
Space Physics, 105, 2375, doi: 10.1029/1999JA900477
Lin, J., Ko, Y .-K., Sui, L., et al. 2005, The Astrophysical Journal,
622, 1251, doi: 10.1086/428110
Lin, J., Murphy, N. A., Shen, C., et al. 2015, Space Science
Reviews, 194, 237, doi: 10.1007/s11214-015-0209-0

18
Linton, M. G., & Longcope, D. W. 2006, ApJ, 642, 1177,
doi: 10.1086/500965
Liu, R. 2013, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
434, 1309, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt1090
Liu, R., Lee, J., Wang, T., et al. 2010, The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 723, L28, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/723/1/L28
Liu, W., Chen, Q., & Petrosian, V . 2013a, The Astrophysical
Journal, 767, 168, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/767/2/168
—. 2013b, The Astrophysical Journal, 767, 168,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/767/2/168
Liu, Y .-H., Cassak, P., Li, X., et al. 2022, Communications Physics,
5, 97, doi: 10.1038/s42005-022-00854-x
Liu, Y .-H., Drake, J. F., & Swisdak, M. 2012, Physics of Plasmas,
19, 022110, doi: 10.1063/1.3685755
Liu, Y .-H., Hesse, M., Guo, F., et al. 2017, PhRvL, 118, 085101,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.085101
Liu, Y .-H., Hesse, M., Genestreti, K., et al. 2025, Space Science
Reviews, 221, 16, doi: 10.1007/s11214-025-01142-0
Longcope, D., Unverferth, J., Klein, C., McCarthy, M., & Priest, E.
2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 868, 148,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaeac4
McKenzie, D. E., & Hudson, H. S. 1999, ApJL, 519, L93,
doi: 10.1086/312110
Mondal, S., Srivastava, A. K., Pontin, D. I., & Priest, E. R. 2025,
The Astrophysical Journal, 989, 222,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adf18e
Nagashima, K., & Yokoyama, T. 2006, The Astrophysical Journal,
647, 654, doi: 10.1086/505320
O’Dwyer, B., Zanna, G. D., Mason, H. E., Weber, M. A., &
Tripathi, D. 2010, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 521, A21,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014872
Parker, E. N. 1957, Journal of Geophysical Research (1896-1977),
62, 509, doi: 10.1029/JZ062i004p00509
Paschmann, G., Papamastorakis, I., Baumjohann, W., et al. 1986,
J. Geophys. Res., 91, 11099, doi: 10.1029/JA091iA10p11099
Petschek, H. E. 1964, in The Physics of Solar Flares, Proceedings
of the AAS-NASA Symposium held 28-30 October, 1963 at the
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD. Edited by Wilmot
N. Hess., V ol. 50 (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, Science and Technical Information Division),
425. https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1964NASSP..50..425P
Reeves, K. K., Linker, J. A., Miki´c, Z., & Forbes, T. G. 2010, The
Astrophysical Journal, 721, 1547,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/721/2/1547
Reeves, K. K., Polito, V ., Chen, B., et al. 2020, The Astrophysical
Journal, 905, 165, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc4e0
Ren, Z., Wang, Y ., Cheng, X., & Ding, M. 2025, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 694, A103, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202451158
Ruan, W., Keppens, R., Yan, L., & Antolin, P. 2024, The
Astrophysical Journal, 967, 82, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad3915
Savage, S. L., & McKenzie, D. E. 2011, The Astrophysical
Journal, 730, 98, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/730/2/98
Savage, S. L., McKenzie, D. E., & Reeves, K. K. 2012, The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 747, L40,
doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/747/2/L40
Savage, S. L., McKenzie, D. E., Reeves, K. K., Forbes, T. G., &
Longcope, D. W. 2010, The Astrophysical Journal, 722, 329,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/722/1/329
Shen, C., Chen, B., Reeves, K. K., et al. 2022, Nature Astronomy,
6, 317, doi: 10.1038/s41550-021-01570-2
Shen, C., Kong, X., Guo, F., Raymond, J. C., & Chen, B. 2018,
The Astrophysical Journal, 869, 116,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaeed3
Shen, C., Lin, J., & Murphy, N. A. 2011, The Astrophysical
Journal, 737, 14, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/737/1/14
Shibata, K., & Magara, T. 2011, Living Reviews in Solar Physics,
8, 6, doi: 10.12942/lrsp-2011-6
Su, Y ., Veronig, A. M., Holman, G. D., et al. 2013, Nature Physics,
9, 489, doi: 10.1038/nphys2675
Sui, L., & Holman, G. D. 2003, The Astrophysical Journal, 596,
L251, doi: 10.1086/379343
SunPy Community, Mumford, S. J., Christe, S., et al. 2015,
Computational Science & Discovery, 8, 014009,
doi: 10.1088/1749-4699/8/1/014009
Sweet, P. A. 1958, in Proceedings from IAU Symposium no. 6.,
V ol. 6 (Cambridge University Press), 123.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1958IAUS....6..123S
Syrovatskii, S. I. 1971, Soviet Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Physics, 33, 933.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1971JETP...33..933S
Takasao, S., Asai, A., Isobe, H., & Shibata, K. 2012, The
Astrophysical Journal, 745, L6,
doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/745/1/L6
Takasao, S., & Shibata, K. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 823,
150, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/823/2/150
Thompson, W. T. 2006, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 449, 791,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20054262
Tsuneta, S. 1996, The Astrophysical Journal, 456, 840,
doi: 10.1086/176701
Tsuneta, S., Hara, H., Shimizu, T., et al. 1992, Publications of the
Astronomical Society of Japan, 44, L63.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1992PASJ...44L..63T
Turk, M. J., Smith, B. D., Oishi, J. S., et al. 2011, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 192, 9,
doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/192/1/9
Unverferth, J., & Longcope, D. 2021, ApJ, 923, 248,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac312e
Walt, S. v. d., Sch¨onberger, J. L., Nunez-Iglesias, J., et al. 2014,
PeerJ, 2, e453, doi: 10.7717/peerj.453

19
Wang, Y ., Cheng, X., Ding, M., et al. 2023, The Astrophysical
Journal Letters, 954, L36, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acf19d
Wuelser, J.-P., Lemen, J. R., Tarbell, T. D., et al. 2004, in
Telescopes and Instrumentation for Solar Astrophysics, V ol.
5171, 111–122, doi: 10.1117/12.506877
Yamada, M., Kulsrud, R., & Ji, H. 2010, Reviews of Modern
Physics, 82, 603, doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.82.603
Ye, J., Raymond, J. C., Mei, Z., et al. 2023, The Astrophysical
Journal, 955, 88, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acf129
Yokoyama, T., & Shibata, K. 1997, The Astrophysical Journal,
474, L61, doi: 10.1086/310429
Yu, S., Chen, B., Reeves, K. K., et al. 2020, The Astrophysical
Journal, 900, 17, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aba8a6
Zanna, G. D. 2013, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 558, A73,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321653
Zhang, T. Y ., & Suen, C. Y . 1984, Communications of the ACM,
27, 236, doi: 10.1145/357994.358023