Title: Interior-Atmosphere Coupling on TRAPPIST-1 f, g, and h: Cryovolcanic Water Exospheres and Infrared Detectability
Authors: E. Kleisioti, D. Dirkx, A. V. Oza, A. Louca, M. Rovira-Navarro, T. -M. Bründl, M. A. Kenworthy
Published: 2026-05-26
Categories: astro-ph.EP

Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. aanda©ESO 2026
May 27, 2026
Interior–Atmosphere Coupling on TRAPPIST -1 f, g, and h:
Cryovolcanic Water Exospheres and Infrared Detectability
E. Kleisioti1,2,4 , D. Dirkx2, Apurva V . Oza3, A. Louca1, M. Rovira-Navarro2,, T.-M. Bründl2, and M. A. Kenworthy1
1 Leiden Observatory, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9513, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
e-mail:kleisioti@mail.strw.leidenuniv.nl
2 Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft, Building 62 Kluyverweg 1, 2629 HS Delft, the Netherlands
3 Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
4 National Observatory of Athens, Institute of Astronomy, Astrophysics, Space Applications and Remote Sensing, 152 36 Athens,
Greece
May 27, 2026
ABSTRACT
Aims.We investigate the interior structures and cryovolcanic observability of the exoplanets TRAPPIST-1f, g, and h. Our aim is to
determine which interior configurations can sustain subsurface liquid water oceans in thermal equilibrium and to assess whether the
resulting cryovolcanic outgassing could be detectable with current and future observatories.
Methods.Using a layered, radially symmetric interior model that includes silicate and ice layers, we identify interior configurations
in thermal equilibrium and quantify the partitioning of internal heat among the different layers and rheological parameters through
a Monte Carlo analysis. We also estimate cryovolcanic water outgassing rates and assess their detectability through transmission
spectroscopy, by creating synthetic transmission spectra of hydrostatic atmospheres and sputtered exospheres via radiative transfer.
Results.We find that, for all three planets, the internal heat budget is dominated by radiogenic heating and tidal dissipation in high-
pressure ice layers, with other contributions remaining minor. across the explored parameter space. Thermal equilibrium solutions
for the inner planets TRAPPIST-1f and g require relatively thin outer ice I shells, implying shallow subsurface oceans, in agree-
ment with previous work. In contrast, TRAPPIST-1h favors thicker ice shells. We show that globally distributed, non-hydrostatic
sputtered exospheres require higher energy conversion efficiencies to produce detectable signals with JWST/NIRISS compared to
localized plume-like outgassing configurations. Spatial localization of outgassed material in plume-like configurations substantially
enhances effective line-of-sight column densities. On TRAPPIST-1f, both globally uniform and localized outgassing scenarios can
produce signals above the JWST/NIRISS detectability threshold corresponding to∼20 transits, depending on the adopted modeling
assumptions.
Conclusions.Our interior model demonstrates that subsurface oceans are sustained over a broad range of interior configurations.
Overall, our results place constraints on the observability of cryovolcanic water vapor on the TRAPPIST-1 f, g, h planets and highlight
interior heat budgets and spatial distribution of outgassed material as key factors governing detectability. This framework strengthens
the prospects for detecting cryovolcanically generated water vapor beyond the Solar System and motivates transmission studies of
Europa-like exoplanets, that is, icy planets with subsurface oceans sustained by internal heating.
Key words.Trappist-1 planets – Subsurface ocean – Cryovolcanism – Tidal heating
1. Introduction
Since the discovery of the Trappist-1 planet system (Gillon
et al. 2017), the system has provided an intriguing opportunity
to the exoplanet community for observational and theoretical
studies(see e.g. Krissansen-Totton & Fortney 2022; Zieba et al.
2023; Pichierri et al. 2024; Schoonenberg, Djoeke et al. 2019)).
Trappist-1 hosts seven known, transiting exoplanets in orbital
resonance, and in almost edge-on orbits (Teyssandier et al. 2022;
Agol et al. 2021). It is the first known system of potentially
rocky, terrestial exoplanets with incident fluxes in the range of
the solar system rocky planets, three of which are located within
the star’s habitable zone.
The small radius of the star aids the planets’ characterisa-
tion. Agol et al. (2021) performed an analysis of transit timing
variations (TTVs) that includes all transit data from Spitzer since
the discovery of the system, and provided precise mass, and ra-
dius measurements for the planets. In addition, they observed a
slight downward trend of density with orbital distance. One pos-
sible explanation is different volatile/water content for the seven
planets. If confirmed, the three outer planets, f,g, and h, might
have between 4.5 and 6.4 wt% water assuming an Earth-like core
(Agol et al. 2021). The latter, together with their low equilibrium
temperatures, makes them good candidates for “cold ocean plan-
ets” (Quick et al. 2020).
Cold ocean planets are “ocean-bearing worlds with ice cov-
ered surfaces” (Quick et al. 2020). Their interior structure and
properties are expected to be similar to those of the solar system
icy moons (Ehrenreich et al. 2006). As such, they might har-
bor subsurface oceans fueled by tidal or radiogenic heating, un-
derneath an icy shell (Nimmo & Pappalardo 2016). Cold ocean
planets might be in abundance in the galaxy (Zeng et al. 2019),
and are significant targets for habitability and astrobiology stud-
ies. Several candidate worlds of this nature have been proposed.
For example, Quick et al. (2023) identified 17 planet candi-
dates that might be icy, including Trappist-1,f,g,h, according to
their measured densities and equilibrium temperatures. Another
planet, whose properties are compatible with a water-rich planet
Article number, page 1 of 15
arXiv:2605.26694v1  [astro-ph.EP]  26 May 2026

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
covered in an icy surface is LHS 1140 b (Quick et al. 2020, 2023;
Cadieux et al. 2024).
Several studies have characterized the possible water-bearing
interior of Trappist-1g,f,h planets (see e.g. Barr et al. 2018; Do-
bos et al. 2019). Acuña et al. (2021) studied their putative hy-
drospheres by modelling their pressure-temperature profiles, and
concluded that water on the planets would be in solid phases.
The planets’ non zero orbital eccentricity and short orbital peri-
ods suggest that tidal heating might be significant in their ther-
mal budget (Luger et al. 2017). Barr et al. (2018) studied tidal
heating in the Trappist-1 system, and concluded that the interior
of the planets can have similar geodynamics as solar system icy
moons.
Cryovolcanism is the eruption or extrusion of volatile mate-
rials, such as water, aqueous solutions, or other ices, in liquid
or vapor form that would otherwise be frozen at the surface of
icy planetary bodies where temperatures fall below the desorp-
tion temperature of most volatiles (Geissler 2015). If the outer
Trappist-1 planets have similar geological features to the solar
system icy moons, they might also exhibit cryovolcanism. Cryo-
volcanism has been detected on Enceladus (Porco et al. 2006;
Dougherty et al. 2006), Triton (Croft et al. 1995), and other
icy bodies in the Solar System (Fagents et al. 2022) and it is
a source of water outgassing that contributes to the formation
of exospheres among other processes such as surface sputtering.
In addition cryovolcanic activity has long been hypothesized for
Europa (Fagents et al. 2000; Fagents 2003). HST Ly-αobserva-
tions observations (Roth et al. 2014) and Galileo magnetic and
plasma wave signatures (Jia et al. 2018) were previsouly inter-
preted as evidence for plume activity. A more recent analysis,
however, suggests that the HST Ly-αobservations are more con-
sistent with an atomic hydrogen exosphere than active plumes
(Roth et al. 2026). In the Solar System, several icy moons pos-
sess tenuous exospheres or outgassing activity, such as Europa,
which has an oxygen dominated exosphere (Smyth & Marconi
2006; Oza et al. 2019b), and Enceladus, which possesses plumes
of water vapor and ice grains, containing traces of salts, sili-
cates and organic compounds (Postberg et al. 2011; Porco et al.
2006). These plumes feed the E-ring, a diffuse torus around Sat-
urn which extends several satellite radii from Enceladus (Baum
et al. 1981).
Our knowledge of the atmospheres of the Trappist-1 planets
is limited, including whether or not they possess atmospheres
in the first place. The extended pre-main-sequence (PMS) phase
of M-dwarf stars, like Trappist-1, makes the planets subject to
atmospheric loss due to their star’s prolonged period of high lu-
minosity and XUV emission (Luger & Barnes 2015). Neverthe-
less, efforts have been made to observationally characterize the
Trappist-1 atmospheres; de Wit et al. (2018) ruled out cloud-
less, hydrogen-dominated atmospheres for planets d, e and f. In
addition, Zieba et al. (2023) found evidence of either tenuous
or no atmosphere for planet c, and the photometric secondary
eclipse observations of Greene et al. (2023) hint that planet b is
most likely a bare rock. Motivated by these results, in this work
we adopt a simplified approach in which the outer TRAPPIST-1
planets are treated as essentially bare icy bodies, and we model
only a tenuous, cryovolcanically supplied water exosphere, ne-
glecting any additional background atmosphere.
Tidal models of varying complexity have been applied to
study bodies and moons within the Solar System (Rovira-
Navarro et al. 2022; Bierson & Steinbrügge 2021) and exoplanet
systems (Henning & Hurford 2014; Shoji & Kurita 2014; van
Woerkom & Kleisioti 2024). They range from models that as-
sume tidal parameters that are independent of the orbital pe-
riod and interior structure (constant-Q approach), and more com-
plicated multi-layered approaches, which take into account the
viscoelastic behavior of each layer material properties (Kleisi-
oti et al. 2023; Rovira-Navarro et al. 2021). Since the discov-
ery of the Trappist planets, several authors have attempted to
constrain their interior structure and potential dynamics assum-
ing that the outer planets Trappist-1 f,g, and h, are “cold ocean
worlds”. Quick et al. (2023) obtained ice shell thicknesses, tidal
heating rates and cryovolcanic column densities. They used the
constant-Q approach to assess tidal heating, which did not take
the dependency of the tidal parameters on each of the planets’
specific interior structure and orbit into account.
Barr et al. (2018) also modeled tidal heating in the system,
however they did not use the updated mass and radius constraints
of Agol et al. (2021), resulting in significantly higher predicted
water contents.
In this work, we examine the interior structure compatible
with the updated density estimates using a multilayer, viscoelas-
tic approach and examine the potential for cryovolcanism and its
remote detection. By constraining the heat generated within each
layer, we can determine the range of internal structures compat-
ible with a given ice shell thickness and assess the total internal
heat budget. We focus on the possibility that the outer planets
Trappist-1 f,g, and h contain water and do not possess thick at-
mospheres, with the goal to assess possible thermal equilibrium
states, and whether exospheres, similar to the solar system icy
moons, can be detectable with JWST. We model fully differenti-
ated planets with an icy shell, subsurface ocean, high pressure ice
layer (HPI), mantle, and a core, and obtain interior structures in
thermal equilibrium. We study the possible thermal states of an
icy shell and a subsurface ocean on Trappist-1f,g,h, using ther-
mal models that have been applied to solar system icy satellites.
To do so, we use the planet masses and radii of Agol et al. (2021),
together with a tidal model that captures the behavior of mate-
rial properties as a function of the orbital period. In Section 2 we
describe our interior, thermal and tidal models. In Section 3 we
present the partitioning of tidal dissipation within the planet in-
terior, and the resulting interior constraints for Trappist-1f. Sec-
tions 4 and 5 focus on the resulting cryovolcanic activity and
its predicted transmission spectroscopy signatures. Finally, Sec-
tion 6 compares our results with previous studies and discusses
whether interior structures in thermal equilibrium can produce
cryovolcanic signatures detectable with JWST.
2. Interior structure and tidal model
We assume a fully differentiated body, with radially homoge-
neous layer properties that consist of an iron core, a silicate man-
tle, a high pressure ice (HPI) layer that accounts for the possible
presence of the water ice polymorphs II through VII (e.g. Jac-
card 1976), a liquid, subsurface ocean and an ice I shell with
densitiesρ c,ρ m,ρ HPI ,ρ ocean, andρ ice,I (Dobos et al. 2019; Barr
et al. 2018). For our work, we require a model to determine feasi-
ble interior structures of the planets that are compatible with the
mass and radius values (see Table 2), under the assumption of
thermal equilibrium. Here we describe the thermal model (Sec-
tion 2.1) used to calculate the equilibrium states of the ice I shell,
and the tidal model (Section 2.2) to determine the heating in the
dissipative layers of the planets’ interior. We describe the plan-
ets’ thermal equilibrium model in Section 2.3.
Article number, page 2 of 15

E. Kleisioti et al.: Water exospheres in the TRAPPIST-1 system
2.1. Heat transfer model
For the heat transfer model of the ice I shell, we follow the ap-
proach of Sohl et al. (2003), who modelled the thermal structure
of Titan’s ice shell. The ice I shell is divided into a conductive
outer layer and a convective sub-layer, as is typically modeled
for solar system icy moons (see e.g. Hussmann et al. 2002;
Green et al. 2021). The heat that is transported through the con-
ductive stagnant lid layer is:
Qcond
4πR2
P
=k (Ttop −T S )
Dcond
(1)
WhereR P is the planet’s radius,Dcond is the thickness of the con-
ductive layer,T S andT T op are the surface and top temperature of
the convective layer andkis the thermal conductivity coefficient,
assumed to be equal to 3.3 W m−1K−1 (Spohn & Schubert 2003).
The equation for heat transport in the convective, sublayer is:
Qconv
4π(RP −D cond)2 =k (Tm −T top)
Dconv
 Ra
Rac
!β
(2)
WhereD conv is the thickness of the convective layer,T m is the
melting temperature of the ice I, andRaandRa c are the Rayleigh
and the critical Rayleigh number (in the order of 10 3 (Schubert
et al. 1979)). The Rayleigh number is given by Equation 3. Con-
vection becomes a significant mechanism for heat transport in
the ice shell whenRa≥Ra c. IfRa≤Ra c we assume that the ice
shell is purely conductive (Equation 1).
Ra= αρice,I gp(Tm −T top)D3
conv
κη(Tint) (3)
Whereαandκare the ice I thermal expansion coefficient and
thermal diffusivity equal to 1.6×10−4K−1 and 1.47×10 −6m2 s−1
respectively (Sohl et al. 2003).g P is the surface gravity of each
planet andη(T int) is the viscosity of the convective layer’s mean
temperature (Tint).
In thermal equilibrium, the heat flux (Q eq) that is trans-
ferred through the conductive layer is equal to the flux convected
through the sublayer:
Qcond =Q conv =Q eq (4)
To obtain the thermal equilibrium state of the ice I shell, we
solve Equations 1,2,3 and 4 iteratively for the layer thicknesses
(Dstag,D conv) and the equilibrium heat fluxQ eq for different val-
ues of total ice I layer thickness (D ice). To do so, we firstly as-
sume a value forD ice, which is the free parameter in our interior
models. This sets the pressure, and thus, the melting temperature
at the bottom of the convective layer (T m), at the depthR ice,I,
as seen in Figure 1. The melting temperature is calculated as a
function of pressure, as shown in Figure A.1 for an ammonia
containing ocean of 5 wt.% (Grasset et al. 2000). These concen-
trations are consistent with those inferred for icy Solar System
bodies, like Titan, where ammonia acts as an antifreeze facili-
tating the existence of subsurface oceans under cold conditions
(Sohl et al. 2003). Furthermore, formation beyond the water ice
line of Trappist-1f,g,h (see Section 6.2) would promote the ac-
cretion of volatile compounds, including ammonia (Öberg et al.
2011). With the assumption that the ocean is isothermal we cal-
culate the pressure at the bottom of the ocean, and thus the thick-
ness of the ocean, and the radiusR HPI . This process is visualized
in the red segment of Figure 2. For more details on the iterative
method, we refer the reader to Sohl et al. (2003).
Fig. 1: Schematic overview of the interior model of Trappist-
1f,g,h. The ice I layer is divided into a conductive and a convec-
tive sublayer. The thermal model determines the thickness of the
conductive and convective layers,Rice,I,R HPI , andQ eq. The tidal
model computes the tidal heating rates in the HPI, and the man-
tle. The layer boundaries are not to scale. Note that the convec-
tive layer is only present for a sufficiently high (≳103) Rayleigh
number
2.2. Tidal response model
The amount of tidal heat dissipated in the interior of a planet is
given by Equation 5 (eg. Segatz et al. 1988).
˙E=− 21
2 Im(k2)(nR)5
G e2 (5)
Wherenis the planet’s mean motion,ethe orbital eccentricity
of the planet, andGthe universal gravitational constant. We are
assuming that the planets are rotating synchronously (Lobo et al.
2023; Turbet et al. 2018). In addition, we assume that the planets
have zero obliquity, and therefore have zero obliquity tides.
Im(k2) is the imaginary part of thek 2 Love number, which
describes the deformation of the planet’s gravity field due to the
tidal interactions with the host star. Im(k 2) depends on the inte-
rior structure and properties (and hence the mass of the dissipa-
tive layers), rheology of the planet and its orbital period (Segatz
et al. 1988; Renaud & Henning 2018; Shoji & Kurita 2014). Un-
like studies that assume a constantk 2/Q(where Q is the tidal
quality factor) value for all planets (e.g. Quick et al. 2023), in
our model (Im(k 2)=k 2/Q) is computed self-consistently and
varies with the planet’s interior structure, rheology, and orbital
period. We computed the tidal dissipation using the viscolestic
theory for self gravitating bodies (see e.g. Peltier 1974; Sabadini
2016) with the Maxwell rheological law, which connects stress
and strain, and has already been applied to study solar system
moons (Hussmann & Spohn 2004; Fischer & Spohn 1990; Tobie,
G. et al. 2019; Roberts & Nimmo 2008; Rovira-Navarro et al.
2022) and exoplanet systems (Rovira-Navarro et al. 2021; Dobos
& Turner 2015; Hay & Matsuyama 2019). We note that more
complex rheological models, such as the Andrade rheological
law, have also been used to investigate tidal dissipation in plane-
tary interiors (see e.g. Kleisioti et al. 2023; Henning & Hurford
Article number, page 3 of 15

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
2014). By solving the equations of motion for the deformation
of each layer in the Fourier domain via the correspondence prin-
ciple (Peltier 1974), we obtain the gravitational potential at the
surface and thus, the Love number. We use the method described
by Rovira-Navarro et al. (2024) for spherically symmetric bod-
ies, and use the the LOV3D software package (Rovira-Navarro
et al. 2024) to compute the tidal dissipation in each layer for a
given planetary structure.
The rheological and physical properties that were used for
the thermal and tidal models are presented in Table 1, while the
orbital properties of each planet are shown in Table 2. We com-
pute tidal dissipation in the mantle, HPI layer, and ice I shell
for each interior structure. For the equilibrium heat-balance clo-
sure in Eq. 6, we initially neglect the mantle and ice I contri-
butions and subsequently verify that this approximation is valid
over the explored parameter space (Section 3.1). For the tidal re-
sponse model we assume an Earth-like mantle and core composi-
tion (iron-rich). The values for mantle viscosity, can range from
1015 to 10 22Pa s, with 10 16Pa s representing partially molten
cases (Barr et al. 2018). A shear modulus of 50 GPa is com-
monly adopted for the mantle at temperatures below the solidus
(Hussmann et al. 2002; Barr et al. 2018). Viscosities of the high-
pressure ice (HPI) layer, range from 1014 to 1020Pa s (Barr et al.
2018), with 10 14 being close the melting point. The HPI shear
modulus was taken to beµ HPP ≈3.5×10 10 Pa, assumed inde-
pendent of temperature, as in Barr et al. (2018). Viscosities of
Ice I range between 1013 and 1016 Pa s, and shear modulus esti-
mates for Ice I typically range from 3.3 to 4.8 GPa (Hussmann
et al. 2002; Barr et al. 2018).
Table 1: Average physical and rheological properties of the inte-
rior model layers
Parameter+Symbol Value Reference
HPI Viscosity (ηHPI ) 10 14 Pa s (Barr et al. 2018)
Mantle Viscosity (ηm) 10 20 Pa s (Lau et al. 2016)
Ice I Viscosity (ηiceI) 10 14 Pa s (Barr et al. 2018)
HPI shear modulus (muHPI ) 3.5×10 10 Pa (Barr et al. 2018)
Mantle shear modulus (mum) 7×10 10 Pa (Segatz et al. 1988)
Ice I shear modulus (muiceI) 3.3×10 9 Pa (Hussmann et al. 2002)
HPI density (ρHPI ) 1310 kgm −3 (Sohl et al. 2003)
Mantle density (ρm) 5000 kgm −3 (Barr et al. 2018)
Ice I density (ρice,1) 917 kgm −3 (Sohl et al. 2003)
Ocean density (ρocean) 950 kgm −3 (Sohl et al. 2003)
Core density (ρcore) 12050 kgm −3 (Barr et al. 2018)
2.3. Interior heat balance and structure calculation
The heat transfer model described in Section 2.1 provides the
heat flux for a given value of the ice I layer thickness (D ice),
and the associated thermal equilibrium heat output (Qeq). In this
manner,Q eq is a function ofD ice. For the entire planet to exist
in equilibrium,Q eq should be equal to the amount of heat that is
produced in the interior. Our aim is to determine the mass and
thickness of each interior layer - the core (mc), mantle (mm), and
high-pressure ice (HPI) layer (m HPI) - for a range of ice shell
thicknesses (Dice), such that the total internal heat production is
consistent withQ eq and measured planetary mass and radius.
We focus on two dominant sources of interior heat: tidal
heating in the HPI layer and radiogenic heating in the silicate
mantle, and assume that the heat flux through the ice shell (Qeq)
must equal the sum of the radioactive decay (Q rad) that is pro-
duced by the accumulation of radioactive elements in the silicate
mantle, and the tidal heat that is produced in the high pressure
ice layer (Q tidal,HPI ). Equation 6 is used as a closure condition
to identify interior structures in thermal equilibrium. We then
verify its validity by recomputing tidal dissipation in all layers
(mantle, HPI, and ice I) for the derived structures and by explor-
ing a wide range of rheological parameters via a Monte Carlo
sensitivity analysis (Section 2.4).
Qeq =Q tidal,HPI +Q rad (6)
For the calculation ofQ rad, we follow the approach of Schu-
bert et al. (1986), and use Equation (1) from Hussmann & Spohn
(2004), which expresses the radiogenic heat production as a
function of mantle mass (m m). We assume a mantle with chon-
dritic composition and a system age of 7.6 Gyr (Burgasser &
Mamajek 2017). We calculateQ tid,HPI using Equation 5, which
provides a direct relationship betweenQ tid,HPI and the mass of
the high-pressure ice layer (mHPI). We note that additional mech-
anisms, such as hemispheric tectonic driven by strong day-night
temperature contrasts on exoplanets, may also influence heat
transport (Meier et al. 2021).
To constrain the full interior structure, we can apply the fol-
lowing constraints, which describe the mass conservation (Equa-
tion 7), and the geometry of the system (Equation 8), while as-
suming homogeneous layers with constant density.
Mp =m c +m m +m ocean +m ice,I +m HPI (7)
We solve forR HPI , defined as the radius of the boundary be-
tween the high-pressure ice layer and the ocean, using the vol-
umes of the layers interior to this interface:
RHPI =
 3
4π
! 1
3
 mHPI
ρHPI
+ mm
ρm
+ mc
ρcore
! 1
3
(8)
Wherem ice,I andm ocean is the mass of the ice I shell, and the
subsurface ocean. The rest of parameters in Equations 7, 8 are
described in Table 1.
Fig. 2: Schematic of the parameter calculation process. The red
segment visualizes the heat transfer model in the outer ice shell,
which is described in Section 2.1. The grey segment describes
the process of calculating the thermal equilibrium in the entire
planet (Section 2.3). The latter thermal equilibrium dictates that
Qeq =Q tidal,HPI +Q rad
Article number, page 4 of 15

E. Kleisioti et al.: Water exospheres in the TRAPPIST-1 system
Table 2: Planet parameters used in the model.
Parameter Symbol Trappist-1f Trappist-1g Trappist-1h
Planet mass [M⊕]M p 1.039±0.031 1.321±0.038 0.326±0.020
Planet radius [R⊕]R p 1.045+0.013
−0.012 1.129+0.015
−0.013 0.775±0.014
Equilibrium temperature [K]T eq 192 174 151
Orbital period [days]P9.20 12.35 18.77
Orbital eccentricitye0.01007 0.00208 0.00567
The planet as well as the star parameters that were used in order to calculate the planets’ equilibrium temperatures are taken from
Agol et al. (2021) to account for possible surface contamination and the lower reflectivity of ice at near-infrared wavelengths, where
M-dwarf spectra peak (Shields et al. 2013). For the calculation ofT eq we assumedA=0.4. Eccentricity values are taken from
Grimm et al. (2018)
SinceQ tid,HPI is a function ofm HPI (see Section 2.2) and
Qrad is a function ofm m, we solve the system of equations 6, 7,
8 form m,m HPI , andm c for a range ofDice. Thus, we calculatemc,
mm,m HPI ,Q rad, andQ tidal,HPI as a function ofD ice. This allows
us to derive the Core Mass Fractions (CMF) and Water Mass
Fractions (WMF) values as a function ofD ice. The gray boxed
region of Figure 2 visualises the calculation process described in
this Section.
We finally assess whether the assumption made in Equation 6
is valid. We recompute the expected tidal heating rates in the dif-
ferent layers, as seen in Figure 3 for the computed interior struc-
tures with varying HPI, mantle, and core masses. In all cases, we
conclude that the tidal heating rate in the mantle (Q tidal,m) is at
least one order of magnitude lower than both the tidal heating in
the HPI and the expected radiogenic heat (see Figure 3) , while
the tidal heat in the ice I shell (Q tidal,iceI ) is typically four orders
of magnitude smaller than the total heat generated in the interior
(see Figure B.1), validating our initial assumption of neglecting
Qtidal,m andQ tidal,iceI in Equation 6.
Fig. 3: Comparison of heat contribution from several sources for
Trappist-1f as a function of ice shell thickness. Tidal heat in the
mantle is negligible in the entire parameter space, while radio-
genic heat and tidal heat in the ice shell both contribute signifi-
cantly to the ice sheet equilbrium heat. Trappist-1f due to its size
and eccentricity has the highest tidal heat of the three planets.
2.4. Sensitivity analysis
To evaluate the robustness of our tidal dissipation results and ad-
dress uncertainties in interior rheology and internal heating, we
performed a Monte Carlo sensitivity analysis over a broad range
of model parameters. Layer viscosities were varied indepen-
dently using log-uniform distributions spanning several orders
of magnitude. Mantle viscosities were sampled over the range
log10(ηm/Pa s)=18-21, HPI viscosities over log 10(ηHPI/Pa s)=
14-18, and ice I shell viscosities over log 10(ηice I/Pa s)=13-16.
These ranges represent values commonly adopted in previous
studies of icy bodies (Barr et al. 2018; Hussmann et al. 2002).
In addition, the radiogenic heat flux was varied between half and
twice the nominal value used in the reference model, correspond-
ing toH=(0.25-1.0)×10 −12 W m−2. For each realization, we
computed the tidal dissipation rates in the mantle, HPI layer, and
ice I shell, as well as the total tidal dissipationQ tidal and the
equilibrium heat fluxQ eq.
3. Tidal dissipation and interior constraints for
Trappist-1f,g,h
We first demonstrate that neglecting tidal dissipation in the sil-
icate mantle and the ice I shell does not significantly affect the
equilibrium heat balance over the parameter space considered
here, by quantifying how tidal dissipation is partitioned among
the planet’s interior layers. We then assess which layers domi-
nate the tidal energy budget and present the interior structures
that can exist in thermal equilibrium.
3.1. Sensitivity analysis results
Figure 4 shows the fractional contributions of tidal dissipation in
the mantle, high-pressure ice layer, and outer ice I shell, normal-
ized by the total tidal dissipation, as a function of ice shell thick-
nessD ice. Across the entire parameter space explored, tidal dis-
sipation within the ice I shell accounts for only a small fraction
of the global energy budget. In all realizations, the maximum
fraction of tidal dissipation occurring in the ice I shell isf ice =
Qtidal,ice I/Qtidal ≲0.1. Because radiogenic heating is a significant
fraction of the total energy budget, the relative contribution of ice
I tidal dissipation to the total heat budget is even smaller, yield-
ingQ tidal,ice I/Qtotal ≲0.04. The largest fractional contributions
from the ice I shell occur primarily for models with relatively
stiffHPI layers (see Figure 5 which illustrates the dependence of
tidal dissipation partitioning on layer viscosities). In these cases,
reduced deformation in the HPI layer allows a greater fraction
of the tidal strain to be accommodated within the overlying ice I
Article number, page 5 of 15

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
shell. Nevertheless, even under these conditions, tidal dissipation
in the ice I shell is a small portion of the total heat budget.
Enhanced tidal dissipation in the mantle occurs only in a
subset of models with small core mass fractions (CMF≲0.1)
and relatively low mantle viscosities. In these cases, the mantle
contribution can reachQ tidal,m/Qeq ∼0.2, since radiogenic heat-
ing in the mantle also contributes significantly to the total heat
budget. Such conditions are mostly achieved for stiffHPI layers
combined with smaller mantle viscosities (Figure 5). If partial
melting were to occur in the mantle, the fraction of tidal dissipa-
tion localized there would likely increase further.
Overall, these results demonstrate that, for the interior struc-
tures considered here, tidal dissipation is not dominated by the
ice I shell, in contrast to inferences drawn from Solar System
satellites (see e.g. Sohl et al. 2003). This difference arises pri-
marily from the specific interior configurations explored in this
study, in particular the presence of very thick high-pressure ice
(HPI) layers, in some cases exceeding∼2000 km in thickness.
Such a thick viscoelastic HPI layer represents a large volume of
deformable solid and can therefore contribute substantially to the
total tidal dissipation budget, reducing the relative importance of
the overlying ice I shell.
Fig. 4: Fractions of Qtidal
Qeq
of the mantle, high-pressure ice layer,
and outer ice I shell, as a function ofD ice. The lighter and darker
shaded regions indicate the 75% and 95% uncertainty intervals
derived from the Monte Carlo distribution, respectively.
3.2. Possible interior structures of the planets T rappist 1 -
f,g,h
In Figure 6a, we present the interior structure of Trappist-1f
(Rcore,R mantle,R HPI ) as a function ofD ice (see Section 2.3). Fig-
ures C.1, C.2 present the corresponding Figures for Trappist-1,g
and h. A givenD ice thickness can transport an amount of heat
equal to the radiogenic heat generated in the mantle and the tidal
heat produced in the HPI layer. Thicker ice I layers can trans-
port smaller amounts of heat. The latter translates to a structure
with higher MHPI
MMantle
ratios, as seen in Figure 3. Thus, asD ice in-
creases, the ratio MHPI
MMantle
also increases (Figure 6). The various
interior structures are consistent with the observed densities of
the planets. As a result, the calculated range for ice shell thick-
ness is limited; thicker ice shells reach thermal equilibrium at
lowerQ eq values. Achieving such equilibrium requires a larger
core, since a smaller mantle reduces radiogenic heating. This, in
turn, prevents the total internal heat, radiogenic from the mantle
and tidal from the high-pressure ice (HPI) layer, from exceeding
the heat transfer capacity of the ice shell. Thus, the high-pressure
ice (HPI) layer expands rapidly withD ice, compensating for the
increased core size.
The right horizontal-axis limit of Figure 6 corresponds to the
case of a planet without a mantle layer, meaning that the iron
core would be in direct contact with the HPI (CMF=0.75). The
left horizontal-axis limit is consistent with an interior structure
that lacks a HPI layer. Such an interior structure corresponds to
the minimum WMF. Smaller WMF’s would not be compatible
with Trappist-1f,g,h having an icy shell with a subsurface liquid
ocean under the assumptions of our model. In particular, chang-
ing the assumptions for the physical and rheological parameters
in Fig. 1 will change the specific numerical values we obtain,
but the trends and overall magnitude of the quantities we present
will be representative for a body with the interior layer structure
as defined in our model. Without an HPI layer, the subsurface
ocean would directly interact with the mantle. This interaction
is crucial for astrobiology and habitability studies, as it allows
essential elements for the development of life to potentially en-
rich the subsurface ocean, similar to what is believed to occur on
Europa (Hand et al. 2022). Recently (Hernandez et al. 2022) sug-
gested that even when high-pressure ice layers are present, these
do not fully block chemical communication. This suggests that
interior-ocean exchange of electrolytes and essential elements
may remain possible across a wide range of planetary conditions.
Figure 6b shows the thickness of the stagnant lid, convective
layer, and ocean layer, as a function ofD ice. If Trappist-1f has a
CMF of 0.5 and an ice shell in thermal equilibrium, the ocean,
approximately 100 km thick, would lie about 6 km beneath an
almost entirely conductive ice shell. The extremely thin convec-
tive shell thickness supports the assumption of a conducting ice I
layer made in this work (Section 2.2), in contrast to the convec-
tive, thicker ice shells observed on icy moons within the solar
system (see e.g. Hussmann et al. 2002).
We present the thermal equilibrium interior structure pa-
rameters for Trappist-1f,g,h in Tables 3, 4, 5 respectively for
CMF=0.18, 0.32, and 0.5 assuming that the planets have not
been exposed to events that could have stripped away their man-
tle, such as mantle evaporation (Cameron 1985). For the planets
Trappist-1f and g, even in the case of a large CMF equal to 0.5,
a subsurface ocean would exist below an ice shell of thickness≲
10 km. Such a thin ice I shell hints that the ocean is more likely to
be in direct contact with the surface through cryovolcanism. As a
result, a plume would likely be composed of material originating
directly from the subsurface ocean, similarly to the cryovolcanic
Article number, page 6 of 15

E. Kleisioti et al.: Water exospheres in the TRAPPIST-1 system
Fig. 5: Top:f ice as a function of different layer viscosity. Bottom:f mantle as a function of different layer viscosity. Enhanced tidal
dissipation occurs in the ice I shell for stiffer HPI layers. Tidal dissipation in the mantle contributes more to the heat budget for
stiffer HPI layers and lower mantle viscosity.
mechanism on Enceladus (Quick et al. 2023; Porco et al. 2014).
Trappist-1h, the least massive of the three planets, exhibits equi-
librium interior structures with an ice layer thickness≳10 km.
This raises the possibility that any cryovolcanism on Trappist-1h
could resemble that of Europa, coming from water-pockets in the
ice (Quick et al. 2023). The ice shell I thicknesses that we obtain
are mostly in agreement with the results of (Quick et al. 2023).
For some interior configurations, particularly those with thicker
Ice I shells, our modeled tidal heating rates for Trappist-1f (≈10
TW) fall within the same order of magnitude as previous esti-
mates by Bolmont et al. (2026), who constrain tidal heating in
Trappist-1f between≈10-30 TW.
In the following section we discuss whether cryovolcanism
could be observed with spectroscopic observations on Trappist-
1f,g,h.
4. Modelling observations of cryovolcanic activity
Cryovolcanic activity has been observed on Saturn’s moon,
Enceladus (Porco et al. 2006; Spencer et al. 2018), and is also
suspected on Jupiter’s moon, Europa, based on multiple detec-
tions (Roth et al. 2014; Sparks et al. 2017; Paganini et al. 2020).
In the case of Enceladus, a subsurface ocean is located≲10
km beneath the south pole (Iess et al. 2014). The thin ice shell
of Enceladus allows cracks to propagate fully downward to the
ocean due to the long-term evolution of the ocean pressure and
ice shell thickness (Rudolph et al. 2022). Cryovolcanic activ-
ity on Enceladus is thought to be continuous, while its inten-
sity appears to be correlated with the orbital period (Ingersoll
et al. 2020) and tidal stresses (Hedman et al. 2013; Souˇcek et al.
2024). On the other hand, cryovolcanic eruptions on Europa are
sporadic (Sparks et al. 2017). In particular, (Paganini et al. 2020;
Phillips et al. 2000) show that large cryovolcanic eruptions are
likely rare, and Fagents et al. (2000) suggest that smaller erup-
Fig. 6: Interior structure as a function ofD ice for the planet
Trappist-1f. a. Radii of different layers as a function ofD ice. b.
Thickness of the stagnand lid, convective and ocean layers as a
function ofD ice.
tions are likely to occur more frequently. Given an ice shell of≈
25–30 km (Quick & Marsh 2015), cryovolcanic activity on Eu-
Article number, page 7 of 15

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
Table 3: Interior and thermal parameters of Trappist-1f in thermal equilibrium for different values of CMF.
Parameter Symbol CMF=0.11 (min) CMF=0.18 CMF=0.32 CMF=0.50
Thickness of ice I layer [km]D ice,I 4.7 4.9 5.6 6.8
Ocean thickness [km]D ocean 117.4 117.1 115.4 111.5
Water mass fraction WMF 0.019 0.038 0.085 0.14
Table 4: Interior and thermal parameters of Trappist-1g in thermal equilibrium for different values of CMF
Parameter Symbol CMF=0.09 (min) CMF=0.18 CMF=0.32 CMF=0.50
Thickness of ice I layer [km]D ice,I 5.2 5.9 7.2 9.2
Ocean thickness [km]D ocean 112.5 110.0 104.4 95.6
Water mass fraction WMF 0.011 0.030 0.059 0.080
Table 5: Interior and thermal parameters of Trappist-1h in thermal equilibrium for different values of CMF
Parameter Symbol CMF=0.02 (min) CMF=0.18 CMF=0.32 CMF=0.50
Thickness of ice I layer [km]D ice,I 9.4 11.5 13.7 18.0
Ocean thickness [km]D ocean 111.0 108.4 103.5 92.0
Water mass fraction WMF 0.080 0.095 0.118 0.150
ropa is thought to originate from water pockets that are located
within the ice shell (Fagents 2003; Manga & Wang 2007).
Similar geological features, including volcanism and cryo-
volcanism, may be present on exoplanet systems (Kleisioti et al.
2024; Quick et al. 2023, 2020; Oza et al. 2019a; Meyer zu
Westram et al. 2024; Guenther & Kislyakova 2019). However,
predicting cryovolcanic outgassing on cold ocean exoplanets is
challenging because it can be influenced by poorly constrained
parameters and interior processes, including the total internal
heat production, possibly the fraction of that heat generated by
tidal dissipation, and the thickness of the outer ice shell. While
surface fractures, like Enceladus’ tiger stripes, may form solely
due to tidal deformation of the ice shell, radiogenic heating
can also contribute to maintaining subsurface liquid reservoirs
(Leone et al. 2021). If tidal dissipation is sufficient to create
cracks, radiogenic heat may further sustain or enhance internal
melting, and together these heat sources can maintain subsurface
oceans that enable cryovolcanic activity (Ingersoll et al. 2020;
Neveu & Rhoden 2019).
The total volcanic outgassingM volc that is driven by ˙ET otal
can be expressed in terms of the gravitational binding energy of
a water molecule to the planet (U):
˙MVolc ≈ηm H20
˙ET otal
U (9)
Whereηis a factor describing the efficiency that the internal
energy is used to power volcanic outgassing (Oza et al. 2019a),
mH20 is the mass of one water molecule. The gravitational bind-
ing energyUis equal to
GM pmH20
Rp
(Johnson et al. 2015). An ef-
ficiency factor ofη=1 would represent the theoretical upper
limit, where all the available energy is used for the outgassing of
water. In reality, this value is much lower. Using a mass loss rate
of 300 kg s−1 (Villanueva et al. 2023) for Enceladus and an inter-
nal power of 35 GW (Hemingway & Mittal 2019), one obtains
an efficiency factor for Enceladus on the order of 10−3.
Given their relatively close-in orbits and the active nature of
TRAPPIST-1, exospheres may form not only through outgassing
from cryovolcanic activity, but also via the mass loss through
thermal escape caused by XUV activity (Wordsworth et al. 2018;
Luger & Barnes 2015)(see also Section 6.2. Quick et al. (2023)
modeled this latter phenomenon by calculating the water mass
loss rate under the XUV flux of TRAPPIST-1, and translating it
into column densities produced by the XUV-driven escape.
The total H 2O column density is computed assuming a
steady-state balance between continuous surface and interior
supply and XUV-driven loss processes. Specifically, the observ-
able column density is given by
Ntotal =
˙Mvolc τXUV
4πR2p mH2O
+
˙Msub τXUV
2πR2p mH2O
.(10)
where ˙Mvolc and ˙Msub are the mass rates of water vapor due to
cryovolcanic outgassing and thermal sublimation, respectively.
In Eq. 10 volcanic outgassing is globally distributed while sur-
face sublimation occurs only over the illuminated hemisphere.
The quantityτ XUV represents the effective molecular lifetime
against XUV-driven photochemical loss.
We parameterize the sublimation flux, assuming it occurs
primarily on the illuminated hemisphere and using the analyti-
cal form
˙Msub =2πa subT 1/2
eq exp
 
− b
Teq
!
,(11)
wherea sub =1.9×10 32cm−2s−1 andb=8500K are empirically
chosen coefficients to represent a low-sublimation case as was
simulated for H2O at Ganymede’s leading hemisphere (Leblanc
et al. 2017; Oza 2017). A second more realistic case, for pure
water ice sublimation following Johnson et al. (1981) considers
a canonicalb=6146K for the samea sub. This substantially in-
creases the expected column density of water vapor, allowing
for a steady-state atmosphere to accumulate. Deviations from
this column density in future observations, are therefore con-
straints on the purity of ice on the surfaces of icy exoplanets in
principle. We test both sublimation cases and consider our low-
sublimation results as representing a conservative, lower bound
on the expected atmospheric column density from pure water ice
sublimation.
Article number, page 8 of 15

E. Kleisioti et al.: Water exospheres in the TRAPPIST-1 system
Following Quick et al. (2023), we approximate this lifetime
using the H2O photoionization timescale scaled from Europa, as
described in Equation 12.
τXUV =4.54×10 7 s
 a
aEuropa
!2
,(12)
whereais the planet’s semimajor axis anda Europa is Europa’s
orbital distance. This scaling assumes that the relevant ionizing
flux varies asa −2 scaled to Europa’s reference value (Shema-
tovich et al. 2005). Future works considering thebare rockor
bare icescenarios of airless exoplanets and exomoons should
consider the detailed electron-impact dissociation, and plasma
destruction rates of water as is estimated in 3-D exosphere mod-
els for Europa (Oza et al. 2019).
We consider three limiting atmospheric configurations for
a fixed volatile inventoryn tot: (1)hydrostatic, representing the
maximum possible collisional redistribution, (2)globally uni-
form sputtered exospheres, (3) and spatially localized sputtered
exospheres, to explore how different distributions of cryovol-
canically produced water affect observable transmission spectra.
These scenarios span the range of plausible density structures
that may arise from cryovolcanic activity and allow us to assess
how different distributions of cryovolcanic outgassed material
influence detectability.
4.1. Hydrostatic atmospheres
We first examine the hydrostatic limit of an atmosphere com-
posed exclusively of water vapor. Under this assumption, the to-
tal surface pressure reduces to the partial pressure of water,
Ptotal =N total mH2O gP,(13)
whereg P is the planetary surface gravity.
Assuming an isothermal atmosphere in hydrostatic equilib-
rium, and an exponential decay model for the density of the
planet’s atmosphere, we get a density profile of the outgasses
water. We set the atmospheric temperature equal to the planetary
equilibrium temperatureT eq (Table 2). This hydrostatic density
structure is used to compute transmission spectra with the radia-
tive transfer codepetitRADTRANS(Mollière et al. 2019, 2020;
Alei et al. 2022), employing the POKAZATEL linelist (Polyan-
sky et al. 2018) for water opacities. Spectra are modeled over
the wavelength range 0.2–2.5µm, covering the dominant H 2O
absorption features, and are subsequently forwarded to thePan-
dExoexposure time calculator (Batalha et al. 2017) to generate
mock JWST datapoints using the JWST/NIRISS Substrip 256
instrument.
4.2. Globally uniform sputtered exospheres
We next consider the case in which the water molecules are
uniformly distributed across the planetary surface, producing
a globally homogeneous collisionless exosphere. The quantity
Nvolc represents the vertical column density of H2O, i.e. the num-
ber of water molecules per unit surface area. To obtain the total
number of outgassed water molecules,n tot, we assume that the
volatile material is uniformly distributed over the planetary sur-
face. In this case, the relevant area is the full spherical surface,
A=4πR 2
p, and the total number of molecules is
ntot =4πR 2
p Ntotal.(14)
Thisn tot is then used as input to the radiative transfer tool
Prometheus(Gebek & Oza 2020) to generate synthetic trans-
mission spectra of a water exosphere as follows.
Prometheuscomputes transmission spectra for gaseous me-
dia in arbitrary geometries, assuming line-of-sight optical depth
integration over a user-specified 3D density distribution. Be-
cause a cryovolcanic plume expands collisionlessly above the
exobase and rapidly becomes non-hydrostatic, we treat the out-
gassed water as an extended exosphere rather than as an isother-
mal hydrostatic atmosphere. The density distribution is therefore
modeled using a power-law scenario, which assumes a spheri-
cally symmetric exosphere of the form
n(r)=n 0
 Rp
r
!q
,(15)
whereqis the power-law index, r the radial distance from the
planet’s center, andn 0 is determined by the total number of ab-
sorbing molecules in the exosphere. We adopt a power-law in-
dexq=6 (Gebek & Oza 2020), which controls how steeply the
exosphere density falls with radius, and a pseudo-temperature
of 200 K for the H 2O absorber, which determines the ther-
mal Doppler width of individual lines. Steep density profiles
with indices≈6 are indicative of strong ion–neutral scattering,
where neutral molecules interact efficiently with the surround-
ing plasma and are removed on short timescales (Johnson 1990).
We compute the transmission spectra for the globally uniform
sputtered exopsheres using the same opacity treatment, wave-
length coverage, and JWST instrument simulation setup as the
one adopted for the hydrostatic atmospheres in Section 4.1.
4.3. Effect of spatial localization
In the preceding analysis, we assumed that material outgassed
via cryovolcanic activity is uniformly distributed over the plan-
etary surface, corresponding to a globally averaged column den-
sity. This assumption provides a conservative lower limit on de-
tectability. However, cryovolcanic activity are expected to be
spatially structured, producing localized denser areas analogous
to plume-like configurations. To quantify the effect of such lo-
calization, we introduce a surface filling factorf, defined as the
fraction of the planetary surface area 4πR 2
p over which the sput-
tered material is distributed. For a fixed number of cryovolcani-
cally produced molecules (n volc), the effective column density
associated with a localized cloud is then given by
Nvolc,loc = nvolc
4πR2p f (16)
such thatf=1 corresponds to a globally uniform cloud, while
f≪1 represents increasingly localized, plume-like distribu-
tions. The total effective column density becomes
Ntotal,loc =
˙Mvolc τXUV
4πR2p mH2O
1
f +
˙Msub τXUV
2πR2p mH2O
.(17)
Concentrating a fixed inventory into a smaller surface area
increases the line-of-sight column density and therefore en-
hances the observability of spectral features. Whenf=1, the
expression becomes equivalent to Equation 10, corresponding to
the globally uniform redistribution case. Throughout this work,
this limiting case is adopted as a conservative baseline. Physi-
cally plausible values offare uncertain, since they depend on
the number, geometry, and temporal variability of active vents.
Article number, page 9 of 15

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
We adopt a value off=0.004 as a limiting case of a localized
configuration corresponding approximately to the fractional sur-
face area associated with an individual tiger-stripe source region
(Porco et al. 2006). More generally, values off∼10 −2-10−1 may
represent broad regional localization, whereasf≲10 −3 would
correspond to highly localized vent-like sources.
5. Transmission spectroscopy signatures of
cryovolcanic outgassing
Figure 7 presents model transmission spectra of cryovolcanic
outgassing on TRAPPIST-1 f, generated using the radiative
transfer codes and exposure time calculator described in Sec-
tion 4. The spectra are shown for two representative column den-
sities and are compared to synthetic JWST/NIRISS data (black
error bars). The top panel illustrates a tenuous hydrostatic atmo-
sphere and serves as a detectability benchmark, while the middle
and bottom panels correspond to a non-hydrostatic, globally uni-
form sputtered cloud. If JWST were to observe every transit of
TRAPPIST-1 f (P=9.2 days) over a 12-year mission lifetime,
corresponding to approximately 450 transits, a hydrostatic water
column density ofN volc ≃1.9×10 19moleculesm −2 would be-
come marginally detectable, as the 1.4µm water feature exceeds
the synthetic JWST uncertainties. In contrast, for a globally uni-
form sputtered cloud, detectability requires a substantially larger
total volatile inventory ofn tot ∼10 38 molecules, corresponding
to an effective column density ofNvolc ∼10 23moleculesm −2.
To evaluate whether the column densities inferred from the
outgassing models presented in Section 4 are physically and ob-
servationally plausible, Figure 8 shows the total water column
density,N total, as a function of the volcanic mass loss rate, ˙Mvolc,
and the corresponding efficiency factorηfor TRAPPIST-1 f.
Vertical dashed lines indicate representative volcanic mass loss
rates inferred for Enceladus, Europa, Earth, and Io. The light
grey shaded region indicates the column densities required for
detectability based on hydrostatic atmosphere spectra (Figure
7a), while the darker grey region corresponds to the detectability
benchmarks derived from non-hydrostatic, sputtered-cloud spec-
tra (Figure 7b - Sputtered cloud benchmark).
The top panel corresponds to a globally uniformN total,
which represents a conservative detectability scenario for non-
hydrostatic exospheres (f=1). Even when assuming an ob-
serving campaign of 450 transits with JWST, the column den-
sities required for detection fall within a regime that demands
efficienciesη >1, indicating that a spatially uniform sput-
tered cloud is energetically unphysical under the assumptions of
our low-sublimation model (dashed blue line).The shaded red
region highlights this unphysical parameter space. In contrast,
the high-sublimation case (continuous blue line) lies well above
the JWST detectability threshold corresponding to∼20 tran-
sits.This suggests that the signal could be detectable even un-
der the conservative assumption of a globally uniform exosphere
(f=1) and for physically realistic efficiency factors. A detection
in this regime could thus provide quantitative constraints on the
sublimation rate.
The bottom panel shows the same models under the as-
sumption that the sputtered material is spatially confined to a
surface fractionf=0.004, yielding plume-like configurations
that enhance the effective line-of-sight column density (Equa-
tion 17). Such localization allows the low-sublimation mod-
eled columns to approach values higher than the hydrostatic
detectability benchmark. Because these configurations are still
modeled as non-hydrostatic, collisionless exospheres, their de-
tectability is more consistently assessed relative to the sputtered-
cloud benchmark. When evaluated against this more appropriate
benchmark, localized sputtering represents a substantially more
favorable scenario than a globally uniform cloud. For ˙Mvolc be-
tween Earth-like and Io-like values, a region of observability for
low-sublimation emerges that requires 20 transits. We note that
this outcome depends additionally on the assumed efficiencyη,
which quantifies how effectively internal energy is converted into
volcanic outgassing and remains poorly constrained. High subli-
mation column densities are observable for both uniformly dis-
tributed and localized sputtered clouds with<20 transits.
Taken together, these results show that (i) hydrostatic wa-
ter atmospheres provide an upper bound on the detectability of
cryovolcanic water vapor, (ii) globally uniform sputtered exo-
spheres with low sublimation rates are energetically inconsistent
with detectable transmission signals, and (iii) spatial localization
of outgassed material reduces the energetic requirements of a de-
tection (iv) a detection would provide quantitative constraints on
the sublimation rate of an icy exoplanet. These findings place
constraints on the detectability of cryovolcanic water vapor on
TRAPPIST-1 f with JWST and motivate future observations with
next-generation facilities.
Cryovolcanic and sputtered neutral environments in the So-
lar System provide useful context for interpreting the column
densities and geometries considered here. In a simple way,
Europa hosts either a sputter-dominated water exosphere or
a sublimation-dominated exosphere in which neutrals follow
largely ballistic trajectories, producing extended clouds of neu-
tral water dissociation products with column densities of order
1012-1014molecules cm−2, depending on the orbital phase (Oza
et al. 2019b). For instance, it is well known the darker trail-
ing hemisphere of Europa is far hotter and also coincident with
plasma ram (Roth 2021). Ganymede, by contrast, possesses an
intrinsic magnetosphere that enhances ion-neutral interactions
resulting in more compact distributions following Ganymede’s
field lines (Leblanc et al. 2023). Shallow profiles (q∼3) im-
ply extended, Europa-like distributions, whereas steeper profiles
(q∼6), as used in this work, confine the same inventory closer
to the planet, more analogous to plasma-modified environments
such Ganymede’s magnetic exosphere.
For comparison with Solar System literature, the water gey-
sers at Enceladus were probed by JWST to have a total of
Ntot ∼10 34.9 water molecules (Villanueva et al. 2023), roughly
a third which begin orbiting Saturn (Cassidy & Johnson 2010).
In the scenario of a high fraction of atmospheric escape then,
a circumstellar water torus may also be amenable for detec-
tion about the ultra cool dwarf star. A detection of a tenuous
circumstellar torus would be indicative of a cryovolcanic sys-
tem venting directly to space (Villanueva et al. 2023). A larger,
total inventory ofn tot ∼10 38 water molecules corresponds to
an average stellar-disk line-of-sight (LOS) column density of
⟨N⟩ ≈1×10 15.6molecules cm −2 when normalized by the stel-
lar disk area, following the definition of⟨N⟩used in Oza et al.
(2019a). This value is comparable than columns discussed for
neutral column densities at Europa (Oza et al. 2019b; Roth et al.
2014) and Ganymede’s water exosphere (Leblanc et al. 2023).
6. Discussion
In this section, we place our modeling results in the context of
previous studies, discuss the detectability of cryovolcanic activ-
ity on TRAPPIST-1f, g, and h, and outline directions for future
observational and theoretical work.
Article number, page 10 of 15

E. Kleisioti et al.: Water exospheres in the TRAPPIST-1 system
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 7: Synthetic transmission spectra of cryovolcanic water out-
gassing on TRAPPIST-1f, taking into account cryovolcanism,
sublimation and volatile loss from XUV irradiation. The black
data points are generated withPandExofor JWST/NIRISS.
(a) Spectrum of a tenuous hydrostatic water atmosphere for
Ntotal =1.9×10 19 (hydrostatic benchmark) produced usingpeti-
tRADTRANS(purple line). Mock JWST datapoints assume 450
transits and a binned resolution of 12. (b) Spectrum of a uni-
formly distributed sputtered cloud produced using Prometheus
(blue line). The darker blue data point are binned observations,
demonstrating how the signal at≈1.9 microns gets diluted. This
sub-figure corresponds to aN total =1.1×10 24 moleculesm −2
(low sublimation case). Mock JWST datapoints assume 20 tran-
sits. (c) Same as (b) but forN total =1.6×10 26 moleculesm −2
which corresponds to the benchmark of the high sublimation
case. Mock JWST datapoints assume 15 transits.
6.1. Water Mass Fraction comparison with previous work
In addition to refining the mass/radius measurements for the
Trappist-1 planets, Agol et al. (2021) theorized over their pos-
sible interior structures and water content. They estimated their
WMFs assuming a condensed water layer of 300 K at 1 bar.
Acuña et al. (2021) also modelled the interior and hydrospheres
of the Trappist-1 planets, taking into account Equations of State
(EOS) for different phases of water, including water vapor and
high pressure ice phases. In Figure 9, we show the calculated
WMFs for CMF=0.25 from our model, taking into account the
mass and radius uncertainties (Table 2), and we compare them
Fig. 8:N total as a function of ˙Mvolc for TRAPPIST-1f. The
shaded red region indicates parameter space requiring efficien-
ciesη >1, which are unphysical. The hydrostatic and sput-
tered cloud benchmarks represent the column densities observ-
able with JWST/NIRISS with 450 transits for a hydrostatic at-
mosphere and a collisionless exosphere, respectively. The dark-
est grey region indicates an exosphere’s column density observ-
able with 20 transits. Top: Detectability of water column den-
sities for a globally uniform sputtered cloud. Even with 450
transits, a collisionless exosphere cannot get observed for low-
sublimation. Bottom: Detectability of water column densities as-
suming the sputtered material is confined to a surface fraction
f=0.004, yielding enhanced line-of-sight columns, which rep-
resent plume-like configurations. Any detection at column den-
sities that would otherwise requireη >1 therefore, would imply
that the absorbing material is spatially confined rather than glob-
ally distributed, consistent with localized sputtering or plume-
like activity or high water sublimation.
to those derived by Agol et al. (2021); Acuña et al. (2021). We
compare our results solely with the latter two studies, as pre-
vious work (Barr et al. 2018; Dorn et al. 2018) on the interior
structures of the system have not used the updated values for
mass and radius. In particular, they have modelled the interior of
the Trappist-1 planets using the mass and radius measurements,
constrained by Delrez et al. (2018); Grimm et al. (2018). Our
results (Figure 9) are mostly within the uncertainties of Acuña
et al. (2021), and there is a larger discrepancy with the results
of Agol et al. (2021), whose results are significantly lower (for
planets f and h). This discrepancy can be explained by our dif-
ferent modelling strategies. In order to reach the given density
constraints, dictated by the mass and radius measurements, Agol
et al. (2021) used a condensed water layer, without taking into
account any equation of state for different phases, thus assuming
lower density for the water layer. The agreement of our results
Article number, page 11 of 15

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
with Acuña et al. (2021) is to be expected, as we included similar
phases for water (high pressure ice polymorphs). Our results can
be interpreted as one out of the multiple interior structures that
Acuña et al. (2021) predict, since their error-bars are calculated
for CMF values that span between 0.2 and 0.3, and we only show
the interior structure for CMF=0.25.
Fig. 9: Estimated water mass fraction, WMF together with their
uncertanties for Trappist-1 f,g,h with our model (green), Agol
et al. (2021, purple), and Acuña et al. (2021, red).
6.2. Water content in the T rappist-1 system and other
possible interior structures
The extended Pre-Main-Sequence (PMS) phase of M-dwarf
stars, like Trappist-1, can cause atmospheric mass loss via ther-
mal escape, and water loss due to the increased luminosity and
XUV activity (see e.g. Wordsworth et al. 2018; Luger & Barnes
2015). This water mass loss depends on the planet’s orbital dis-
tance (Bourrier et al. 2017), making close-in planets more prone
to volatile escape (Bolmont et al. 2017). Gialluca et al. (2024)
calculated the water loss rates for the Trappist-1 planets, and
studied their implications on recent observations (Zieba et al.
2023; Greene et al. 2023), which imply a tenuous oxygen at-
mosphere or no atmosphere for planets b and c, respectively.
According to Gialluca et al. (2024), however, the loss of atmo-
spheres on the inner planets does not preclude the retention of
substantial water inventories on the outer planets, where lower
stellar irradiation could allow water to persist. Recent stud-
ies have assessed the complete loss of a water reservoir at the
Galilean satellites, namely Io (Bennacer et al. 2026) and Europa,
both which experience atmospheric sputtering (Johnson 1990),
or plasma-driven escape of sodium and potassium (Gebek &
Oza 2020). The sputter escape of water has yet to be modeled
in detail at Europa and Ganymede (Oza et al. 2019b; Leblanc
et al. 2023), in contrast to Io’s observed sodium escape by atmo-
spheric sputtering (Burger et al. 2001), however is to first order,
photoionization limited.
As seen from Figure 8, tidal heating rates and, thusN volc
is highly dependant on the CMF that is assumed for the plan-
ets. We explore the range of probable CMFs for the planets that
are compatible with their formation mechanism. The most fa-
vored scenario for the Trappist-1 planets is formation in a pro-
toplanetary disk, possibly beyond the water ice line, with a sub-
sequent inward migration, which is supported by the resonant
chain and compactness of the system (Teyssandier et al. 2022).
Planet formation within a protoplanetary disk results in planets
with similar ratios of relative refractory elements, meaning simi-
lar CMFs, for fully differentiated bodies (Bond et al. 2010; Elser
et al. 2012), but with different volatile element content (Öberg &
Bergin 2016). Thus, the WMF of the planets is also a function
of their formation mechanism. If the Trappist-1 planets are best
described by the CMF of the most dense planet (planet c with
22%−31% CMF), their densities can be fitted with different
light-element content or water, according to Dorn et al. (2018).
With our model, the latter CMF ratios would mean WMF values
of≈4−8×10 −2,3−6×10 −2, and 1−11×10 −2 for Trappist-1f,g
and h respectively.
Varying the WMF in order to obtain the observed densities is
compatible with the results of Agol et al. (2021, Figure 9), who
found that all Trappist-1 planets fall within one compositional
line that is less dense than solar system terrestrial planets. Other
possible compositions for the Trappist-1 planets include either
an interior with less iron compared to the terrestial content, or
oxidized iron in the mantle (Agol et al. 2021).
6.3. Future work
A first question to address in the future would be how to confirm
that an observation of water comes from cryovolcanism. Exo-
genic sources of water are expected to remain constant over time
(Paganini et al. 2020), whereas endogenic cryovolcanism may
vary depending on the balance of interior processes such as tidal
heating and radiogenic heat generation. Repeated observations
could potentially contribute to the confirmation of the origin of
water. The relationship between cryovolcanism and the different
interior heat sources remains an open question, with significant
implications for interpreting observations of cryovolcanic activ-
ity.
A second point of discussion would be a possible connection
of observations of cryovolcanic activity to interior constraints.
If tidal heating is the dominant driver of cryovolcanism, plan-
ets with low CMF values are more likely to exhibit detectable
cryovolcanic signatures due to enhanced tidal dissipation. Con-
versely, if the total internal heat budget is dominated by radio-
genic sources, planets with higher CMF values might exhibit
stronger cryovolcanic activity.
Further investigation is needed to determine feasible inte-
rior models for a particular water column density observation.
A more detailed analysis would need to consider uncertainties
in interior parameters and ice rheology, the temperature depen-
dence of rheological properties and the identification of sec-
ondary equilibrium states in mantle dynamics, as in Kleisioti
et al. (2023). While our study outlines the potential sources of
cryovolcanism and their implications, the detailed uncertainties
inherent to interior modeling and observational constraints fall
outside the scope of this work. Future research is needed to refine
these models and better constrain the interplay between plane-
tary structure, heat generation, and cryovolcanic activity.
7. Conclusions
In this work, we combined thermal and tidal heating mod-
els, previously applied to icy satellites in the Solar System on
TRAPPIST-1f, g, and h. We identified interior configurations
compatible with the presence of subsurface oceans and showed
that, for all three planets, tidal heating within the high-pressure
ice layer and radiogenic heating dominate over tidal dissipation
in the silicate mantle and ice I shell under the assumptions of
our model. Our dissipation partitioning differs from Solar Sys-
tem icy satellites, where dissipation is often concentrated in the
ice I shell, because our TRAPPIST-1 solutions can contain very
Article number, page 12 of 15

E. Kleisioti et al.: Water exospheres in the TRAPPIST-1 system
thick viscoelastic HPI layers which represent a large volume of
deformable solid and therefore contribute substantially to the to-
tal tidal dissipation budget.
In addition, we constrain the ice I and subsurface ocean
layer thicknesses for all three planets. The interior structures of
the inner two planets, Trappist-1f and g, would be in thermal
equilibrium only in cases where the outer ice I shell is rela-
tively thin, between≈4 and 10 km, under the assumptions of
our model. We also calculated the corresponding WMFs and
CMFs that are compatible with such interior structures. We find
that for an Earth-like CMF (0.32) Trappist-1f,g,h, would pos-
sess a subsurface ocean in thermal equilibrium for a WMF of
8.5×10 −2,5.9×10 −2 and 11.8×10 −1.
Moreover, we investigated the detectability of cryovolcanic
water vapor via transmission spectroscopy. We showed that hy-
drostatic water atmospheres provide an upper bound on de-
tectability, whereas non-hydrostatic, globally uniform sputtered
exospheres require energetically unphysical efficiencies to pro-
duce detectable transmission signatures with JWST when pure
water ice sublimation rates are low. Spatial localization of out-
gassed material in plume-like configurations substantially en-
hances effective line-of-sight column densities and reduces the
energetic requirements for a detection. Such configurations are
detectable on TRAPPIST-1f for volcanic mass fluxes between
Earth-like and Io-like values with≈20 transits, although such
detections depend sensitively on the assumed energy conversion
efficiencies and spatial localization of outgassed material. When
high water ice sublimation rates are assumed for TRAPPIST-1f
non-hydrostatic, globally uniform and localized sputtered clouds
produce signals above the JWST/NIRISS detectability thresh-
old corresponding to≈20 transits, under the assumptions of our
models. Since the high sublimation rate is standard for pure wa-
ter ice (Johnson et al. 1981), our simulations suggest a potential
detection (or non-detection) of water vapor is able to inform the
pure water mass fraction of ice on TRAPPIST-1f’s surface.
Taken together, our results place constraints on the observ-
ability of cryovolcanic water vapor on TRAPPIST-1f, g, and h
with current facilities. While JWST observations need favorable
conditions to detect cryovolcanic activity, future observations
with next-generation space- (e.g.Habitable World Observatory)
and ground-based telescopes (e.g. ELT/ANDES), combined with
improved modeling of interior–surface interactions, will be es-
sential for assessing the prevalence and observational signatures
of cryovolcanism on icy exoplanets (Quick et al. 2023).
Acknowledgements.The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
and Stéphanie Cazaux for their constructive reviews which greatly strengthened
the manuscript. ThePythonprogramming language (Rossum 1995) and the
open-sourcePythonpackagesnumpy(van der Walt et al. 2011),matplotlib
(Hunter 2007),astropy(Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013),petitRADTRANS
(Mollière et al. 2019, 2020; Alei et al. 2022) andPandExo(Batalha et al. 2017)
were used. For the calculation of tidal heating the LOV3D software package
(Rovira-Navarro et al. 2024) was used. This research has been supported by the
PEPSci Programme (Planetary and ExoPlanetary Science Programme), NWO,
the Netherlands.
References
Acuña, Deleuil, Mousis, , et al. 2021, AI&A, 647, A53
Agol, E., Dorn, C., Grimm, S. L., et al. 2021, The Planetary Science Journal, 2,
1
Alei, E., Konrad, B. S., Angerhausen, D., et al. 2022, A&A, 665, A106
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 558,
A33
Barr, A. C., Dobos, V ., & Kiss, L. L. 2018, Astronomy I& Astrophysics, 613,
A37
Batalha, N. E., Mandell, A., Pontoppidan, K., et al. 2017, PASP, 129, 064501
Baum, W., Kreidl, T., Westphal, J., et al. 1981, Icarus, 47, 84
Bennacer, Y ., Mousis, O., & Hue, V . 2026, ApJ, 997, 70
Bierson, C. J. & Steinbrügge, G. 2021, The Planetary Science Journal, 2, 89
Bolmont, E., Sastre, M., Revol, A., Kervazo, M., & Tobie, G. 2026, arXiv e-
prints, arXiv:2601.03408
Bolmont, E., Selsis, F., Owen, J. E., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 464, 3728
Bond, J. C., O’Brien, D. P., & Lauretta, D. S. 2010, The Astrophysical Journal,
715, 1050
Bourrier, V ., de Wit, J., Bolmont, E., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 121
Burgasser, A. J. & Mamajek, E. E. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 845, 110
Burger, M. H., Schneider, N. M., de Pater, I., et al. 2001, ApJ, 563, 1063
Cadieux, C., Doyon, R., MacDonald, R. J., et al. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 970, L2
Cameron, A. 1985, Icarus, 64, 285
Cassidy, T. A. & Johnson, R. E. 2010, Icarus, 209, 696
Croft, S. K., Kargel, J. S., Kirk, R. L., et al. 1995, in Neptune and Triton, ed.
D. P. Cruikshank, M. S. Matthews, & A. M. Schumann, 879–947
de Wit, J., Wakeford, H. R., Lewis, N. K., et al. 2018, Nature Astronomy, 2,
214–219
Delrez, L., Gillon, M., Triaud, A. H. M. J., et al. 2018, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 475, 3577
Dobos, Barr, Amy C., & Kiss, László L. 2019, AI&A, 624, A2
Dobos, V . & Turner, E. L. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 804, 41
Dorn, C., Mosegaard, K., Grimm, S. L., & Alibert, Y . 2018, The Astrophysical
Journal, 865, 20
Dougherty, M. K., Khurana, K. K., Neubauer, F. M., et al. 2006, Science, 311,
1406
Ehrenreich, D., des Etangs, A. L., Beaulieu, J.-P., & Grasset, O. 2006, The As-
trophysical Journal, 651, 535
Elser, S., Meyer, M., & Moore, B. 2012, Icarus, 221, 859
Fagents, S. A. 2003, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 108, 5139
Fagents, S. A., Greeley, R., Sullivan, R. J., et al. 2000, Icarus, 144, 54
Fagents, S. A., Lopes, R. M., Quick, L. C., & Gregg, T. K. 2022, in Comparative
Planetology, V ol. 1, Planetary V olcanism across the Solar System, ed. T. K.
Gregg, R. M. Lopes, & S. A. Fagents (Elsevier), 161–234
Fischer, H.-J. & Spohn, T. 1990, Icarus, 83, 39
Gebek, A. & Oza, A. V . 2020, MNRAS, 497, 5271
Geissler, P. E. 2015, in The Encyclopedia of V olcanoes, 2nd edn., ed. H. Sigurds-
son, B. Houghton, S. R. McNutt, H. Rymer, & J. Stix (Amsterdam: Academic
Press), 763–778
Gialluca, M. T., Barnes, R., Meadows, V . S., et al. 2024, The Planetary Science
Journal, 5, 137
Gillon, M., Triaud, A. H. M. J., Demory, B.-O., et al. 2017, Nature, 542, 456
Grasset, O., Sotin, C., & Deschamps, F. 2000, Planetary and Space Science, 48,
617
Green, A. P., Montesi, L. G. J., & Cooper, C. M. 2021, Journal of Geophysical
Research: Planets, 126, e2020JE006677
Greene, T. P., Bell, T. J., Ducrot, E., et al. 2023, Nature, 618, 39–42
Grimm, Demory, Brice-Olivier, Gillon, Michaël, et al. 2018, A&A, 613, A68
Guenther, E. W. & Kislyakova, K. G. 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal As-
tronomical Society, 491, 3974
Hand, K. P., Phillips, C. B., Murray, A., et al. 2022, The Planetary Science Jour-
nal, 3, 22
Hay, H. C. F. C. & Matsuyama, I. 2019, The Astrophysical Journal, 875, 22
Hedman, M., Gosmeyer, C., Nicholson, P., et al. 2013, Nature, 500, 182
Hemingway, D. J. & Mittal, T. 2019, Icarus, 332, 111
Henning, W. G. & Hurford, T. 2014, The Astrophysical Journal, 789, 30
Hernandez, J.-A., Caracas, R., & Labrosse, S. 2022, Nature Communications,
13, 3303
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing In Science & Engineering, 9, 90
Hussmann, H. & Spohn, T. 2004, Icarus, 171, 391
Hussmann, H., Spohn, T., & Wieczerkowski, K. 2002, Icarus, 156, 143
Iess, L., Stevenson, D. J., Parisi, M., et al. 2014, Science, 344, 78
Ingersoll, A. P., Ewald, S. P., & Trumbo, S. K. 2020, Icarus, 344, 113345, cassini
Mission Science Results
Jaccard, C. 1976, Journal of Glaciology, 17, 155–156
Jia, X., Kivelson, M. G., Khurana, K. K., & Provan, G. T. 2018, Nature Astron-
omy, 2, 459
Johnson, R. E. 1990, Energetic Charged-Particle Interactions with Atmospheres
and Surfaces (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag)
Johnson, R. E., Lanzerotti, L. J., Brown, W. L., & Armstrong, T. P. 1981, Science,
212, 1027
Johnson, R. E., Oza, A., Young, L. A., V olkov, A. N., & Schmidt, C. 2015, ApJ,
809, 43
Kleisioti, Dirkx, D., Rovira-Navarro, M., & Kenworthy, M. A. 2023, A&A, 675,
A57
Kleisioti, Dirkx, D., Tan, X., & Kenworthy, M. A. 2024, A&A, 687, A125
Krissansen-Totton, J. & Fortney, J. J. 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 933, 115
Lau, H. C. P., Mitrovica, J. X., Austermann, J., et al. 2016, Journal of Geophysi-
cal Research: Solid Earth, 121, 6991
Article number, page 13 of 15

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
Leblanc, F., Oza, A. V ., Leclercq, L., et al. 2017, Icarus, 293, 185
Leblanc, F., Roth, L., Chaufray, J., et al. 2023, Icarus, 399, 115557
Leone, G., Bieger, K., & Soto, M. 2021, Planetary Science Journal, 2, 29
Lobo, A. H., Shields, A. L., Palubski, I. Z., & Wolf, E. 2023, The Astrophysical
Journal, 945, 161
Luger, R. & Barnes, R. 2015, Astrobiology, 15, 119
Luger, R., Sestovic, M., Kruse, E., et al. 2017, Nature Astronomy, 1, 0129
Manga, M. & Wang, C.-Y . 2007, Geophysical Research Letters, 34, L07202
Meier, T. G., Bower, D. J., Lichtenberg, T., Tackley, P. J., & Demory, B.-O. 2021,
The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 908, L48
Meyer zu Westram, M., Oza, A. V ., & Galli, A. 2024, Journal of Geophysical
Research: Planets, 129, e2023JE007935, e2023JE007935 2023JE007935
Mollière, P., Stolker, T., Lacour, S., et al. 2020, A&A, 640, A131
Mollière, P., Wardenier, J. P., van Boekel, R., et al. 2019, A&A, 627, A67
Neveu, M. & Rhoden, A. R. 2019, Nature Astronomy, 3, 543
Nimmo, F. & Pappalardo, R. T. 2016, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets,
121, 1378
Öberg, K. I., Murray-Clay, R., & Bergin, E. A. 2011, ApJ, 743, L16
Oza, A. 2017, PhD thesis, Sorbonne Université
Oza, A. V ., Johnson, R. E., Lellouch, E., et al. 2019a, The Astrophysical Journal,
885, 168
Oza, A. V ., Leblanc, F., Johnson, R. E., et al. 2019b, Planetary and Space Science,
167, 23
Oza, A. V ., Leblanc, F., Johnson, R. E., et al. 2019, Planet. Space Sci., 167, 23
Paganini, L., Villanueva, G. L., Roth, L., et al. 2020, Nature Astronomy, 4, 266
Peltier, W. R. 1974, Reviews of Geophysics, 12, 649
Phillips, C. B., McEwen, A. S., Hoppa, G. V ., et al. 2000, Journal of Geophysical
Research: Planets, 105, 22579
Pichierri, G., Morbidelli, A., Batygin, K., et al. 2024, Nature Astronomy, 8, 1408
Polyansky, O. L., Kyuberis, A. A., Zobov, N. F., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 480, 2597
Porco, C., DiNino, D., & Nimmo, F. 2014, The Astronomical Journal, 148, 45
Porco, C. C., Helfenstein, P., Thomas, P. C., et al. 2006, Science, 311, 1393
Postberg, F., Schmidt, J., Hillier, J., Kempf, S., & Srama, R. 2011, Nature, 474,
620
Quick, L. C. & Marsh, B. D. 2015, Icarus, 253, 16
Quick, L. C., Roberge, A., Mendoza, G. T., Quintana, E. V ., & Youngblood, A. A.
2023, The Astrophysical Journal, 956, 29
Quick, L. C., Roberge, A., Mlinar, A. B., & Hedman, M. M. 2020, Publications
of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 132, 084402
Renaud, J. P. & Henning, W. G. 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 857, 98
Roberts, J. H. & Nimmo, F. 2008, Icarus, 194, 675
Rossum, G. 1995, Python Reference Manual, Tech. rep., Centrum voor
Wiskunde en Informatica (CWI), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, The Nether-
lands
Roth, L. 2021, Geophysical Research Letters, 48, e2021GL094289,
e2021GL094289 2021GL094289
Roth, L., Retherford, K. D., Saur, J., et al. 2026, A&A, 709, A59
Roth, L., Saur, J., Retherford, K. D., et al. 2014, Science, 343, 171
Rovira-Navarro, M., Katz, R. F., Liao, Y ., van der Wal, W., & Nimmo,
F. 2022, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 127, e2021JE007117,
e2021JE007117 2021JE007117
Rovira-Navarro, M., Matsuyama, I., & Berne, A. 2024, The Planetary Science
Journal, 5, 129
Rovira-Navarro, M., van der Wal, W., Steinke, T., & Dirkx, D. 2021, The Plane-
tary Science Journal, 2, 119
Rudolph, M. L., Manga, M., Walker, M., & Rhoden, A. R. 2022, in LPI Contri-
butions, V ol. 2678, 53rd Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, 2562
Sabadini, Vermeersen B., . C. G. 2016, Global Dynamics of the Earth: Appli-
cations of Viscoelastic Relaxation Theory to Solid-Earth and Planetary Geo-
physics (2nd ed.; Berlin: Springer)
Schoonenberg, Djoeke, Liu, Beibei, Ormel, Chris W., & Dorn, Caroline. 2019,
A&A, 627, A149
Schubert, G., Cassen, P., & Young, R. 1979, Icarus, 38, 192
Schubert, G., Spohn, T., & Reynolds, R. T. 1986, in IAU Colloq. 77: Some Back-
ground about Satellites, ed. J. A. Burns & M. S. Matthews (University of
Arizona Press), 224–292
Segatz, M., Spohn, T., Ross, M. N., & Schubert, G. 1988, Icarus, 75, 187
Shematovich, V ., Johnson, R., Cooper, J., & Wong, M. 2005, Icarus, 173, 480
Shields, A. L., Meadows, V . S., Bitz, C. M., et al. 2013, Astrobiology, 13, 715,
pMID: 23855332
Shoji, D. & Kurita, K. 2014, The Astrophysical Journal, 789, 3
Smyth, W. H. & Marconi, M. L. 2006, Icarus, 181, 510
Sohl, F., Hussmann, H., Schwentker, B., Spohn, T., & Lorenz, R. D. 2003, Jour-
nal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 108
Souˇcek, O., B ˇehounková, M., Lanzendörfer, M., et al. 2024, Nature Communi-
cations, 15, 7405
Sparks, W. B., Schmidt, B. E., McGrath, M. A., et al. 2017, The Astrophysical
Journal Letters, 839, L18
Spencer, J. R., Nimmo, F., Ingersoll, A. P., et al. 2018, in Enceladus and the
Icy Moons of Saturn, ed. P. M. Schenk, R. N. Clark, C. J. A. Howett, A. J.
Verbiscer, & J. H. Waite (University of Arizona Press), 163
Spohn, T. & Schubert, G. 2003, Icarus, 161, 456
Teyssandier, Libert, A.-S., & Agol, E. 2022, A&A, 658, A170
Tobie, G., Grasset, O., Dumoulin, C., & Mocquet, A. 2019, A&A, 630, A70
Turbet, Bolmont, Emeline, Leconte, Jeremy, et al. 2018, A&A, 612, A86
van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011, Computing in Science
& Engineering, 13, 22
van Woerkom, Q. B. & Kleisioti, E. 2024, A&A, 684, A72
Villanueva, G. L., Hammel, H. B., Milam, S. N., et al. 2023, Nature Astronomy,
7, 1056
Villanueva, G. L., Hammel, H. B., Milam, S. N., et al. 2023, Nature Astronomy,
7, 1056
Wordsworth, R. D., Schaefer, L. K., & Fischer, R. A. 2018, The Astronomical
Journal, 155, 195
Zeng, L., Jacobsen, S. B., Sasselov, D. D., et al. 2019, Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 116, 9723
Zieba, S., Kreidberg, L., Ducrot, E., et al. 2023, Nature, 620, 746–749
Öberg, K. I. & Bergin, E. A. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 831, L19
Article number, page 14 of 15

E. Kleisioti et al.: Water exospheres in the TRAPPIST-1 system
Appendix A: Melting temperature as a function of
pressure
Fig. A.1: Melting temperature as a function of pressure for an
ammonia containing ocean of 5 wt.% (Grasset et al. 2000; Sohl
et al. 2003)
Appendix B: Tidal heat generated in the Ice I outer
shell
Fig. B.1: Heat source distribution in the interior of Trappist-1f.
Qtidal,HPI Qtidal,m, andQ tidal,iceI is the tidal heat generated in the
HPI layer, mantle and ice I shell respectively.Q rad is the radio-
genic heat produced in the mantle. The tidal heat that is gener-
ated in the ice I layer at least 4 orders of magnitude smaller than
the total heat generated in the interior (Qeq).
Appendix C: Interior structures as a function ofD ice
for the planets Trappist-1g,h
Fig. C.1: a. Interior structure as a function ofD ice for the planet
Trappist-1g.
Fig. C.2: (a) Interior structure as a function ofD ice for the planet
Trappist-1h.
Article number, page 15 of 15