Title: The AGORA High-resolution Galaxy Simulations Comparison Project. XI: Solving the Non-Spherical Morphology and Evolution of Dark Matter Halos with Haskap Pie
Authors: Kirk S. S. Barrow, Thinh Huu Nguyen, Santi Roca-Fàbrega, Ji-hoon Kim, Varun Satish, Kentaro Nagamine, Saulius Matusaitis, Eduárd Illes, Ramón Rodríguez-Cardoso, Minyong Jung, Hyeonyong Kim, Anna Genina, Pablo Granizo, Alessandro Lupi, Johnny W. Powell, Héctor Velázquez, Tom Abel, Oscar Agertz, Renyue Cen, Daniel Ceverino, Boon Kiat Oh, Yuri Oku, Joel R. Primack, Thomas R. Quinn, Yves Revaz, Alvaro Segovia-Otero, Ikkoh Shimizu, Edward Skrabacz, Romain Teyssier
Published: 2026-05-22
Categories: astro-ph.GA, astro-ph.CO

1Draft version May 26, 2026
Typeset using LATEXtwocolumnstyle in AASTeX631
The AGORA High-resolution Galaxy Simulations Comparison Project. XI: Solving the
Non-Spherical Morphology and Evolution of Dark Matter Halos withHaskap Pie
Kirk S. S. Barrow, 1 Thịnh Hữu Nguyễn, 2 Santi Roca-F àbrega,3, 4,∗ Ji-hoon Kim, 5, 6, 7,∗ V arun Satish,2
Kentaro Nagamine,8, 9, 10, 11, 12,∗ Saulius Matusaitis,2 Eduárd Illes, 13, 14 Ramón Rodríguez-Cardoso, 15, 16, 17
Minyong Jung, 6 Hyeonyong Kim, 6,∗ Anna Genina, 18,∗ Pablo Granizo, 8, 19 Alessandro Lupi, 20, 21, 22,∗
Johnny W. Powell, 23,∗ Héctor Velázquez, 24,∗ Tom Abel, 25, 26, 27 Oscar Agertz,3 Renyue Cen, 28, 29
Daniel Ceverino, 19, 30 Boon Kiat Oh, 31, 32 Yuri Oku, 28 Joel R. Primack, 33,† Thomas R. Quinn, 34 Yves Rev az,35,∗
Al v aro Segovia-Otero,3 Ikkoh Shimizu, 36,∗ Edw ard Skrabacz,2 Romain Teyssier, 37 and
theAGORACollaboration
1Department of Astronomy, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 1002 W Green St, Urbana, IL 61801, USA;kbarrow@illinois.edu
2Department of Astronomy, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 1002 W Green St, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
3Lund Observatory, Division of Astrophysics, Department of Physics, Lund University, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden
4Departamento de Física de la Tierra y Astrofísica, Facultad de Ciencias Físicas, Plaza Ciencias, 1, 28040 Madrid, Spain
5Seoul National University Astronomy Research Center, Seoul 08826, Korea
6Center for Theoretical Physics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
7Institute for Data Innovation in Science, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea
8Theoretical Astrophysics, Department of Earth and Space Science, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Osaka,
560-0043, Japan
9Theoretical Joint Research, Forefront Research Center, Graduate School of Science, The University of Osaka, 1-1 Machikaneyama,
Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan
10Kavli IPMU (WPI), UTIAS, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8583, Japan
11Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV 89154, USA
12Nevada Center for Astrophysics, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 4505 S. Maryland Pkwy, Las Vegas, NV 89154-4002, USA
13Kapteyn Astronomical Institute, University of Groningen, Landleven 12, NL-9747 AD Groningen, the Netherlands
14Tartu Observatory, University of Tartu, Observatooriumi 1, 61602 Tõravere, Estonia
15Departamento de Física de la Tierra y Astrofísica, Fac. de C.C. Físicas, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, E-28040 Madrid, Spain
16GMV, Space and Avionics Equipment, Isaac Newton, 11 Tres Cantos, E-28760 Madrid, Spain
17Instituto de Física de Partículas y del Cosmos, IPARCOS, Fac. C.C. Físicas, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, E-28040 Madrid,
Spain
18Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Royal Observatory, Blackford Hill, Edinburgh EH9 3HJ, UK
19Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria de Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain
20Como Lake Center for Astrophysics, DiSAT, Università degli Studi dell’Insubria, via Valleggio 11, I-22100 Como, Italy
21INFN, Sezione di Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 3, I-20126 Milano, Italy
22INAF - Osservatorio di Astrofisica e Scienza dello Spazio di Bologna, Via Gobetti 93/3, I-40129 Bologna
23Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202, USA
24Instituto de Astronomía, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, A.P. 70-264, 04510, Mexico, D.F., Mexico
25Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
26Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
27SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
28Center for Cosmology and Computational Astrophysics, Institute for Advanced Study in Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310027, People’s Republic of China
29Institute of Astronomy, School of Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, People’s Republic of China
30CIAFF, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, E-28049 Madrid, Spain
31Department of Physics, University of Connecticut, U-3046, Storrs, CT 06269, USA
32School of Physics, Korea Institute for Advanced Study, 85 Hoegiro, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 02455, Republic of Korea
33Department of Physics, University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
34Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, Seattle, W A 98195, USA
35Institute of Physics, Laboratoire d’Astrophysique, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
36Shikoku Gakuin University, 3-2-1 Bunkyocho, Zentsuji, Kagawa, 765-8505, Japan
1 The list of authors is provisional and is just in alphabetical order.
Before the beta release of this paper, the order will be discussed
with all the coauthors and a final list will be included.
arXiv:2605.24097v1  [astro-ph.GA]  22 May 2026

2
37Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
ABSTRACT
We introduce a halo solving and tracking procedure that intrinsically treats dark matter halos as non-
spherical objects by leveraging the bound particle searching techniques used inHaskap Pie(Barrow
et al. 2026). TheAGORACollaboration’s hydrodynamic simulationCosmoRunproject provides a useful
laboratory to explore trends in dark matter halo morphology that are revealed by our new procedure
in the context of any dispersions or similarities between the codes. We find that several morphological
and shape measures were very responsive to high mass ratio mergers. The greatest difference in these
measures between the simulation codes were related to timing discrepancies and the dynamical state
of the halos prior to the mergers. Most other quantities were similar across codes, including several
secular and redshift-dependent trends in various dynamical quantities that showed a departure from
Virial Theorem (e.g., overdensity and halo mass). We find that halo spin and the ratio between the
semi-major and the semi-minor axis peaked at4> z >2before declining at low redshift. Also,
halo overdensity is both mass-dependent and redshift-dependent, diverging for low mass halos at low
redshift. Our method contributes a new perspective on these trends that have not been fully replicated
in other works due to our emphasis on fundamentally non-spherical halos and measures of morphology
that correspondingly do not assume spherical symmetry.
1.INTRODUCTION
For some time, the study of dark matter halos has
focused on a model of spherical collapse. Therein, the
Universe begins as a dense, expanding collection of small
perturbations in matter density. Expansion is rapid
enough that matter cannot immediately collapse under
gravity. However, after a period of growth of scale, the
local gravitational potential of local density peaks leads
to a bias in the density field of matter. If this density
reaches∼1.69 times the critical density of the Universe
(Gunn & Gott 1972), self-attraction eventually over-
comes cosmological expansion, and the matter begins
to contract under gravity. Eventually, this leads to run-
away growth of density, and matter enters gravitational
free-fall, collecting into halos.
If one assumes that the matter falling into a halo is
spherically symmetric and has uniform density, this pro-
cess can be modeled with parametric equations for grav-
itational acceleration (Lin et al. 1965). Typically, one
applies a virialization argument, assuming that the po-
tential energy and total energy of the particles are con-
nected by a scalar factor,n, that depends on the density
profile of the halo (Lahav et al. 1991). From here, the
final radius can be determined based on the cosmolog-
ical time of the start of collapse and the time of viri-
alization. In the simplest case, the virialization time is
assumed to be twice as long as the time of the start of
collapse due to the cyclical nature of the solution. In
this formalism, ifn= 1, the resulting density of the
∗ Code leaders
† In memoriam
halo is∆ c =ρ/ ¯rho= 18π 2 times the critical density of
the Universe,¯ρ=ρ c = 3H 2
8πG (Peebles 1980). In several
works, an approximated value of∆ c = 200is used.
This initial matter-only derivation was expanded by
Bryan & Norman (1998) to include expressions for dark
energy to form the widely, but not universally, accepted
definition of a virial overdensity given by
∆c = 18π2 + 82x−39x 2.(1)
Here,xisΩ m(1 +z) 3/E2(z)−1, whereΩ m and
E(z), whereE(z) =H(z)/H o take their fiducial cos-
mological definitions. These coefficients were discov-
ered by fitting parameters to analytical solutions, which
were based on a reformulated spherical collapse ex-
pression that included both matter and dark energy:
∆c = Ω(a c)(ac/rc)3 (Eke et al. 1996). Here,a c is the
scale factor at collapse andr c is the radius of the uni-
form density volume at collapse. Thus, in its develop-
ment, Eq. 1 never breaks from the presumption that
halos are spheres or that the medium that forms a halo
is homogeneous and spherically symmetric. However,
even early analysis of the shape of halos in cosmological
simulations showed that they could diverge significantly
from a sphere, especially during mergers (e.g. Barnes &
Efstathiou 1987; Frenk et al. 1988; Lacey & Cole 1994).
Studies on the non-spherical shapes of halos have
heavily focused on the establishment of ellipsoidal semi-
major, semi-minor, and intermediate axes and studying
the distribution and evolution of ratios of these axes
(e.g. Bullock 2002; Springel et al. 2004; Bailin & Stein-
metz 2005; Allgood et al. 2006; Bonamigo et al. 2015;
Tomassetti et al. 2016; Vega-Ferrero et al. 2017). In

3
each case they have found that a significant fraction of
halos departs from a spherical shape. Recent observa-
tional studies of the Milky Way have also lent evidence
to non-spherical halos (e.g. Zhu et al. 2025; Han et al.
2026; Dillamore & Sanders 2026).
When examining dark matter halos in simulations, the
presumption of spherical symmetry can also propagate
through to the results through the use of a halo-finder.
In establishing the halo population and characterizing
its physical dimensions, most morphology studies of
cosmological simulations have relied on either spheri-
cal overdensity (SO) (Lacey & Cole 1994; Eisenstein &
Hut 1998; Knollmann & Knebe 2009; Planelles & Quilis
2010; Hadzhiyska et al. 2022; Vallés-Pérez et al. 2022)
or friends-of-friends(FoF)/phase-space halo solvers (e.g.
Davis et al. 1985; Springel et al. 2001; Dolag et al. 2009;
Skory et al. 2010; Diemand et al. 2006; Maciejewski et al.
2009; Elahi et al. 2019; Behroozi et al. 2012). SO solvers
typically solve a density field to find a halo center and
decide dark matter particle membership based on spher-
ical assumptions for overdensity and the arrangement of
the density field. FoF/phase-space solvers allow for link-
ing particles without necessarily assuming spherical pro-
files, but do presume the existence of a halo radius and
may unbind particles in that radius after establishing a
spherical halo. In both cases, there can be less tolerance
for highly non-spherical halos or halos that do not have
well-defined virial radii. Therefore, the preponderance
of morphological studies has relied on the presumption
of spherical halos either in the construction of their mea-
sures or in the pipeline used to identify and characterize
the halos to some degree.
In addition to studies of ellipsoidal axes, several stud-
ies have explored density profiles of halos to explore their
internal morphology and confirm the scaling used to de-
rive their virial overdensity. Based on the premise of a
spherically symmetric halo, Navarro et al. (1996) gener-
ated a two-parameter density profile model (NFW) by
fitting results from N-body simulations. This model or
the earlier Einasto (1965) model have been extensively
employed to construct models of dark matter halos in
various applications with great success with over 9,000
citations combined. Measures like halo concentration,
which come directly from the parameters of the NFW
profile and derived measures like Bullock et al. (2001)
spin (over 1,100 citations), have been extensively mod-
eled, studied, and explored. These profiles and any de-
rived quantities assume that halos have a single density
peak in addition to the assumptions of spherical sym-
metry. This treatment has been broadly successful in
predicting and describing the attributes of halos and
structure in a wide variety of applications. However,
at least in the case of major mergers, halos do not have
a spherical shape or a single density peak, which implies
that the more active a halo merger tree, the less these
assumptions might apply.
This tension has established a need to reexamine the
treatment of merging halos and subhalos in halo-finders
to produce dedicated halo tracking algorithms that ex-
tend their results to better track infalling and subha-
los through the dynamical disruptions that warp their
characteristics (e.g. Mansfield et al. 2024; Diemer et al.
2024; Rodríguez-Cardoso et al. 2025; Kong et al. 2025).
Haskap Pie(Halo finding Algorithm with efficient
Sampling, K-means clustering, tree-Assembly, Particle
tracking, Python modules, Inter-code applicability, and
Energy solving) was similarly developed to study merg-
ing and infalling halos, but was built from the ground
up to incorporate techniques that do not rely on the
establishment of a density peak, a linking length, or a
spherical overdensity. Instead,Haskap Piefinds ha-
los based on searching the volume self-bound collections
of particles, which leads to more dynamically consistent
halos that can be tracked in deep and complex potential
wells (Barrow et al. 2026).
In this work, we deploy two tools to reexamine the
spherical halo paradigm to extend studies of halo mor-
phology into potentially new regimes. First, we take
advantage of the open-ended halo-solving strategy in
Haskap Pieto eliminate the assumption of spherical
symmetry in the characterization of halos, which was
first explored in was first examined in Nguyễn et al.
(2026). The primary goal of this study is to present
this change and explore of how shape variables can be
constructed consistently from non-spherical halos.
The second tool we leverage is the nine hydrodynam-
ical simulation code-spanningAGORACosmoRuncom-
parison project (Roca-Fàbrega et al. 2021, 2024a), which
we used to test our procedure and study halo morphol-
ogy.CosmoRunis powerful for this study because of the
careful way the prescriptions were well converged across
simulations codes so well that differences in the results
can be directly tied to a few differences in feedback,
for example. In short order, theCosmoRundataset has
been the subject of several extensive investigations into
various regimes and effects including the properties and
populations of satellite galaxies (Jung et al. 2024), the
relationship between feedback and the chemistry of the
circumgalactic medium (Strawn et al. 2024), the dynam-
ical and tidal stripping of satellites (Rodríguez-Cardoso
et al. 2025), and the morphology of the stellar and gas
disk (Jung et al. 2025). Since baryon effects are well-
studied and increasingly constrained forCosmoRun, we

4
can study dark matter halos with a good context for
why any differences between simulations may occur.
The structure of this paper is as follows: We begin
with a discussion of the modifications toHaskap Pie
followed by a description of our shape parameters and
how they trend for a single snapshot in Sec. 2. The pri-
mary results (Sec. 3) are split into two sections, where
we first explore the evolution of a single Milky Way-sized
main halo across simulations in Sec. 3.1 and then the
evolution of the whole sample in Sec. 3.2. In Sec. 4,
we narrow down our sample to a single mass range to
explore and explain new trends that will need further
context beyond theAGORAsimulations. Finally, we
discuss and summarize our findings in Sec. 5.
2.METHODS
2.1.Simulations
TheAGORACosmoRunsample now includes nine
codes that span different hydrodynamic solving schemes
including adaptive mesh refinement (AMR; ART-I
(Kravtsov et al. 1997), ENZO(Bryan et al. 2014), and
RAMSES (Teyssier 2002)), smoothed particle hydro-
dynamics (SPH; CHANGA (Jetley et al. 2008, 2010;
Menon et al. 2015), GADGET-3 as well as GADGET-4
(Springel 2005; Springel et al. 2021) and GEAR (Re-
vaz & Jablonka 2012)), and hybrid methods (AREPO
(Springel 2010; Weinberger et al. 2020) and GIZMO
(Hopkins 2015)) run with common initial conditions and
prescriptions. Each simulation follows a zoom-in region
centered on a10 12 M⊙ halo atz= 0with a dark mat-
ter mass resolution of∼2.8×10 5 M⊙, as described in
Roca-Fàbrega et al. (2021, 2024a). The public release
of the data is described in Roca-Fàbrega et al. (2024b).
CHANGA and GEAR had a large number of timesteps
available for analysis, so we took every second and third
timestep for those simulations, respectively, to better
homogenize the data sampling frequency. For AREPO,
we use thermal feedback (AREPO-T). For CHANGA,
we use thermal and kinetic feedback rather than super-
bubbles.
In addition, Fig. 1 and Fig. 3 were made with
an ENZO high-redshift radiative-hydrodynamic zoom-
in simulation described in Santos-Olmsted et al. (2024)
and Barrow et al. (2026) with an effective dark mat-
ter mass resolution of2.81×10 4 M⊙ centered around a
∼1.3×10 9 M⊙ halo atz= 7.5. This simulation was
used to quickly iterate on changes to the halo-finding
code.
2.1.1.Refined Region Contamination
Since all our simulations are zoom-in regions that fo-
cus on the Lagrangian region of a single halo, it is impor-
tant that all the halos in our analysis are largely unaf-
fected by contamination from larger particle masses. In
Barrow et al. 2026(Section 2.1.1), we described our re-
fined region solving algorithm, which is distinct from the
restrictions built into the simulations. For each timestep
of each simulation, we define a bounding box that only
includes the most refined particles and second-most re-
fined particles (eight times the mass of the most refined
particles), and we excluded all halos outside that region.
Overall, less than 5% of halos in this study volume had
any second-most refined particles.
2.2.Non-Spherical Halo-Solving
In prior work (Barrow et al. 2026), we used spherical
overdensity and gravitational boundedness as a proxy
to determine which dark matter particles were part of
halos. This method carried the underlying assumption
that halos are roughly spherical, which did not leverage
a long heritage of studies showing that halos are bet-
ter described triaxially or through other non-spherical
descriptions. In this work we attempt to define non-
spherical halos in a way that allows us to study their
intrinsic morphology. Our method differs in that we
are able to fully describe the potential well of our halos
through our particle sampling technique, which allows
us to directly determine the shape of the halo during its
identification in the simulation. The details of our par-
ticle sampling technique are extensively described in the
antecedent paper, but in summary, particles are grouped
into HealPix-based(Górski et al. 2005) annular sections
in such a way that the radial distribution of particle
number density is roughly flat rather than cuspy. Then
the mass of particles in each annular sector is corre-
spondingly upscaled so that the mass distribution is pre-
served. To find which of these particles are bound to a
halo, we segregate particles based on their position, ki-
netic, and potential energies with respect to the center
of a search region using k-means clustering and use the
clusters. We then re-solve the energies within each clus-
ter twice, using the bound particles from the previous
iteration to define the centers used for potential and ki-
netic energy calculations.
In Fig. 1 (left) we see the resulting particles seated
within their virial radii (Bryan & Norman 1998) (Eq.
1) as described in Tab. 1 of Barrow et al. (2026), which
were calculated by finding a radius from the halo center
that contains an overdensity equal to or similar to the
virial overdensity. However, as shown in the figure, the
particles are not typically spherically distributed in ei-
ther small or large halos. Since our bound particle lists
are only biased by gravitational energy, we can use them

5
Figure 1.Comparison of corresponding results on our test simulation using spherical (left) and non-spherical (right) halo-
finding techniques. Particles that are bound to the halo are plotted with the same color as the halo radius. Colors are consistent
by halo but rotate through the pallette between halos.
Δhalo= ΔcMhalo<MboundClass IΔhalo≥ ΔcMhalo=MboundClassIIΔhalo> ΔcMhalo<MboundClassIII
HaloBoundParticles
Figure 2.Illustration of the three classes of halos described
in Sec. 2.2 showing the relationship between convex hull
halos and the total volume encompassing self-bound par-
ticles. Class I halos are classical halos and Class II halos
have higher bound overdensities than the virial overdensi-
ties. Class III halos are halos that are recorded at higher
overdensity than the virial overdensity target but are also a
subset of the bound particles. This occurs as a result of keep-
ing the halo characteristics consistent between timesteps.
to generate a definition of halo boundedness that com-
pletely bypasses the assumption of spherical symmetry.
Based on a target overdensity (see Tab. 1 of Barrow
et al. (2026)) , our non-spherical halos are defined us-
ing the following process. First, a convex hull is defined
that encompasses the bound elements of the dark matter
sample, and the overdensity of bound particles within
the hull is measured. If that value is greater than the
target overdensity, then the bound elements of the halo
are assumed to be denser than Virial Theorem implies,
and no further refinement of the hull is attempted. Oth-
erwise, if the overdensity is lower than the target, each
particle is weighted by orbital energy times the inverse
square of radius (E/r 2) from the center of energy of the
halo. All particles withE/r 2 >cut off i are discarded
from the halo and the overdensity of the remaining par-
ticles is calculated. Using this weighting, the final cut-
off threshold is solved using gradient descent over up to
50 iterative steps or until convergence to within 5ρ/ρ c
of the target overdensity is reached. 50 iterations was
four times as large as needed for any individual halo to
converge in our test sample of about 1,000 halos.
Following this procedure, our halos are only indi-
rectly defined by radius and overdensity and are di-
rectly defined by thresholds in orbital energy and dis-
tance. This combined energy and distance weighting
means that outlying particles of equal boundedness are
disfavored, and equidistant particles that are less bound
are also disfavored, resulting in a compact structure of
tightly bound particles. As shown in Fig. 3 (left), the
hull boundaries are also bound particle positions, and
the hull can contain an unlimited number of vertices
and faces. Because all particles evolve dynamically, the
membership and shape of the hull are likewise dynamic.
An alternative to our use of convex hulls is the use of

6
a non-convex bounding volume such as an alpha shape
(Edelsbrunner et al. 1983). We prefer a convex to a non-
convex shape to ease our interpretation of halo volumes
and merging as well as to speed our calculations, but
we note that method like an alpha shape may be more
suited to match the shape of heavily tidally disrupted
halos or streams.
Importantly, neither are every particle nor every
bound particle inside the convex hull necessarily counted
as part of the dense mass of the halo. This is useful es-
pecially in the case of mergers where the membership
of the hull naturally evolves to encompasses and include
infalling material. Thus, our methodology does not pre-
sume spherical halos in any step of the finding process,
and highly non-spherical halo solutions appear in our
results. The spherical version ofHaskap Piewas de-
signed to track infalling halos and subhalos longer and
more consistently than other methods and remains in-
tact as an optional mode. This non-spherical energy-
based method is not directly comparable using the same
metrics since the foundational definition of a halo has
been significantly altered. Therefore, this work is not
focused on sub-halo tracking efficacy or comparisons to
other halo-finders, which were covered in the antecedent
paper, but on exploring the impact of changing the def-
inition of halos and the morphology of the dark matter
distributions found withHaskap Pie. We emphasize
that only dark matter is used to construct all the rela-
tionships explored here, including overdensity, but that
Haskap Piecan include all particles in its calculations.
Our method reports the virial radius as well as other
overdensity radii in addition to the enclosing convex hull
but internally tracks the halo using the tightly enclosed
hull and its overdensity. In many cases, this leads to
better tracking of halo objects in complex potentials. In
Fig. 1 (right), where all the parameters are the same ex-
cept that the halos are tracked with convex hulls rather
than virial radius, we can see that some smaller isolated
halos and subhalos are made present.
Our convex hull-finding procedure produces three
classes of halos as illustrated in Fig. 2.Class Iare
classic halos wherein the enclosed density of the halo
decreases with radius, and the virial overdensity is a
subset of the full set of bound particles. For these halos,
lower overdensity at larger radii may also be defined,
such asr 50c, and assumptions based on NFW profiles
generally hold.
Class IIare halos that consist of all the bound par-
ticles in a cluster, have a classic inverse relationship be-
tween radius and enclosed density, but have a higher
overdensity than the Virial Theorem target. Any at-
tempt to define a virial radius for these halos necessarily
includes unbound particles and could include mass from
another, larger halo, which would disrupt the shape of
the density profile. Several halo-finding methods would
report halos of this nature as much larger than their
actual size by searching for a lower density at a higher
radius. This can lead to an inability to continue track
the halo if it is embedded in a complex system or cluster
of halos and sub-halos.
Class IIIare halos that have higher overdensity than
the virial overdensity but do not encompass all the
bound particles. This can occur for both methodological
and dynamical reasons. Methodologically, theHaskap
Piesteps the target overdensity towards the virial over-
density so there are instances when the overdensity of
the halo is less than the minimum overdensity of the
bound particles. However, for this to occur, the encom-
passing set of self-bound particles need to be changing
more rapidly than the corresponding stepping of the tar-
get overdensity. This can occur in complex gravitation
potentials such as major mergers and for subhalos mov-
ing in and out of the denser parts of a larger halo. Also
when the gravitational potential is complex, solutions
for a halo are less stable and degenerate, which may lead
to larger changes during our progenitor and descendant
halo selection process in halo-tracking.
Defining halos based only on an open search of bound
particles are intrinsically non-deterministic, as both po-
tential energy and kinetic energy are functions of the
set of particles included, and since the particle sampling
procedure uses a random assignment. These results con-
verge in simple potential wells, but solutions for more
complex structures may change in each iteration. Thus,
while results can be reproduced, using different random
seeds returns slightly different results. As discussed in
Barrow et al. (2026), this is mitigated by producing a
large number of candidate halos and using a cost func-
tion to prune them until we create a best fiducial tree.
On average, several realizations of each halo are avail-
able to be pruned to the best solution according to a cost
function. In Class III halos, multiple solutions are typi-
cally reported in the sample, and a choice must be made
about the priority given to the solution with a smaller or
larger volume. We have chosen to leave the decision to
the same cost function, which penalizes both inconsis-
tent overdensities and radii across timesteps, and allows
our solutions to bias towards consistency. As a conse-
quence of our decision to not hard-code the choice into
our halo-finding, it is possible for halos to switch be-
tween these solutions during high mass ratio mergers.
As shown in Fig. 1, there are cases where the spher-
ical solution reports more halos in an area as well as
cases where the non-spherical model reports more ha-

7
Figure 3.Left: The edges and vertices of the convex hull (green) enclosing the bound particles (red) that meet the virial
overdensity threshold plotted with the semi-major (black), semi-minor (blue), and intermediate axis (yellow). Right: A 2-D
projection of the same hull (green) plotted with a projection of the particles (blue) along with various definitions of center: the
center of energy of all the bound particles used as the halo center, the center of energy of the particles included in the convex
hull (Hull CoE), the center of mass of the particles included in the hull (Hull CoM), and the average position of the vertices
of the hull (Hull Center). Also included are radius measures based on spherical overdensity (r 80c, r200c, r500c), the maximum
half-width from the halo center to the farthest convex hull vertex (Halo Radius), and the spherical overdensity that corresponds
to the overdensity of the convex hull (virial Radius). This convex hull represents a system of halos with a potential that is offset
from any of the three prominent self-bound density peaks that are tracked as separately as subhalos.
los. Occasionally, when a halo is highly non-spherical,
the spherical finder is likely to report the halo as two
or more individual halos instead of one. This behavior
can potentially produce a more physical description of a
halo, such as when the difference is solely due to a dis-
crepancy between the physical shape of the halo and the
assumption of a sphere. It can also lead to the loss of
merger remnants after major mergers due to the conver-
gence between the two of their potential wells and the
energy-based definition of their halo centers, which can
happen more quickly when defining a halo based on or-
bital energy thresholds from the outside in rather than
from the inside out based on radii.
2.3.Halo Definitions
With this method of finding and tracking halos, a few
halo descriptors such as the halo position, halo radius,
overdensity, and halo mass lack a consistent definition,
so we need to pay special consideration to how they are
being used in this context and how they manifest in our
results.
2.3.1.Halo Centers
Since our halos are non-spherical, several potential
definitions of a “halo center” are valid depending on the
intended analysis and which particles are counted within
a halo. The weighted average position of particles of
typex,⃗ rx, over scalarS, ¯⃗ rS, can be defined as
¯⃗ rS =
xP S ⃗ rx
xP S
,(2)
for various choices ofSandx. Ifxis all particles
that are gravitationally bound to the halo andSis the
total energy of those particles, we recover the center
of energy. We find that the center of energy is more
stable between timesteps than if we usedSto be the
particle mass to define a center of mass. Therefore, we
refer to the center of energy as the “halo center" and use
different descriptors for other measures of the center.
The halo finder uses this halo center to track and predict
the movement of the halo as well as to determine likely
progenitor and descendant halos to build a halo tree.
A common practice in SO and FoF halo-finders is to
base or build the center of halos around density peaks.
This presumes that the center of a virialized dark mat-

8
ter particles and its densest region are coincident, and if
energy solving is used, it also presumes that the density
peak is also the bottom of the potential well. However,
both their center of mass or energy can differ signifi-
cantly from the location of the density peak. This is
common in systems that have multiple density peaks
due to a population of subhalos or inflalling mergers.
Additionally, because multiple density peaks can exist
within a complex system of merging halos and subhalos,
discontinuities in halo positions can form over time as
the central densities evolve. A density peak definition
also tends to be sensitive to smoothing lengths and simu-
lation resolution, which act to limit the height of density
peaks. Conversely, the center of energy strongly weights
the bottom of the potential well, which is less prone to
discontinuities. Fig. 3 (right) shows the density of the
underlying particle distribution (blue markers) in our
test simulation as compared to the halo center showing
three clear density peaks withinr 500c and a halo center
between them. Each of the density peaks comes from a
major merger and will take an extended time to settle
into the potential well and so neither of the peaks is well
suited to act as the center of the larger halo. Each of the
density peaks is captured, however, as a separate halo
(Fig. 1, shown as subhalos of the central halo, which
is colored in green). Therefore, encompassing halo is a
distinct structure that is unconnected to a density peak.
This behavior often appears in our results around major
or multiple mergers since our energy-solving method will
capture cluster-scale structures regardless of the com-
plexity of the particle distribution.
In addition to reporting the center of energy for all
the bound particles, we also report centers based onx
being the particles that meet the total energy threshold
that corresponds to a target overdensity used to find
the convex hull andStaking the value of either total
orbital energy or particle mass. This returns a center
of energy and a center of mass of the particles used to
define our halos. Finally, the geometric center of the
convex hull can be determined from the hull vertices,
which are reported in the finder output. Because these
centers might be determined using a subset of the full
list of bound particles (Class I described above), it is
possible for the halo center to be offset from the other
centers as shown in Fig. 3 (right).
2.3.2.Overdensity and Halo Radius
Our hull-finding procedure biases the overdensity of
halos towards the virial overdensity, but typically this is
only well-defined for halos with sufficient mass and num-
ber of particles. Smaller halos tend to fall into Class II,
and their bound particle population is more compact. In
Figure 4.Results from the last timestep of theCosmoRun-
ART simulation (z∼0) showing quantities related to over-
density, radius, and bounded mass. Each scatter point is
a single halo. Top: The overdensity versus particle sam-
ple count relationship showing an asymptotic trend at low
counts. Middle: The relationship between halo radius and
mass showing the total bound mass (orange) and the halo
mass within the convex hull. Bottom: The ratio between
the bound mass and the halo mass colored by overdensity.
Three classes of halos appear in the plot as described in Sec.
2.2.

9
r80c
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
r100c
r150c
r200c
r250c
r300c
IQR
r500c
r700c
r1000c
r
c
Radius
Radius Measure
(r r)/r
Figure 5.Standard deviation of scaled residuals(r−¯r)/¯rfrom a smooth trend,¯r, for each measure of radius reported. The
smooth trend is generated using a Savgol filter with a window size of 10 and a polynomial order of 3. Each red scatter point
represents the standard deviation of all residuals for one halo. The interquartile range and median values of all halos tracks in
theCosmoRun-ART simulation are given in blue. The halo radius based on the maximum distance from a hull vertex to the halo
center is the most stable measure.
the firstHaskap Piepaper, the spherical halo-finding
results showed that the number density of halos was sup-
pressed for halos with fewer than around 500 particles.
We found halo overdensity to be strongly related to the
number of particles that comprise a halo. Fig. 4 (top)
shows the overdensity-particle number relationship for
the final timestep of theAGORACosmoRun-ART sim-
ulation. Here, the particle counts are after we’ve ap-
plied our sampling procedure on particle-dense regions.
We find that the overdensity of the bound halos grows
asymptotically at lower particle number, essentially pro-
hibiting solutions for halos with a few tens of particles.
This relationship implies that small halos must be
compact to be self-bound. This follows from the defi-
nition of orbital energy. For kinetic energy to be equiv-
alent to gravitational potential energy, the square of the
velocity scales with 1/r. However, the initial dispersion
of dark matter velocities is set by the cosmological pa-
rameters, so weak potential wells must be dense and
deep to capture dark matter. At low particle counts,
the depth of the potential well is limited by resolution,
and eventually, self-gravitation cannot be determined.
Virial overdensity is historically tied to the premise of
spherical non-linear collapse occurring when the over-
density reaches a critical value. In that formalism, the
overdensity radius can be described as the radius that
encloses a spherical volume that has a given overdensity.
For exampler 200c would be the radius corresponding to
an overdensity∆ c =ρ/ρ c = 200, which is often used
as an approximation of the virial value. However, the
critical overdensity for collapse is also a function of scale
and sensitive to resolution. Therefore, we accept high
overdensity, low mass objects as “halos” since their col-
lapse has been confirmed gravitationally but make no
attempt to define them to lower overdensities. As a
result, quantities liker 200c are not present for all halos.
All halos with solved potentials do have a reported over-
density and an overdensity radius, which are defined as
the overdensity of the convex hull and the radius from
the halo center that encloses the same overdensity re-
spectively. In Fig. 4 (center), we show the relationship
between radius and halo mass.
We also define a “halo radius” as the maximum dis-
tance from the halo center to a vertex of the enclos-
ing convex hull. This measure is not a true radius, but
it does describe the radius of a circumscribing sphere
drawn around the hull. As shown in Fig. 5, this halo
radius is more stable between timesteps than radii based
on spherical overdensity. Since not all halos have a high
peak density due to particle resolutions as well as dy-
namics, fewer halos have a well-defined radius at higher
overdensities.
2.3.3.Halo Mass and Bound Mass
The quantity we report as “halo mass” is the mass of
the particles that are under theE/r 2 threshold that cor-
responds to a target overdensity. We additionally report
the mass of bound particles at several spherical over-
density radii, which are roughly comparable to halo and
virial masses reported by other halo-finders. Our halo
mass is either equal to or smaller than the total mass
of all bound particles, which we report as the “bound
mass”.

10
Fig. 4 (bottom) shows the relationship between bound
mass and halo mass for the test sample. Higher mass
halos are more consistently solved as halos of the Class
I halos and the bound mass to halo mass ratio increases
with bound mass. This implies that the virial mass of
halos is a smaller fraction of the bound mass as halo
mass increases. At the low mass end, we see two behav-
iors. First, we see a collection of halos that have equiv-
alent halo and bound masses. These are Class II halos
where the bound mass is highly overdense. The second
behavior is halos that have bound mass to halo mass
ratios greater than one. These are halos that fell into
the Class II at a recent timestep but now fall into Class
III. Since our forward and backward modeling technique
gradually steps the target overdensity towards the virial
overdensity, halos will continue to have high overden-
sities for some time, even if more bound particles are
present at lower overdensity. We found after extensive
testing that this gradual change in the target overden-
sity lead to much more consistent halo trees, especially
in situations where subhalos enter and exit the potential
of larger halos.
In this single-timestep sample, about 18% of halos
have equivalent bound and halo masses and the high-
est ratio of bound to halo mass is approximately 4.91.
2.4.Measures of Morphology
We have adapted, adopted, and produced various
measures to study the morphology of our halos. We
have consolidated their definitions in this section for
reference. Tab. 1 has also been provided as a concise
summary.
2.4.1.Principal Axes
Though several other halo-finding methods unbind
particles to refine their halo definitions, they are lim-
ited in their ability to solve for triaxiality because they
do not contain a robust solution for boundedness. How-
ever, in post-processing of spherical halos, it is possible
to obtain a solution for the semi-major, semi-minor, and
intermediate axes by, for example, using the Allgood
et al. (2006) method, which weights particles by the in-
verse square of their distance from the halo radius.
We find the axes directly by solving the eigenvectors
of the covariance of the halo particle positions, which
returns the orientation of an orthogonal set of principal
axes. For halos that use particle sampling, we recreate
the original particle distribution before taking the co-
variance. The square root of the eigenvalues returns the
relative length of the axes, which we divide by the high-
est value and multiply by the halo radius as well as the
number of particles. This is then multiplied to the unit
vectors in the direction of the corresponding eigenvec-
tor direction, which returns the semi-major axis,⃗ a, the
semi-minor axis, ⃗b, and the intermediate axis,⃗ c. These
vectors are reported in the halo-finding results and are
demonstrated in the example shown in Fig. 3 (left). The
classical scalar values of these axes (a, b, c) can then be
determined by taking the Euclidean norm of these vec-
tors. By construction,ais equal to the halo radius.
Therefore, unless the semi-major axis is exactly aligned
to the largest half-width,⃗ awill expand a bit beyond the
boundary of the halo. The ratio of its length with re-
spect to the other axes is consistent regardless of scaling
and can be directly used for measures of morphology.
This is slightly similar to the Allgood et al. (2006)
method since a 1/r 2 weighting was used to determine the
extent of the convex hull. However, they are related to
particle clustering in linear order rather than quadratic
order, which is a key difference. Our axes are not an
expression of how the closest particles are weighted but
are a measure of the full shape of the overdense region.
While we calculate these axes, we note that since our
halos can take on highly non-ellipsoidal shapes,a, b,and
cdo not have a consistent meaning. In our analysis,
we focus on thea/bratio (sin other work) incorporate
departures from a spherical shape to combinations of
other measures.
2.4.2.Sphericity and Sphere-filling Fraction
To detect how our halos diverge from a spherical mor-
phology, we have adapted two measures. Sphericity is
defined as the ratio between the surface area of a sphere
of volumeVand the surface area,A, of an object of the
same volume,
Ψ = π1/3(6V) 2/3
A .(3)
This measure is unity if the object is a sphere and
less than one for all objects that are not spheres. The
number of sides can limit the theoretical maximum value
of sphericity. For example, a cube has a sphericity of≈
0.806and a dodecahedron (regular 12-sided polyhedron)
has a sphericity of≈0.911. This means that the number
of particles describing a convex hull can place an upper
limit on this measure, but only for small numbers of
particles. As shown in Fig. 6 (left top), which shows
the halos in the final timestep of theAGORACosmoRun-
ART simulation, there is a clear positive relationship
between sphericity and halo mass. In that timestep, the
highest value of sphericity is≈0.987.
Alternatively, we can define a sphere-filling fraction as
ϕ= 3V
4πr3 ,(4)

11
Figure 6.Trends in halo morphological features of the last timestep of theCosmoRun-ART simulation, where each scatter point
represents a halo all colored by the semi-major axis to semi-minor axis ratioa/b. Each of the measures is as described in Sec.
2.4.
T able 1.Definition of key variables used to describe halos withHaskap Pie.
Variable Symbol Short Description
Halo Center N/A Center of energy of the bound particles
Center of Hull N/A Mean position of all vertices of the convex hull halo
Halo Radius N/A Longest distance from the halo center to a vertex of the convex hull halo
Halo Mass N/A Mass of the bound convex hull halo particles
Bound Mass N/A The total mass of self-bound particles
Overdensity Radius r∆c Spherical overdensity radius corresponding to the convex hull halo overdensity
Spin λ Total spin of the convex hull halo
Sphericity Ψ Ratio of surface area of a sphere to the surface area of the convex hull halo
Sphere Filling Fraction ϕ Ratio of the volume of a sphere to the volume of the convex hull
Semi-major Axis ⃗ a Longest principal axis of the convex hull halo
Semi-minor Axis ⃗b Shortest principal axis of the convex hull halo
Specific Angular Momentum ⃗j Angular momentum of particles in the convex hull halo divided by their mass
Spin λ Total spin of the convex hull halo
Oblateness O Angle between⃗ aand ⃗jscaled byπ/2(Range: [0,1])
whereris the halo radius. This is a measure of the
fraction of a sphere with the same radius as the max-
imal distance between the halo center and the farthest
vertex is filled by the hull volume and emphasizes vertex
outliers. As shown in Fig. 6 (left bottom) for the same
timestep, the trend in this measure is more pronounced
and less likely to asymptotically approach unity for high
sphericity halos.
2.4.3.Angular Momentum and Spin
The spin parameter is classically defined as
λ= J|E| 1/2
GM5/2 ,(5)
whereJis magnitude of the total angular momen-
tum,Eis the total orbital energy, andMis the mass
of the system. Traditionally, it has been difficult to di-

12
rectly determine the spin parameter of halos using re-
sults from other halo finders since the orbital energy,
E, is typically not directly calculated for each particle.
Instead, alternate measures such as the Bullock et al.
(2001) spin have used assumptions of an NFW profile,
and a spherical halo have been developed and heavily
used in the literature. In the formalism for that pa-
rameter, they motivate the development of their spin
parameter by noting that the energy distribution of ha-
los is more complex than the set of assumptions used
to calculate it. Studies such as Zjupa & Springel (2017)
have examined the difference between the spin parame-
ter and found Eq. 5 to be more consistent across redshift
(Fig. 9 in their paper), however the comparisons were
made using SO and FoF halo-finders rather than a fully
non-spherical methodology.
Conversely, our halo finding methodology determines
the energy of each particle as a fundamental step of our
solving process. This allows us to recover the true spin
parameter and reportλand halo-specific angular mo-
mentum,j=J/M, with our halo-finding results. These
results include the caveat that we take angular momen-
tum from the center of energy instead of the center of
mass, since this center seems to be closer to the true
center of orbital motion. In Fig. 6 (right top), we show
that the distribution ofλis positively correlateda/b,
and the spread ofλin log space is negatively correlated
with halo mass. The distribution ofjis positively cor-
related to both halo mass anda/bas shown in Fig. 6
(right bottom).
2.4.4.Quantities Derived from Principal Axes
Oblateness and prolateness can be determined directly
from the principal axes. Oblateness is a measure of how
normal the angular momentum vector is to the semi-
major axis vector or
O= 2
π cos−1

⃗j·⃗ a
|⃗j||⃗ a|
 ,(6)
where values greater than 1/2 indicate an oblate ob-
ject with the semi-major axis that is more normal to the
angular momentum axis and values less than 1/2 indi-
cate a prolate object. In the example finalCosmoRun-
ART timestep (z= 0), we find that∼77.2% of the halos
are oblate and the remaining fraction are prolate. We
further incorporate the sphericity of the halo in order
to emphasize the shape of the halo by takingO(1−Ψ).
High values of this measure indicate an oblate object
with low sphericity. The additional factor of1−Ψelim-
inates the singularity of the dot product between ⃗jand
⃗ afor spherical objects. As shown in Fig. 6 (center bot-
tom), this quantity is typically higher for smaller halos
since sphericity is highly correlated to halo mass.
This is distinct from the Frenk et al. (1988) definition
used in subsequent work, which categorized shape pa-
rameters of halos by the ratio of the three axes. Therein,
they define a halo as oblate ifc/a < b/c, prolate if
c/a > b/c, and triaxial ifc/a∼b/c. Thus, in that def-
inition, a halo is prolate if the intermediate and semi-
minor axis are close in magnitude and prolate if they
are not. Because our halos are neither assumed to be
spherical nor ellipsoidal in their construction, it can be
beneficial to define their shapes such that they respond
to departures from symmetry through sphericity in this
way.
3.RESULTS
TheAGORACosmoRunsimulations have zoom-in re-
gions focused on the evolution of a Milky Way-sized
galaxy. Therefore, we pay special attention to the evo-
lution of that galaxy’s dark matter halo across cosmic
time and between simulations in Sec. 3.1. Addition-
ally, we report morphological characteristics for the full
sample of halos caught inside the zoom-in region in Sec.
4.AGORAPaper I (Kim et al. 2014) already showed
that differences in the treatment of baryons between the
codes do not strongly affect dark matter dynamics and
likely do not play a key role in shaping halo morphology.
Prior studies of these data have characterized the evo-
lution of the main halo and compared the merger trees.
This showed a timing discrepancy for the first major
merger and subsequent major mergers as examined in
(Roca-Fàbrega et al. 2024a). Outside of this, the codes
roughly agreed on broad morphological trends. There-
fore, we focus on establishing how the codes agree and
differ in morphology due in the context of dynamical
dispersions in the evolution of dark matter.
3.1.Main Halo
Some of the timing discrepancies between codes that
occurred in the halo tree of the first major merger char-
acterized in previous works could have originated in a
halo-finder’s definition of a “merger.” As shown in Bar-
row et al. (2026), the time a halo-finder loses track of
a merging halo does not converge and several works
have been able to extend the tracking of infalling ha-
los. Therefore, a merger should not be defined by when
a halo-finder loses track of a progenitor. An alternate
definition of a merger is when the two virial radii begin
to overlap. However, while this metric is more stable,
it is premised on an assumption of spherical symmetry
precisely when halos are least spherical. With our non-
spherical results, we can directly study the impact of

13
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.61.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0a/b
ART
ENZO
RAMSES
CHANGA
GADGET3
GADGET4
GEAR
AREPO
GIZMO
2 4 6 8 10 12 141.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4a/b
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.60.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Sphere Filling Fraction ( )
2 4 6 8 10 12 140.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Sphere Filling Fraction ( )
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
Age [Gyr]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Center Offset ( r/r)
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Age [Gyr]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Center Offset ( r/r)
Figure 7.The evolution of three shape parameters for the main halo in each of the nine simulations. Left plots show early
times, which include a high mass ratio major merger. Right plots show the late-time evolution. Top:a/bratio showing peaks
associated with mergers. Middle: sphere filling fraction (Eq. 4) showing a more impulse-like responsiveness to minor mergers.
Bottom, the offset between the center of energy of the halo and the geometric center of the halo scaled by the halo radius. In
the bottom plots, the full trend is shown as transparent lines and the smoothed trend is shown as opaque lines.

14
0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70
Closing Time from 1 Gyr [Gyr]
1.08
1.10
1.12
1.14
1.16
1.18
1.20Time of Peak a/b [Gyr]
ART
ENZO
RAMSES
CHANGA
GADGET3
GADGET4
GEAR
AREPO
GIZMO
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Halo Mass Ratio
2.25
2.50
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50
3.75Peak a/b
Figure 8.Trends connecting thea/bratio of the high mass
major merger at∼1.1 Gyr to the state of the infalling halo
at 1 Gyr. Top: the time of the peak ina/bversus the closing
time (distance divided by radial closing velocity) showing a
roughly positive correlation. Bottom: The peak value ofa/b
versus the merger mass ratio also shows a positive correlation
with CHANGA’s realization as an outlier.
these mergers on the shape of the halo as well as mea-
sure how long disruptions to a spherical halo persist, al-
lowing us to alternatively define major mergers through
particle dynamics.
3.1.1.Principal Axes
In individual timesteps, larger halos are more likely to
be more spherical, have lower values ofa/b(see Fig. 6,
top left), and converge to spherical collapse theory and
thus are typically captured in the halo finder as Class I
halos. The exception to this is high mass ratio mergers,
which can distort the morphology significantly. Mergers
appear clearly as large spikes in thea/bratio of the main
halo as shown in Fig. 7. The halo-finder tracks the main
halo backwards in time and there is rough agreement
between codes as to when thea/bratio starts to grow
(∼1.4 Gyr).
The peak ina/brepresents the highest distortion that
occurs before both halos are regarded as fully distinct
self-bound structures. There is some disagreement be-
tween simulations as to when thea/bratio peaks and
falls, which occurs anywhere from∼1.05 Gyr to∼1.22
Gyr. Generally, the longer the two halos are regarded
as a single structure, the larger the peak. There is also
some correlation between the magnitude of the peak and
how early in Cosmic Time the peak occurs for the same
reason.
The differences in timing and peak magnitude of
the spike may be related to the halo-finder solving
method rather than a physical process, so we investi-
gated whether there were dynamical indicators of when
a peak might occur that preceded the merger. Specifi-
cally, we examined the mass ratio, distance, and closing
time of the two halos at 1000 Myr across simulations
and compared them to the magnitude and time of the
peak ofa/b. As shown in Tab. 2, the closing time, which
is defined as the distance divided by the projection of
the relative velocity between the two halos onto the line
connecting them, was correlated to the time of the peak
ofa/b(see Fig. 8 top). Furthermore, GADGET4’s ver-
sion of the merger is a clear outlier, happening earlier
than the others due to the halos having a much lower
closing time to each other by 1000 Myr, which cannot
be explained except as an intrinsic difference in halo po-
sitions and velocities.
With the exception of the halo in CHANGA, the
merger mass ratio was strongly correlated to thea/b
peak (see Fig. 8 bottom). This follows from an argu-
ment that a major merger can deform the potential well
more than a more minor merger. Given the connection
between thea/bratio and dynamical processes, there
is the potential to use the timing of the peak and the
time whena/bsettles to a minimum might as indica-
tors for the onset of a merger and the coalescence of the
two halos respectively, regardless of the efficacy of halo-
tracking. A deeper discussion of the CHANGA result is
provided in the appendix, were we show that it may be
due to a complex system of simultaneous major mergers.
We also investigated the other prominent merger
events for the main halo. The mass ratio of the largest
merger at around 2.5 Gyr is between 0.16-0.20 (at 2
Gyr) for all simulations except GADGET4 and GEAR
and the peaks ofa/bare correspondingly lower than
the∼1.1 Gyr merger with values between 1.8 and 2.25.
GADGET4’s and GEAR’s merger mass ratio were out-

15
T able 2.Table of quantities used to produce Fig. 8 and the cluster ratio, which is defined and explored in the appendix in the
context of dense collections of halos simultaneously merging. Distance, closing time, and mass ratio are taken at 1 Gyr. The
outlier mass ratio value for CHANGA is explored in the Appendix.
Simulation Code Distance [kpc] Closing Time [Myr] Mass Ratio Cluster Ratio Peaka/b Peaka/bTime [Gyr]
ART 29.4 646 0.844 1.32 3.04 1.15
ENZO 33.0 645 0.668 0.94 2.24 1.20
RAMSES 29.5 532 0.814 1.26 3.49 1.13
CHANGA 31.5 640 0.503∗ 1.25 3.48 1.13
GADGET-3 28.5 546 0.909 1.22 3.60 1.10
GADGET-4 28.7 495 0.828 2.38 3.91 1.07
GEAR 34.5 702 0.778 1.16 3.12 1.21
AREPO 31.0 667 0.872 2.41 3.41 1.11
GIZMO 30.4 674 0.787 0.97 3.26 1.10
liers at 0.55 and 0.28 witha/bpeaks of 2.06 and 2.35,
respectively. The last strong change ina/bis related to
a merger that occurs between 5.8 and 8.5 Gyr, depend-
ing on the simulation, indicating that the mergers are
by then unsynchronized. In each of the three merger
events, GEAR’s and ART’s peaks are among the latest,
and ENZO’s peaks move from last to first over time.
Outside of the effect of mergers, there does not seem
to be any secular evolution in thea/bratio of the main
halo after 700 Myr in any of the simulations and the
halos tend to settle to ratios between about 1.2 and 1.4
between disruptions, at all redshifts. Settling times are
a strong function of redshift as lengthened free-fall and
dynamical times at later times also manifest as long set-
tling times. Conversely, merger mass ratios do not have
an obvious effect on settling times, even among mergers
at similar redshifts.
In summary, there are at least two major discrepancies
between the dark matter halos that arise when compar-
ing simulations. First, there are differences in the states
of the halos (positions and velocities) that subtly ac-
cumulate over time, leading to timing discrepancies. In
some cases, this difference exceeds any effect that can be
attributed to gravity solving, softening length, or gen-
eral numerical effects. Second, there are differences in
the halo merger mass ratios between simulations, which
lead to dynamical and morphological differences in the
resulting halos that also accumulate over time.
3.1.2.Sphere-filling Fraction and Sphericity
Though Fig. 6 (bottom left) showed that sphere-filling
fraction,ϕ, was highly correlated with halo mass for the
halos in a single low-redshift timestep, we found thatϕ
of the main halo sharply responds to mergers with high
variation. A reasonable expectation is that the process
of a merger causes drops inϕas thea/bspike. However,
at low mass and early times, dips inϕdue to mergers
are much less prominent than increases inϕthat arise
when the higher combined mass after the halo leads al-
lows the halo to settle into a spherical morphology. This
effect can be seen at the beginning at∼500 Myr in Fig.
7 (middle row). As shown in Fig. 6 (bottom left), the
transition typically happens in halos between 10 8 and
∼5×1010 M⊙, which is above the threshold of∼10 8
M⊙ (∼350 particles) where overdensity grows asymp-
totically, and halos switch between Class I and Class II
or III. At∼450 Myr, which is prior to the merger that
causes the jump and during thea/bpeak of a preceding
strong merger, the halo’s mass is∼8×10 9M⊙ (∼28,600
particles). This implies that the shape change is more
mass-dependent than particle-count dependent.
At higher mass, mergers consistently present as promi-
nent dips inϕas the morphology of the halo is temporar-
ily disrupted before settling back into a more spherical
shape. Becauseϕis based only on the shape of the
bounding hull anda/bis weighted by particle positions,
these two measures can present different signals. This
is because halos that merge only directly disrupt the
shape of the main halo as they cross the hull boundary,
whereas deviations ina/bcan persist as long as the cen-
ter of energy and the density peaks of the two halos are
separated. Therefore, changes inϕare typically sharper
and more responsive to low-mass mergers than changes
ina/b. For example, it is easier to see that the event
between 2 and 4 Gyr is actually two high mass ratio
mergers in relatively short succession from the double
dips. However, the magnitude of the dips inϕare rela-
tively similar between mergers and so this feature is not
as clear a signal of the merger mass ratio asa/b.
Outside of mergers at later times, the sphere-filling
fraction continues to gradually trend upward. As noted
in Sec. 2.4.2, due to its definition, the sphere filling frac-
tion can only approach unity if the center of the hull and
the center of energy are the same and any offset will cap
ϕat a lower value. As shown in Fig. 3 (right), the hull

16
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
10 2
10 1
ART
ENZO
RAMSES
CHANGA
GADGET3
GADGET4
GEAR
AREPO
GIZMO
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
10 2
10 1
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.60.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
2 4 6 8 10 12 140.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
Age [Gyr]
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Mh/Mh
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Age [Gyr]
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Mh/Mh
Figure 9.Spin (λ, top), change in spin (∆λ, center), and change in halo mass scaled by halo mass (∆M h/Mh, bottom) for the
main halo as a function of simulation time. Smoothed values are opaque and the full trend is translucent.

17
center can be offset from the center of mass and energy
can be offset in a direction that does not tend towards a
local density peak. We find that filamentary structure
(which forms a “v” shape to the top right and to the left
in those figures) can pull the hull center towards it as
the edges of the hull, and thus the hull center, are more
sensitive to smaller density changes at the hull bound-
ary. In Barrow et al. (2026) (Figure 12), the bias the
filamentary structure that results in theϕcap for the
CosmoRunmain halos can be seen in each of the simula-
tions through the clustering of merger infall points.
As shown in Fig. 7 (bottom row), we calculated the
distance between the center of mass of the hull and its
geometric center scaled by the halo radius,∆⃗ r/r. Due to
its sensitivity to smaller changes in density, this measure
had much more variation thana/bbetween timesteps.
To determine a secular trend, we used a third-degree
polynomial Savgol filter. For the filter window, we took
the number of timesteps between 1 Gyr and 2 Gyr in
each simulation and divided that period into five groups
(5-13 timesteps per∼200 Myr for this period). We found
that the gradual increase inϕindeed corresponded to
a downward trend in∆⃗ r/r. As a merger signal, this
measure was less sensitive to minor mergers thanϕor
a/band thus better at differentiating between major and
minor mergers thanϕ.
We also explored the evolution of sphericity,Ψ, for
the main halo across simulations, which generally re-
sponded similarly toϕ, except the low mass mergers did
not appear as strong signals.
3.1.3.Mass and Spin
The bound particles in the convex hull used to calcu-
late the halo mass only represent a subset of the bound
particles for Class I halo results. To test the variation
in the number of particles used to describe a halo, we
again used a third-degree polynomial Savgol filter with
the same window size to find the secular change,∆ ¯m,
in halo mass for the main halo. The evolution of∆ ¯m/¯m
(dashed line) and∆m/m(solid line) is shown in Fig. 9
(bottom panels). We then calculated the standard de-
viation of(∆m−∆ ¯m)/¯mfor each mass,σ m, for the
period between 500 and 1750 Myr, which was available
for all nine simulations.
Except for GIZMO, which has a large mass adjust-
ment during the major merger, we found thatσ m was
lower for halo mass (0.0175-0.0431) than bound mass
(0.0305-0.0526) as the more compact definition of the
halo at higher overdensity was found to be more stable.
Also, except for GIZMO, larger values in the range corre-
sponded to larger intervals between timesteps in the sim-
ulation. In all cases except ENZO,σ m for halo mass was
less than form 300c (0.0218-1.13) even thoughm 300c was
a higher density than the halo density at all timesteps.
This is due to an incongruence between spherical over-
density and our definition of a halo that leads to higher
variation for measures that assume spherical symmetry.
Therefore, our halo quantities like spin and angular mo-
mentum are based on the particles used to define our
halo mass instead of the bound mass or other defini-
tions for consistency.
Peaks ina/bcoincide with large changes to the vol-
ume of the halo. Spin peaks and troughs occur during
merger events but are not always coincident witha/b
peaks, implying that large spin changes are not strictly
stemming from changes in the halo boundaries or the
particles included. During a merger, the halos may spin
down (reduction inλ), spin up (increase inλ), or both.
The highest peaks inλduring the merger at∼1.1 Gyr
are GADGET3, AREPO, RAMSES, and ART. In or-
der of minima, the most prominent spin downs were
CHANGA, RAMSES, and GEAR. Since a spin-down
implies that the halos have opposing angular momenta
and a high angular momentum difference can disrupt
halo morphology during a merger, CHANGA’s low min-
imum spin is potentially related to the outliera/bpeak
of the interaction. Despite low minima, when spin was
smoothed with a Savgol filter, CHANGA and RAMSES
had spin changes that were in line with the mean trends
of the other codes. The only code to show a prominent
secular reduction in spin during the merger was GEAR
(Fig. 9, top left at 1.1 Gyr).
Spin changes during other mergers seem to have bet-
ter agreement between codes, but some mergers do not
induce a significant change in spin. Over the long term,
the spin of the main halo evolves most rapidly during the
first∼1.25 Gyr of the simulations, when it peaks and
then trends gradually towards zero. This implies a lim-
ited volume of correlated spins about our main halo that
is washed out at large scales and higher halo masses.
3.1.4.Overdensity
The overdensity of the main halo is unaffected by low
mass/low particle count effects even at high redshift,
and so we can use its evolution as a probe of the dy-
namical and cosmological evolution of halos over time.
Since our solving method biases halos’ overdensities to-
wards the virial overdensity over time, deviations from
that value may provide insights into the redshift evolu-
tion of halo density.
Fig. 10 (top) shows the matter overdensity of the main
halo (translucent line) as well as its halo mass to bound
mass ratio (solid line) versus simulation time. Since the
halo mass to bound mass ratio is always below unity and

18
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500Matter Overdensity
200c
BN1997
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
Age [Gyr]
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500Matter Overdensity
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Age [Gyr]
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Halo Mass / Bound Mass
ART
ENZO
RAMSES
CHANGA
GADGET3
GADGET4
GEAR
AREPO
GIZMO
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Halo Mass / Bound Mass
Figure 10.Top: halo mass to bound mass ratios (right axis, solid line) for the main halo versus time, as well as halo matter
overdensity versus time (left axis, translucent). The main halo tracks the virial overdensity (black dot-dashed line) as designed.
Also plotted is 200c as a dashed line. Bottom: the mean trend of both variables for halos with masses greater than8×10 8
and between 0.5 and 3 virial radii from the main halo center, showing how dynamical effects can tend to inflate the recovered
matter overdensity and halo mass to bound mass ratio.
overdensities track the virial overdensity, the main halo
is always a Class I solution in every simulation at every
time step. This serves as a validation that our solving
method for overdensity recovers the virial solution in the
most massive, most spherical case in our data.
Like several of our other measures, the halo mass to
bound mass ratio is reactive to mergers, which is ex-
pressed as a decrease in the ratio for the highest mass
ratio mergers. At late times, the ratio trends upward,
implying that the bound mass and the virial mass may
gradually converge afterz= 0.
Fig. 10 (bottom), we explore the set of halos with
mass greater than8×10 8 M⊙ (∼1786 particles) that are
between 0.5 and three virial radii of the main halo. We
set the minimum mass to avoid the effects of low particle
counts on overdensity, and we set the distance to the
main halo so that we can study the effect of environment
and proximity to a large halo on the overdensity of halos.
The values reported in these plots are simple averages
of the values for the individual halos. Outside of this
region, the overdensity of large halos trends towards the
virial value.
As shown in the figure, before 2 Gyr, the mean
overdensity scatters between the virial value and 300.
Though some simulations show higher values than oth-
ers at various points in time, they are roughly consis-
tent. After 2 Gyr, the mean grows faster than the virial
value, settling at around 400 for the simulations that

19
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800Overdensity
ART
z = 7.0
z = 4.0
z = 2.0
z = 1.0
z = 0.5
z = 0.1
z = 0.0
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800 ENZO
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800 RAMSES
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800 CHANGA
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800 GADGET3
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800Overdensity
GADGET4
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800 GEAR
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800 AREPO
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800 GIZMO
Figure 11.Overdensity versus halo mass within the refined region for each of theCosmoRunsimulations at fixed redshifts.
Each data value is the mean of a mass bin. Lines are used for mass bins with greater than five halos, and scatter points are
used for mass bins with five or fewer halos.
reachz= 0. Since the average halo mass to bound mass
ratio approaches unity faster for this sample than for
other halos in this mass range, the overall implication is
that these halos need to be denser to maintain their in-
tegrity in the proximity of the main halo than the effect
of dark energy and cosmological expansion would ana-
lytically imply. Thus, corrections to virial theorem may
be needed for low redshift halos in cluster environments,
including satellites of the Milky Way.
3.2.Full Sample
ThoughCosmoRunis based around a Milky Way-sized
halo, the refined region captures other independent sys-
tems of smaller halos and creates a larger sample that
we can use to probe how our measures trend more gen-
erally. However, like many studies based on zoom-in
regions, we are limited by the bias of only studying an
overdense region that mostly converges into the prox-
imity of the main halo so our observations should be
considered in that context.
For the full sample, the secular change in variables like
sphere filling fraction anda/bare the same as the trends
we noted for the main halo. On average, sphere-filling
is positively correlated with Halo Mass and simulation
time. The higher the mass, the smaller the sample and
the averages scatter. Similarly,a/bis negatively corre-
lated with halo mass and cosmic time. Though we did
not find a seculara/brelation with cosmic time for the
main halo, jumps ina/bwere found to be correlated
with major mergers. At higher cosmic time, the ma-
jor merger rate naturally decreases, so the averagea/b
values similarly decrease.
The following quantities have more complex relation-
ship, which we explore in more detail.
3.2.1.Overdensity
A shown in Fig. 11, the low mass relationship between
overdensity and mass demonstrated in Fig. 6 (top) is not
independent of redshift. In all simulations, the overden-
sity trend fromz= 7was lower than at lower redshifts.
This implies that this relationship is being moderated
by dynamics rather than particle count, as we implied
in Sec. 2.3.2. This dynamical difference can either be
non-numerical (e.g., growth of particle velocities, expan-
sion, tidal stripping) or numerical (e.g., cosmological
lengthening of gravitational smoothing). As described
in Roca-Fàbrega et al. (2021), afterz= 9the particle
softening length is switched from 800 co-moving pc to 80
proper pc for particle based-codes, and since the virial
radius grows with time (∼3.8kpc for a 10 7 M⊙ halo
atz= 0), numerical effects should dissipate over time.
Therefore, the effect is likely non-numerical rather than
numerical. Conversely for AMR codes (ART, ENZO,
RAMSES), particle softening is fixed in co-moving units
and there is a correspondingly weaker relationship be-
tween redshift and overdensity. To quantify the dynam-
ical evolution of dark matter, we used the GADGET-4
CosmoRunsimulation to find the dark matter velocity
dispersion,σ v,DM, within the refined region over time
and compared that value to the escape velocity of a
halo with a virial overdensity, which is a function of

20
1 2 3 5 14
Age [Gyr]
02468101214
Redshift
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140Velocity [km/s]
GADGET4
107 M
5 × 107 M
108 M
4 × 108 M
8 × 108 M
v, DM/3
1 2 3 5 14
02468101214
Redshift
0
200
400
600
800
1000Matter Overdensity
Virial
Figure 12.Top: A comparison of escape velocities at the
virial radius of halos of different masses (solid-colored lines)
to one third the dark matter velocity dispersion (thick brown
line) in theCosmoRunGADGET-4 simulation refined region.
Bottom: Also plotted as translucent scatter points are the
overdensities of halos with masses near the corresponding
values used in the escape velocity calculation. The x-axis
scaling emphasizes how the variables evolve with redshift
rather than time.
halo mass. Though some of the increase in dispersion
comes from dark matter particles bound to massive ha-
los, we expect a significant fraction of the dark matter
particles to fail to bind or remain bound to the halo
below a threshold mass if the overall dark matter veloc-
ity dispersion is significantly higher than a halo’s escape
velocity.
In general, the escape velocity of a halo at it’s outer
radius with the virial overdensity (r vir = ( 3Mh
4π∆cρc
)1/3)
isv esc =
p
2GM/rvir. Thus, for a fixed mass,v esc will
tend to decrease asp c decreased with lower redshifts.
Thereforeσ v,DM, which increases with redshift due to
cosmic expansion, will eventually be higher than a halo’s
escape velocity. In practice, this dark matter heating
and evaporation seems to occur when the volume-wide
σv,DM is around three times the escape velocity of a halo
at the virial radius.
As shown in Fig. 12 (top), the crossing points with
σv,DM/3(brown line) for10 7,5×10 7,10 8,4×10 8, and
8×10 8 M⊙ halos are atz= 6.5,z= 3.8,z= 2.8,
z= 1.5, andz= 1.1respectively. Also plotted in Fig.
12 (bottom) are the median matter overdensity of halos
within 10% of the indicated masses as a function of red-
shift (scatter points). After the escape velocity crosses
σv,DM/3, overdensities tend to rise, but only after bound
particles outside the virial radius evaporate, leaving be-
hind a denser halo.
We have confirmed that the environment can lead
to higher overdensities, implying that interactions with
large halos can play a role in densification, for example,
through tidal stripping. Fig. 10 (bottom) showed that
the mean overdensity showed a clear signal for>8×10 8
M⊙ halos, the medians did not. By using the median in
Fig. 12, we are effectively masking the strongest envi-
ronmental effects of the main halo and other large halos.
Halos with extremely low particle counts are unable to
resolve their potential wells and may need higher over-
densities to bind particles to compensate. Both this lim-
itation and a redshift dependence appear to contribute
to the trends in Fig. 12. Halos with a mass of10 7 M⊙
(∼35 particles) have a higher overall matter overdensity
at all redshifts to compensate for their smaller counts,
which further grows afterz∼8. Higher mass halos
are able to track the virial overdensity (dashed black
line) until lower redshifts, when their values also grow.
Halo with masses≥4×10 8 M⊙ (∼1429 particles) track
the virial overdensity on average at all redshifts. How-
ever, as suggested in Fig. 10, the halo mass to bound
mass ratio evolves upward with time as it becomes in-
creasingly difficult to categorize the virial radius with a
subset of the bound particles. This means that though
higher mass halos are more easily characterized by a
virial overdensity, the halos are still strained by cosmo-
logical effects. Conversely, since the10 7 M⊙ halos were
never characterized well by a virial overdensity, cosmo-
logical effects immediately appear that aren’t masked
by our hard-coded bias towards the virial overdensity.
Since this affects all mass ranges, including the highest
mass halo, the underlying trend implies that the virial

21
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Oblateness × (1-Sphericity)
ART
Oblateness × (1-Sphericity)
0.5 ×  (1-Sphericity)
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10 ENZO
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10 RAMSES
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10 CHANGA
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10 GADGET3
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Oblateness × (1-Sphericity)
GADGET4
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10 GEAR
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10 AREPO
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10 GIZMO
Figure 13.Oblateness times (1-Sphericity),O(1−Ψ), for all halos in the refined region of each simulation atz= 2as a
function of mass (solid black line and filled circles) compared toO(1−Ψ)/2(dashed line and open circles), which represents
neutral oblateness. Each simulation tends towards values above the neutral oblateness line and thus is biased towards oblate
orientations. In this work, this means that the semi-major axis and the angular momentum vector tend to be more perpendicular
than aligned.
overdensity is not a consistent measure of a halo, even
when it can be consistently calculated.
Extremely small halos (10 −7 M⊙, Earth-sized) have
been produced in cosmological simulations (Diemand
et al. 2005; Skory et al. 2010; Anderhalden & Diemand
2013) showing their formation at high redshift as the
earliest structures if enough resolution is available to re-
solve their density profiles. The corresponding peak den-
sities of these halos were so high that they were explored
as sources for a signal for dark matter self-annihilation.
These dense cores and extremely fine particle resolutions
make these “micro-halos” robust against dispersion, so
they can be reproduced at any redshift if one constructs
enough nested zoom-ins to establish a high enough den-
sity (e.g. Wang et al. 2020). Micro-halos in these works
were not identified or constrained by self-boundness, but
rather by their density profiles. Using a density profile,
you can constructr 200c just by taking advantage of the
smoothness of density across space and tracing density
from a core to a desired overdensity. Since our halos are
differently defined, they are not directly comparable.
Our smaller halos have more difficulty surviving to
low redshift as the threshold overdensity growth to re-
main self-bounded eventually meets a numerical limit.
Ordinarily, as long as enough density can be modeled to
bound a particle, the central density should not affect
a determination of how many particles are bound to a
halo. This is because the gravitational potential is only
related to enclosed mass in a spherically symmetric con-
figuration. However, with the exception of merging ha-
los, our smallest halos are also less spherical. As shown
in Fig. 1, the number and shape of small halos are a key
difference between our spherical and non-spherical halo
trees. There are several instances of small halos that
only appear in the non-spherical tree, as well as non-
spherical halos that are recorded as adjacent spherical
halos in the spherical tree. For a highly non-spherical
halo, the gravitational potential is warped, and particles
are more susceptible to stripping (tidal and evaporatory)
if local densities are not high enough.
3.2.2.Oblateness and Spin
Our definition ofO(1−Ψ), whereO(oblateness) and
Ψ(sphericity) are given in Eqs. 6 and 3 respectively,
gives us a measure of both how perpendicular the angu-
lar momentum axis is to the semi-major axis and to what
degree a halo’s shape deviates from a perfect sphere. In
Fig. 13, we show the average value ofO(1−Ψ)as a func-
tion of halo mass atz= 2. As we show in Fig. 6 (top
left),Ψis strongly positively correlated to halo mass
and soO(1−Ψ)is correspondingly higher for low mass
halos. SinceOtakes values between 0 and 1 linearly for
angles between the semi-major axis and the angular mo-
mentum direction between 0 andπ/2.(1−Ψ)/2should
represent neutral oblateness, wherein the angle between
angular momentum vector and the semi-major axis is
π/2and the halo is neither more bulging in its poles or
equator.

22
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
10 2
10 1
100
 ART
z = 7.0
z = 4.0
z = 2.0
z = 1.0
z = 0.5
z = 0.1
z = 0.0
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
10 2
10 1
100 ENZO
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
10 2
10 1
100 RAMSES
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
10 2
10 1
100 CHANGA
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
10 2
10 1
100 GADGET3
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
10 2
10 1
100
 GADGET4
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
10 2
10 1
100 GEAR
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
10 2
10 1
100 AREPO
107
109 1011
Halo Mass [M ]
10 2
10 1
100 GIZMO
Figure 14.The spin versus halo mass versus redshift trend plotted in the same manner as Fig. 11.
1 2 3 5 14
Age [Gyr]
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
1 2 3 5 14
Age [Gyr]
0
6
4
3
2
Oblateness × /2
5 × 108 < M/M < 109
1 2 3 5 14
Age [Gyr]
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175Number of Halos
0246810
Redshift
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75
3.00
3.25a/b
ART
ENZO
RAMSES
CHANGA
GADGET3
GADGET4
GEAR
AREPO
GIZMO
0246810
Redshift
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Oblateness × (1-Sphericity)
0246810
Redshift
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95Halo Mass/Bound Mass
5
10
15
20
25
Mean Formation Redshift
Figure 15.Key dynamical and shape trends for halos in all simulations between5×10 8 and10 9 M⊙. In the top right plot is
the sample size as a function of redshift (solid line) and the mean formation redshift of the halos in the sample as a function
of redshift (dashed line). For all other plots, we show the mean values of the indicated quantities across the sample. Smoothed
values are opaque and the full trend is translucent. The x-axis scaling emphasizes the how the variables evolve with redshift
rather than time.

23
The average values ofO(1−Ψ)are systematically and
consistently higher than(1−Ψ)/2, implying that the
angular momentum axis and semi-major axis are more
likely to be unaligned (oblate). This is in broad agree-
ment with other findings (e.g Bailin & Steinmetz 2005;
Shaw et al. 2006; Bett et al. 2007). However, there is
a significant spread in data and individual values for
(1−Ψ)/2fill in the region under(1−Ψ min). Since
sphericity is fairly consistent with the exception of small,
short disruptions during mergers, the scatter should be
attributed to large, high-frequency fluctuations inOfor
each individual halo over time, which we observed for
the main halo in each simulation (translucent lines in
Fig.??). The time averaged mean value ofOfor the
main halo was between 0.60 and 0.65 for every simula-
tion, and so the angular momentum axis and the semi-
major axis were biased toward non-alignment. In Fig.
??,O(1−Ψ)(transparent lines) is seen evolving differ-
ently than(1−Ψ)/2(solid line). The halo is more oblate
(O >0.5) during mergers as well as during the period
of time shown in Fig. 8 (bottom left) when the halo has
a high offset between the halo center of mass and the
hull center (∆⃗ r/r) peaks at around 0.85 Gyr. Between
these events,Oreturns to values higher than 0.5, im-
plying that this is the settled state. Furthermore, large
changes inOdo not seem to directly affectΨ, which
is much less variable and does not move with secular
changes inO. Dynamically, this would imply that halos
torque their semi-major axis away from their angular
momentum axis without changing shape.
Fig. 14 shows the relationship between mean spin,
halo mass, and redshift. We see in the full sample for all
simulations and at all redshifts the same general trend
of spin up and down over time that we reported for the
main halo. The spin values averages were generally be-
tween 0.05 and 0.2 and were scattered significantly for
individual halos. As shown in Fig. 9, scatter was cor-
related to mergers, but the secular value evolved more
consistently.
4.FIXED-MASS TRENDS AND DISCUSSION
Several of our measures are highly responsive to the
mass of the halo, so we narrowed down our sample to a
smaller range of masses to study their secular evolution
of with redshift. In Fig. 15, we plotted the average
values of key parameters for all halos between5×10 8
and10 9 M⊙ versus redshift, which is a range of masses
that did not seem to be strongly affected by low particle
counts or low halo count statistics for most redshifts and
was consistently well-defined at the virial overdensity.
The top right plot (solid lines) shows the number of halos
in the sample as a function of redshift and simulation.
10 2
 10 1
100
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14P( )
All CosmoRun Sims
5 × 108 < M/M < 109
z = 3
z = 2
z = 1
z = 0.5
Figure 16.Spin distribution constructed from the combined
sample of5×10 8 and10 9 M⊙ halos from simulations that
have data available for the given redshifts. The data show
a skewed log-normal relationship with occasional bimodal
peaks due to the combined sample. Circular points on the
bottom show the unweighted mean of the distribution for the
corresponding redshift and have a downward trend to lower
spin fromz∼3. Box scatter points show the same trend in
the median and the horizontal lines show the interquartile
range.
There were high scatter and disagreement in average
spin between simulations belowz= 6since the sam-
ple size is small, but afterwards, the means followed a
tight, consistent relationship, and average spins begin
to decline afterz∼2. Because the results are similar
between simulations forz <6, we combined the simu-
lation samples to build combined spin distributions for
this halo mass range as shown in Fig. 16. These distri-
butions are roughly log-normal as indicated by previous
studies, but with more pronounced skewness. Similar
to the mean (shown as scatter points), the peak of the
distribution trended downward with lower redshift from
z= 3. This lies in contrast to studies showing that
the distribution of halo spins was largely independent
of redshift (e.g Mu˜ noz-Cuartas et al. 2011). Some stud-
ies have demonstrated a decrease, such as A vila-Reese
et al. (2005), which showed a much slighter decrease in
the peak of their fitted log-normal distribution (0.003)
for clusters than the (0.015-0.02) mean spin decrease we
show for this mass range fromz= 1toz= 0. Zjupa &
Springel (2017) showed that a similarly large decrease
in the log-normal peaks of their true spin distribution
could be recovered for SO halo finders. However, their

24
trend extended toz= 8, whereas our trend is suggestive
of a peak betweenz= 2andz= 4. Additionally, their
results also showed no trend for a FoF halo finder, which
is more closely aligned with our halo-finding methodol-
ogy than SO finders.
There could be multiple sources for this discrepancy,
such as the difference between Bullock et al. (2001) spin
and true spin, the redshift evolution of halo shape, halo
mass/bound mass fraction, and overdensity, our com-
bined sample of multiple simulation codes, or bias in
the zoom-in region itself. In Fig. 15, we present key
trends that could help explain this evolution that are
broadly consistent between simulations. In the top right
plot (dashed line), we show that the halos in the sample
are progressively younger as the older halos merge into
larger halos or grow out of the mass range over time.
Our single time-step results in Fig. 6 (top right) show
that a positive correlation betweena/band our fixed
mass results show a secular drop in thea/bratio and
redshift in Fig. 15 (bottom left). The latter finding is
the opposite of the Allgood et al. (2006) finding of higher
meana/bratios with lower redshift for fixed-mass bins.
This further discrepancy could be related to their1/r 2
weighted definition ofa/b, which more strongly empha-
sizes the steepness of the density profile of halos, which
is correlated with redshift through virial theorem. Our
definition of ana/bratio is less sensitive to density pro-
files, and so the strong correlation between formation
time anda/bcould be suggestive of a dynamical differ-
ence in late-forming halos.
Our sample also had a lowerO(1−Ψ)(center), but a
consistent mean value ofO, which means that sphericity
(Ψ) increases with time. This implies that a key redshift-
independent trend for a fixed-mass sample is that the
average angle between the angular momentum axis and
the semi-major axis,O×π/2 =θ, is approximatelyπ/3.
Since this is neither collinear to or perpendicular to the
semi-major axis, this implies a strong procession of the
angular momentum vector. The distribution of cos(θ)
in simulations have been studied (e.g. Shaw et al. 2006;
Bett et al. 2007) showing a smooth, decreasing trend
fromcos(θ) = 1tocos(θ) = 0.
This sample also has an overdensity that is roughly
consistent with the virial overdensity as shown in Fig.
12. However, halo mass to bound mass ratios increase
with lower redshift (In Fig. 15, bottom right), which im-
plies a disconnect with the presumption of a relaxed viri-
alized halo and the virial overdensity. Here we see one
difference between simulations with ENZO, where there
is a depression in the trend at intermediate redshift.
ENZO’s refined region contains more halos in this mass
range due, in part, to readjustments that were made as
the main halo’s trajectory diverged out of the zoom-in
regions over time. This seems to have revealed a pos-
sible environmental connection on halo mass to bound
mass that did not appear in the other variables. How-
ever, because this trend does not significantly affect the
other variables, those variables may not be environment-
dependent or sample-dependent. The full context of all
these trends will be explored with a simulation that is
not biased to a zoom-in region in future work that is not
focused on theAGORAsimulations.
5.SUMMARY
We have introduced a new, non-spherical halo-finding
version ofHaskap Piethat takes advantage of its open
search for self-bounded particles. To test our technique,
we used theAGORAcosmological simulation compari-
son project’sCosmoRunsuite of simulations to study the
halos we recovered with our algorithm. The dynamical
and shape parameters reported byHaskap Piefor ha-
los include measures that do not presume that halos are
symmetric or spherical, allowing an in-depth study of
dark matter halo morphology.
Some of our key findings so far are:
1.Haskap Pietracks and reports halos as an over-
dense collection of convex hulls that encompass
self-bound particles that meet a threshold of over-
density. The resulting halos are non-spherical and
not tied to density peaks. The flexibility in halo
shape results in differences in the halo catalog
(Fig. 1).
2. Broader trends for aggregate samples of halos were
roughly consistent between simulation codes, but
there were differences in the morphological re-
sponse to major mergers tied to timing discrep-
ancies and dynamical differences prior to mergers.
3. Geometric parameters which includea/bratio,Ψ
(Eq. 3), andϕ(Eq. 4), all respond to major merg-
ers of the main halo. The sphere-filling fraction
(ϕ) responds more quickly to and more sharply
to mergers with more intermediate mass ratios
(Fig. 7). Thea/bratio of our restricted sample of
masses shows a secular decrease in thea/bratio
fromz∼6(Fig. 15 bottom left).
4. Halo overdensity has a complex interaction with
redshift, halo-mass (Fig. 11), and formation time.
There appears to be a relationship between dark
matter velocities and the overdensity of smaller
halos (Fig. 12). The virial overdensity does not
track this relationship and thus does not provide
a consistent definition for our halos.

25
5. Spin (λ) exhibits merger induced variations as well
as secular changes for the main halo (Fig. 9) and
the full sample (Fig. 14). When we restrict the
sample to a tighter range of masses (5×10 8 and
109 M⊙) and take an average, spin peaks between
z= 4andz= 2and then decreases untilz= 0
(Fig. 15 top left and Fig. 16).
6. The angle between the angular momentum vector
and the semi-major axis is highly time varying, but
for our restricted sample of masses (5×10 8 and10 9
M⊙), the average angle is consistently∼π/3(Fig.
15 top center). Thus, halos are generally biased
towards bulging perpendicularly to their angular
momentum axis but are also likely to precess.
7. Differences in merger times between the simula-
tions are due to actual positional and velocity dif-
ferences in the location of the halo and can be
predicted ahead of the merger (Fig. 8). Outliers
in detecting the merger mass ratio of the largest
merger of the main halo are due to differences in
the complexity of the sub-halo configurations and
gravitational potential of the infalling halo (Fig.
17).
6.LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
6.1.Progress withHaskap Pie
The non-spherical and spherical versionsHaskap Pie
function as independent modes that are easily selected
by the user. In the future, more dedicated algorithms for
the treatment of the non-spherical case might improve
the handling of some of the more unique structures and
interactions we discovered in this study. For example,
we have embarked on a project to better treat mergers
and more consistently and correctly identify progenitors
when we build the halo tree which we will shortly imple-
ment and document. Additionally, usingHaskap Pie
on large datasets is prohibitively expensive and so we
will consider further measures we can take to optimize
the code.
6.2.Solving Dynamical Questions
Our analysis of theAGORAsimulations provided in-
sights into trends that we would like to continue to ex-
plore with a larger dataset. Specifically, we will study
the trends in spin and the angle between the semi-
major axis and the angular momentum vector. In both
cases, neither our results nor the way we measure the
quantities in the context of a non-spherical halo fully
agree with the literature. Since these trends were not
simulation-dependent, we have identified a large single-
code simulation with a large sample of halos that we
will use to fully investigate this finding. That investiga-
tion is best separated from this work, which is primarily
focused on introducing a new method and performing
a code-comparison. Analyzing the larger sample will
likely require further development ofHaskap Pie.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
KSSB, THN, SM, VS, and ECS acknowledge the Univer-
sity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for their continued
support. KSSB acknowledges the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications as well as the Texas Ad-
vanced Supercomputing Center for their support with
the Delta Supercomputer and Stampede3 Supercom-
puter, respectively, as well as the ACCESS program
for computing grants PHY230100, PHYS240175, and
PHYS250173. We acknowledge the AGORA collabo-
ration for their support and simulation data products.
We also especially acknowledge Joel Primack for his con-
tributions in the late spring and summer of 2025 to the
discussions that lead to this investigation.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
APPENDIX
A.MULTIPLE MAJOR MERGERS
The mass ratio of the merger into main halo in
CHANGA recorded in Tab. 2 was significantly smaller
than it was for the other simulations. However, in Fig.
9 (bottom left), the secular change in mass of the main
halo is the second highest. Furthermore, all the signa-
tures of a merger in Fig. 7 imply that the CHANGA
merger should have been more significant. To solve
this discrepancy, we investigated the merger and found
that the infalling halo was solved at a higher overden-
sity (∼388ρ c) at 1000 Myr than the corresponding halo
in the other simulations and that the bound mass was
greater than the halo mass, making it a Class III so-
lution at 1000 Myr whereas the others were Class I or
II. This difference is connected to both the halo-finding
methodology as well as dynamical differences between
the simulations.
Halos are solved with both forward and backward
modeling. When backward-modeling in time, merging

26
Merging Halo
Main Halo
Figure 17.The region around the main halo at 800 Gyr in theCosmoRun-CHANGA (left) and GIZMO (right) simulations
showing the complex assembly of halos that make up the infalling halo for the major merger at 1.1 Gyr. This cluster of CHANGA
halos loses its definition just prior to the merger, which causes the outlier mass ratio seen in Fig. 8 (bottom) and Tab. 2. Colors
are consistent by halo but rotate through the pallette between halos.
halos are typically first captured as subhalos or infalling
halos as Class II solutions within the larger potential
well of the halo they merge into. As they leave the halo,
their sphere of influence grows, and they become Class
III solutions. Normally, they would settle into Class I
solutions as the halo finder targets the virial overdensity,
however if another major merger occurs, the potential
well may remain complex and the minimum overdensity
of the bound particles may remain constrained.
In forward-modeling, halos are typically initially dis-
covered in isolation as Class I or II solutions, the latter
of which settle into Class I solutions as particle counts
grow. As forward-modeled halos merge, solutions typi-
cally convert to Class II and overdensities grow as they
fall into complex potential wells where loosely bound
particles are stripped. The subtle difference is that
backward-modeled halos tend to have slightly higher
overdensities before a merger than forward-modeled
ones. When pruning the final solution between realiza-
tions of a halo track, the halo-finder prioritizes the solu-
tion with the longer halo history and the higher cumu-
lative mass, which typically favors the forward-modeled
solution as long as the halo paths are unbroken in each
direction.
However, there are dynamical situations that have
a higher tendency of breaking the lower-overdensity
forward-modeled paths. Particularly, when major merg-
ers occur in rapid succession and the bound mass rapidly
changes. For example, during the infall of multiple ha-
los, particles may temporarily unbind from the center
of energy. This can lead to disfavored discontinuities
in the combination of halo mass, radius, and overden-
sity between timesteps that fail the cost functions for
the lower overdensity solution but remain consistent for
the higher overdensity solution that is less sensitive to
changes in the overall potential well.
CHANGA’s halo is unique among the simulations as
measured by the number of major halos in its vicinity.
As shown in Fig. 17, there are at least 11 massive halos
(at least 5% of the mass of the main halo) that are ac-
tively interacting with and within 10 kpc of the merging
halo at 800 Myr, which ranged from two to nine for the
other simulations. The encompassing halo of the com-
plex (large green halo to the bottom in Fig. 17) buckles
by 1000 Myr, leaving behind a collection of smaller ha-
los that individually fall into the main halo. Taking
the total mass ratio of halos to the main halo that are
within 5 kpc of the merging halo at 1000 Myr (recorded
as the “Cluster Ratio” in Tab. 2), CHANGA is no longer
an outlier in its relationship between merging mass ra-
tio and peaka/b. However, that measure is not robust
against double-counting particles, so we do not use it
in our primary analysis. The merging halos in AREPO
and GADGET4 also have high numbers of massive inter-
acting halos within 10 kpc at 800 Myr (seven and nine,
respectively) but have not lost the encompassing halo
by 1000 Myr. Since their cluster ratios include both the
encompassing halo and its components, it is significantly
higher.

27
We have named the phenomenon of an encompassing
halo that bounds a region of several distinct self-bound
halos of similar mass without a clear central halo a “clus-
ter halo”. On a smaller scale, the halo depicted in Fig.
4 is also a cluster halo as three separately tracked ma-
jor halos have combined around a halo centered between
their individual centers to form a common, distinct po-
tential well. N-body interactions between similar masses
in close proximity are chaotic and do not conserve or-
bital energy with respect to the center of mass. Because
we have defined halos as being unique self-bound struc-
tures rather than an overdense collection of dark matter,
these clusters can become unstable in rapid changes to
the potential well, such as the in the CHANGA merging
halo shown in Fig. 17. In this version ofHaskap Pie,
this behavior mostly arises from the switch from spher-
ical to non-spherical halo definitions and it seems to at
least partially arise from unexplored dynamical consid-
erations. Therefore, though it complicates the analysis
of halos, we have not changed our finding algorithm to
specifically disfavor this phenomenon so that it can be
properly studied in this and future work.
REFERENCES
Allgood, B., Flores, R. A., Primack, J. R., et al. 2006,
MNRAS, 367, 1781,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.10094.x
Anderhalden, D., & Diemand, J. 2013, JCAP, 2013, 009,
doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2013/04/009
A vila-Reese, V., Colín, P., Gottl¨ ober, S., Firmani, C., &
Maulbetsch, C. 2005, ApJ, 634, 51, doi: 10.1086/491726
Bailin, J., & Steinmetz, M. 2005, ApJ, 627, 647,
doi: 10.1086/430397
Barnes, J., & Efstathiou, G. 1987, ApJ, 319, 575,
doi: 10.1086/165480
Barrow, K. S. S., Nguyễn, T. H., & Skrabacz, E. 2026, ApJ,
999, 72, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae2eb4
Behroozi, P. S., Wechsler, R. H., & Wu, H.-Y. 2012, The
Astrophysical Journal, 762, 109,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/762/2/109
Bett, P., Eke, V., Frenk, C. S., et al. 2007, MNRAS, 376,
215, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.11432.x
Bonamigo, M., Despali, G., Limousin, M., et al. 2015,
MNRAS, 449, 3171, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv417
Bryan, G. L., & Norman, M. L. 1998, ApJ, 495, 80,
doi: 10.1086/305262
Bryan, G. L., Norman, M. L., O’Shea, B. W., et al. 2014,
ApJS, 211, 19, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/211/2/19
Bullock, J. S. 2002, in The Shapes of Galaxies and their
Dark Halos, ed. P. Natarajan, 109–113,
doi: 10.1142/9789812778017_0018
Bullock, J. S., Dekel, A., Kolatt, T. S., et al. 2001, ApJ,
555, 240, doi: 10.1086/321477
Davis, M., Efstathiou, G., Frenk, C. S., & White, S. D. M.
1985, ApJ, 292, 371, doi: 10.1086/163168
Diemand, J., Kuhlen, M., & Madau, P. 2006, ApJ, 649, 1,
doi: 10.1086/506377
Diemand, J., Moore, B., & Stadel, J. 2005, Nature, 433,
389, doi: 10.1038/nature03270
Diemer, B., Behroozi, P., & Mansfield, P. 2024, MNRAS,
533, 3811, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2007
Dillamore, A. M., & Sanders, J. L. 2026, MNRAS,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag226
Dolag, K., Borgani, S., Murante, G., & Springel, V. 2009,
MNRAS, 399, 497, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15034.x
Edelsbrunner, H., Kirkpatrick, D., & Seidel, R. 1983, IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 29, 551,
doi: 10.1109/TIT.1983.1056714
Einasto, J. 1965, Trudy Astrofizicheskogo Instituta
Alma-Ata, 5, 87
Eisenstein, D. J., & Hut, P. 1998, ApJ, 498, 137,
doi: 10.1086/305535
Eke, V. R., Cole, S., & Frenk, C. S. 1996, MNRAS, 282,
263, doi: 10.1093/mnras/282.1.263
Elahi, P. J., Ca˜ nas, R., Poulton, R. J. J., et al. 2019,
PASA, 36, e021, doi: 10.1017/pasa.2019.12
Frenk, C. S., White, S. D. M., Davis, M., & Efstathiou, G.
1988, ApJ, 327, 507, doi: 10.1086/166213
Górski, K. M., Hivon, E., Banday, A. J., et al. 2005, ApJ,
622, 759, doi: 10.1086/427976
Gunn, J. E., & Gott, III, J. R. 1972, ApJ, 176, 1,
doi: 10.1086/151605
Hadzhiyska, B., Eisenstein, D., Bose, S., Garrison, L. H., &
Maksimova, N. 2022, MNRAS, 509, 501,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2980
Han, J. J., Conroy, C., Johnson, B. D., et al. 2026, AJ, 164,
249, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac97e9
Hopkins, P. F. 2015, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 450, 53, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv195
Jetley, P., Gioachin, F., Mendes, C., Kale, L. V., & Quinn,
T. 2008, in 2008 IEEE International Symposium on
Parallel and Distributed Processing (Miami, FL, USA:
IEEE), 1–12, doi: 10.1109/IPDPS.2008.4536319

28
Jetley, P., Wesolowski, L., Gioachin, F., Kalé, L. V., &
Quinn, T. R. 2010, in Proceedings of the 2010
ACM/IEEE International Conference for High
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis, SC ’10 (USA: IEEE Computer Society), 1–11,
doi: 10.1109/SC.2010.49
Jung, M., Roca-Fàbrega, S., Kim, J.-H., et al. 2024, ApJ,
964, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad245b
Jung, M., Kim, J.-H., Nguyễn, T. H., et al. 2025, ApJ, 994,
245, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae112d
Kim, J.-h., Abel, T., Agertz, O., et al. 2014, ApJS, 210, 14,
doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/210/1/14
Knollmann, S. R., & Knebe, A. 2009, ApJS, 182, 608,
doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/182/2/608
Kong, H., Boylan-Kolchin, M., & Bullock, J. S. 2025, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2503.10766,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2503.10766
Kravtsov, A. V., Klypin, A. A., & Khokhlov, A. M. 1997,
The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 111, 73,
doi: 10.1086/313015
Lacey, C., & Cole, S. 1994, MNRAS, 271, 676,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/271.3.676
Lahav, O., Lilje, P. B., Primack, J. R., & Rees, M. J. 1991,
MNRAS, 251, 128, doi: 10.1093/mnras/251.1.128
Lin, C. C., Mestel, L., & Shu, F. H. 1965, ApJ, 142, 1431,
doi: 10.1086/148428
Maciejewski, M., Colombi, S., Springel, V., Alard, C., &
Bouchet, F. R. 2009, MNRAS, 396, 1329,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.14825.x
Mansfield, P., Darragh-Ford, E., Wang, Y., et al. 2024,
ApJ, 970, 178, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad4e33
Menon, H., Wesolowski, L., Zheng, G., et al. 2015,
Computational Astrophysics and Cosmology, 2, 1,
doi: 10.1186/s40668-015-0007-9
Mu˜ noz-Cuartas, J. C., Macciò, A. V., Gottl¨ ober, S., &
Dutton, A. A. 2011, MNRAS, 411, 584,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17704.x
Navarro, J. F., Frenk, C. S., & White, S. D. M. 1996, ApJ,
462, 563, doi: 10.1086/177173
Nguyễn, T. H., Barrow, K. S. S., Byrom, S., & Satish, V.
2026, MNRAS, 545, staf2045,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf2045
Peebles, P. J. E. 1980, The large-scale structure of the
universe
Planelles, S., & Quilis, V. 2010, A&A, 519, A94,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014214
Revaz, Y., & Jablonka, P. 2012, Astronomy & Astrophysics,
538, A82, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201117402
Roca-Fàbrega, S., Kim, J.-H., Hausammann, L., et al. 2021,
ApJ, 917, 64, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac088a
Roca-Fàbrega, S., Kim, J.-H., Primack, J. R., et al. 2024a,
ApJ, 968, 125, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad43de
Roca-Fàbrega, S., Kim, J.-h., Primack, J. R., et al. 2024b,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2408.00432,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2408.00432
Rodríguez-Cardoso, R., Roca-Fàbrega, S., Jung, M., et al.
2025, A&A, 698, A303,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202453639
Santos-Olmsted, L., Barrow, K. S. S., & Hartwig, T. 2024,
ApJ, 969, 144, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad46fd
Shaw, L. D., Weller, J., Ostriker, J. P., & Bode, P. 2006,
ApJ, 646, 815, doi: 10.1086/505016
Skory, S., Turk, M. J., Norman, M. L., & Coil, A. L. 2010,
ApJS, 191, 43, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/191/1/43
Springel, V. 2005, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 364, 1105,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.09655.x
—. 2010, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 401, 791, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15715.x
Springel, V., Pakmor, R., Zier, O., & Reinecke, M. 2021,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 506,
2871, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1855
Springel, V., White, S. D. M., & Hernquist, L. 2004, in IAU
Symposium, Vol. 220, Dark Matter in Galaxies, ed.
S. Ryder, D. Pisano, M. Walker, & K. Freeman, 421
Springel, V., White, S. D. M., Tormen, G., & Kauffmann,
G. 2001, MNRAS, 328, 726,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04912.x
Strawn, C., Roca-Fàbrega, S., Primack, J. R., et al. 2024,
ApJ, 962, 29, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad12cb
Teyssier, R. 2002, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 385, 337,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20011817
Tomassetti, M., Dekel, A., Mandelker, N., et al. 2016,
MNRAS, 458, 4477, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw606
Vallés-Pérez, D., Planelles, S., & Quilis, V. 2022, A&A,
664, A42, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202243712
Vega-Ferrero, J., Yepes, G., & Gottl¨ ober, S. 2017, MNRAS,
467, 3226, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx282
Wang, J., Bose, S., Frenk, C. S., et al. 2020, Nature, 585,
39, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2642-9
Weinberger, R., Springel, V., & Pakmor, R. 2020, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 248, 32,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab908c
Zhu, L., Xue, X.-X., Mao, S., Yang, C., & Zhang, L. 2025,
A&A, 703, A43, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202556036
Zjupa, J., & Springel, V. 2017, MNRAS, 466, 1625,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2945