Title: Metamorphoses of carbon and oxygen in protoplanetary discs: how chemistry and radial drift transform inner disc C/O ratios
Authors: Tamara Molyarova, Richard A. Booth, Catherine Walsh
Published: 2026-05-29
Categories: astro-ph.EP, astro-ph.SR

MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026) Preprint 1 June 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.3
Metamorphoses of carbon and oxygen in protoplanetary discs: how
chemistry and radial drift transform inner disc C/O ratios
Tamara Molyarova1★, Richard A. Booth1, Catherine Walsh1
1School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
The chemical composition of a protoplanetary disc is sensitive to its thermal structure and dust properties, and can provide
insights into the disc evolution. Recent observations with the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) reveal correlations of
the inner disc compositions with disc size, accretion rate and stellar mass, explained by the key role of dust radial drift in
redistributing primordial volatiles. We explore how chemical reactions change the composition of ices carried with pebbles and
how they affect the inner disc C/O ratios in a disc around a solar mass star. We consider different drift efficiencies set by dust
fragmentation velocity and include dust traps at different locations. We vary the incident cosmic ray ionisation rate𝜁and the
efficiency of cosmic ray dissociation of ices, and consider the effect of carbon grain destruction. We find that methane depletion
within<1Myrpreventsthedeliveryofcarbon-richgastotheinnerdiscandyieldsC/O≲1for𝜁⩾10 −17s−1.Dusttrapscollect
waterandcarbon-richicesformedviamethanedestruction,furtherloweringtheinnerdiscmetallicityandC/Oratio.Cosmic-ray
drivenphotodissociationoficescanconvertwatertoO 2 andcarbon-bearingmoleculestoCO,allowingicestoescapethetrapif
≳10%of the dissociated products can participate in surface reactions. We discuss the observational implications and conclude
thatcosmicraysandtheireffectonicesarethekeyfactorsthatdeterminetheimpactofchemistryontheinnerdisccomposition.
Key words:protoplanetary discs – astrochemistry
1 INTRODUCTION
The chemical composition of protoplanetary discs sets the environ-
ment for planet formation. The composition is determined by the
combination of dust growth and chemical processes in the gas and
on dust grains, and bears the imprint of global evolution of the disc
physicalstructure.Thus,observationsofthemolecularandelemental
compositionofprotoplanetarydiscscanprobethephysicalproperties
of protoplanetary discs and offer an insight into their evolution.
Bothchemicalandphysicalprocessesaffectthedisccomposition;
the former can repartition key elements between molecular carriers,
whilethelatterredistributesthembetweenthegasandicephases,as
well as between different disc regions. A variety of protoplanetary
disc models consider chemical reactions and the evolution of dust
and gas properties either separately or in combination, to simulate
the elemental and molecular composition of planet-forming mate-
rial. The assumption of a quasi-static disc structure allows one to
thoroughly model chemical evolution, accounting for thousands of
reactionsinverticallyandradiallyresolvedsimulations(e.g.Aikawa
et al. 2002; Woods & Willacy 2009; Woitke et al. 2009; Akimkin
et al. 2013; Cleeves et al. 2014a; Walsh et al. 2015; Eistrup et al.
2016; Kamp et al. 2017; Ruaud & Gorti 2019; Schwarz et al. 2019,
and many others, see Henning & Semenov (2013) for a review).
Some of these models include turbulent mixing (Semenov & Wiebe
2011;Furuyaetal.2013)ortemporalevolutionofphysicalstructure
★ E-mail: t.molyarova@leeds.ac.uk
(e.g. Drozdovskaya et al. 2014, 2016; Rab et al. 2017; Eistrup et al.
2018; Waggoner & Cleeves 2019; Miley et al. 2021).
Anotherclassofmodelsfocusesonthedustevolutionandtransport
and only includes freeze-out chemistry (Öberg & Bergin 2016; Piso
et al. 2016; Booth et al. 2017; Schneider & Bitsch 2021; Kalyaan
et al. 2023; Mah et al. 2024; Molyarova et al. 2025; Sellek et al.
2025;Williamsetal.2025).Thesemodelstypicallyconsiderthedisc
midplane only and allow to capture the redistribution of elements,
particularly in the radial direction. Some models are focused on the
vertical dust transport, with chemistry (Van Clepper et al. 2022) or
without (Krijt et al. 2016, 2018). Finally, some global models com-
bine aspects of both chemistry and dust evolution (e.g., Tscharnuter
& Gail 2007; Ilee et al. 2017; Cridland et al. 2017; Booth & Ilee
2019; Krijt et al. 2020; Pacetti et al. 2025; Sellek & van Dishoeck
2025, note that the listed works have varying degrees of chemical
complexity). Another type of model are those that post-process the
physical evolution of the disc and follow the chemical evolution of
a gas element (Xu et al. 2017; Price et al. 2020; Eistrup & Henning
2022).
The relatively colder outer regions of protoplanetary discs (≳
10au)areobservedatmillimetrewavelengthsinrotationaltransitions
ofgas-phasemoleculesbyAtacamaLargeMillimeter/submillimeter
Array (ALMA) or Northern Extended Millimeter Array (NOEMA).
Observations indicate that the gas in the outer disc is often carbon-
rich,withsuper-solarC/Oratios,often≳1(Kamaetal.2016;Bergin
et al. 2016; Cleeves et al. 2018; Bosman et al. 2021; Sturm et al.
2023; Miotello et al. 2019). The modelling of the observed molecu-
lar abundances indicates that the elevated C/O ratio is likely a result
©2026 The Authors
arXiv:2605.31091v1  [astro-ph.EP]  29 May 2026

2Molyarova et al.
oftheverticaltransportofice-coveredgrainsbetweenirradiatedand
non-irradiated layers leading to chemical processing of CO by UV
radiation and subsequent formation of hydrocarbons (Bergin et al.
2016; Van Clepper et al. 2022). Another factor is the depletion of
carbon and oxygen through radial dust transport inwards, which can
be affected by the presence of ring substructures and their position
relative to the CO snowline (van der Marel et al. 2021; Sturm et al.
2022).
Thecompositionofhotterinnerdiscscanbeprobedthroughnear-
to mid-infrared observations, a capability enhanced by JWST/MIRI
(e.g., Banzatti et al. 2023; Grant et al. 2023, 2024; Romero-Mirza
et al. 2024; Colmenares et al. 2024; Vlasblom et al. 2025), and
particularly the large programmes MINDS and JDISCS (Henning
et al. 2024; Arulanantham et al. 2025). Flux ratio measurements
supported by astrochemical modelling can be used to determine the
C/Oratiooftheinnerdisc(Woitkeetal.2018;Andersonetal.2021),
which can have diverse compositions. Typically, inner discs around
solar-mass T Tauri stars are bright in water emission, while discs
around low-mass stars show hydrocarbon emission indicating high
C/O ratios (Grant et al. 2025; Arabhavi et al. 2025), which suggests
a trend across stellar masses. Solar-mass exceptions from this trend
include, e.g., the carbon-rich DoAr 33 (Colmenares et al. 2024),
which may be explained by an unusually low accretion rate and the
water-poor MY Lup (Salyk et al. 2025), which possibly results from
itshighinclination.Alternatively,thesecasescouldindicateunusual
chemical or physical conditions. The water emission appears to be
anti-correlated with the disc size and the presence of substructures
in the outer disc (Banzatti et al. 2023; Gasman et al. 2025b).
ThemaininterpretationofthevarietyoftheC/Oratiosobservedin
innerdiscsisthatthisisaresultofdustradialdrift(Najitaetal.2011,
2013; Banzatti et al. 2020, 2023; Krijt et al. 2025). Dust evolution
and drift models predict water-rich inner regions in compact discs
withuninterruptedpebbledrift,whereasdusttrapsofvariousorigins
can intercept the drift, resulting in a lower water content in the inner
disc and larger disc sizes (Kalyaan et al. 2021, 2023; Mah et al.
2024; Ndugu et al. 2024; Lienert et al. 2024; Easterwood et al.
2024).Theobservedtrendwithstellarmasscanalsobeattributedto
the effect of the drift being sensitive to the thermal structure: Mah
etal.(2023)showthatlow-massstarshavefastercarbonenrichment
due to closer in snowlines. However, not all compact discs follow
the hypothesis that their cold H2O reservoir is enhanced following
efficient radial drift (Temmink et al. 2025). This suggests that some
additionalprocessesareatplay,affectingtheC/Obalanceintheinner
disc.Thiscouldbetheeffectofdustleakingfromthetrap(Stammler
etal.2023;Pinillaetal.2024;Huangetal.2025),orpossiblyaneffect
of chemical evolution. Recent modelling of dynamically evolving
discs with a more sophisticated surface chemistry model by Pacetti
etal.(2025)showedthatchemicalprocessescansignificantlychange
the disc composition at timescales longer than 2Myr and should be
considered simultaneously with dust evolution, and highlighted the
importance of initial composition and global ionisation rate. The
ionisation rate and stellar mass can also be key factors in carbon
enrichment of inner discs, particularly in the presence of dust traps
(Sellek & van Dishoeck 2025).
Chemical reactions change the composition of the disc at
timescales of∼1Myr (Eistrup et al. 2018), slower than typical
timescales of transport, particularly at higher levels of turbulence
(𝛼 >10 −3; Booth & Ilee 2019), which supports the applicability
of the freeze-out based models. Grain-surface reactions do typically
operate at timescales>1Myr (Eistrup et al. 2018; Bosman et al.
2018; Pacetti et al. 2025). However, cosmic-ray induced processes,
particularlydestructionofgas-phasemethaneandCOandtheircon-
version to less volatile species can proceed at shorter timescales of
a few 100kyrs (Eistrup et al. 2018; Price et al. 2020). Cosmic ray
ionisation is the main driver of chemistry in the midplanes of proto-
planetary discs (Aikawa et al. 1999), because it triggers reactions in
thediscmidplaneandiseventuallyresponsiblefortheprocessingof
theobservablemolecules(Cleevesetal.2013,2014b,2015;Schwarz
etal.2018;Aikawaetal.2021;Trapmanetal.2022;van’tHoffetal.
2022).Atthesametimemethaneisakeyspeciesnecessarytoobtain
carbon-rich gas in discs, being the only main carbon carrier in the
disc midplane whenC/O>1, and its initial abundance determines
howhightheC/Ocanbecome(Mahetal.2023;Hougeetal.2025b;
Sellek & van Dishoeck 2025). Therefore, its chemical destruction
can significantly alter the carbon enrichment of the inner disc. The
sensitivity of CO and CH4 chemical processing to the ionisation
rate can also affect the observed inner disc C/O ratio (Sellek & van
Dishoeck 2025).
In this paper, we investigate the chemical composition of a proto-
planetary disc midplane using a model that combines dust evolution
and transport with sophisticated gas-phase and surface chemistry.
Manyoftheobservedprotoplanetarydiscsareolderthan1Myr(e.g.,
Manara et al. 2023), thus their molecular compositions are likely
affected by chemical processes. As discussed above, ice-phase re-
actions and cosmic ray driven chemistry govern the abundances of
main carbon and oxygen bearing species at Myr timescales (Eistrup
et al. 2016; Bosman et al. 2018; Booth & Ilee 2019). Our goal is
to analyse the combined effect of chemical reactions and dust radial
drift on the composition of the inner regions of protoplanetary discs
at timescales up to 10Myr.
The paper is structured as follows. We describe the model in Sec-
tion 2 before separately considering the effects of chemistry in Sec-
tion 3.1 and dust drift in Section 3.2. Next, we consider their com-
bined effect on the inner disc composition in Section 3.3, in discs
with and without dust traps (Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.1, respectively).
After that, we consider the effect of the trap location in 3.4 and
of the ionisation rate in Section 3.5. Finally, we discuss the model
caveats and observational implications in Section 4 and summarise
our findings in Section 5.
2 METHODS
Inthepresentworkwesimulatechemicalevolutiontogetherwithdust
growthanddriftinaviscouslyevolvingdisc.Weuseanastrochemical
model with comprehensive treatment of surface chemistry by Walsh
etal.(2015)coupledtothemodelofviscousdiscevolutionadopting
a two-population approximation of dust growth as done in Booth &
Ilee(2019).ComparedtoBooth&Ilee(2019),thenetworkbyWalsh
et al. (2015) features more elaborate surface chemistry including
two-body surface reactions, photodissociation of ices and reactive
desorption. These reaction types are necessary to account for long-
term chemical processes on dust grains at Myr timescales. This is
the same chemical network also used in Bosman et al. (2018). We
exploredifferentefficienciesofradialdrift,considermodelswithand
without dust traps, and investigate the effect of chemical reactions
by varying incident cosmic ray ionisation rate and the contribution
from cosmic ray induced dissociation of ices.
2.1 Gas and dust evolution
We adopt the viscous evolution code by Booth et al. (2017) that
solves the equation by Lynden-Bell & Pringle (1974) for multi-fluid
gas consisting of multiple gas and dust components. The code uses
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

C/O in the inner discs3
the classic𝛼parametrisation of viscosity𝜈=𝛼𝑐 s𝐻, with sound
speed,𝑐 s,andlocaldiscscaleheight,𝐻(Shakura&Sunyaev1973).
Inthisworkweuseadefaultvalueof𝛼=10 −3.Initially,thesurface
density radial profile is a tapered power law with an exponent of
−1, a characteristic radius of 100au, and has an initial gas mass of
0.01𝑀 ⊙. The central star has solar mass, an effective temperature
of4000K and a radius of2.5𝑅 ⊙. The midplane temperature𝑇(𝑅)
is determined by a combination of viscous and irradiative heating
following the prescription by Liu et al. (2019).
Dust evolution is described following the two-population model
two-pop-pyby Birnstiel et al. (2012). The initial mass fraction of
refractory grain cores (including the refractory carbon component,
and excluding ice mantles) is 0.0056 relative to the gas. This mass
fraction is determined by the adopted chemical composition (see
Section 2.2). The combined mass of dust and ice relative to the gas
used in the grain growth calculations is 0.012, close to the standard
ISM value of 0.01. The two populations of grains have different
dynamics: small grains have fixed size and are dynamically coupled
tothegas,whilelargergrainscangrowandmoverelativetogas,i.e.,
drift toward pressure maxima. The model analytically approximates
collisionalgrowthofdustgrainstotheirmaximumsizewheregrowth
is restricted by fragmentation or radial drift, depending on local
conditions. The ices frozen on dust are assumed to be distributed
such that all of the grains have the same ice mass fraction.
Fragmentationischaracterisedbythefragmentationvelocity𝑣 frag,
which in most of our models equals either 10 or 1m s−1 for icy and
non-icygrains,respectively.Thisvaluecorrespondstothedustgrains
being resilient to collisional fragmentation in most of the disc, thus
growing to larger sizes and efficiently drifting though the disc (fast
transport).Combinedwiththerelativelyhighvalueof𝛼=10 −3,such
resilientgrainsallowtoreproducedustemissioninmulti-wavelength
ALMA observations, as shown by Tong et al. (2026) using MAPS
sources(Öbergetal.2021;Sierraetal.2021),althoughtheAGE-PRO
data suggests that low turbulence and low fragmentation velocities
might be a better match for the dust emission (Luo et al. 2026).
Laboratory experiments and observational data tend to favour lower
values of𝑣 frag ≈1m s −1 (Gundlach et al. 2018; Musiolik & Wurm
2019; Jiang et al. 2024; Ueda et al. 2024). Using𝑣frag =1m s −1
in combination with weaker turbulence (𝛼=10−4) would produce
similar drift velocities, so we choose to use high values of𝛼=10−3
and𝑣 frag =10m s −1 and explore drift efficiency by varying𝑣frag.
To do that, we consider a model with𝑣frag =1m s −1 regardless of
the presence of ice mantles (slow transport), to analyse the effect of
chemistry in models with weak dust transport.
To add a dust trap to the disc, we introduce a planet of1𝑀Jup
at a fixed radial distance. This planet creates a perturbation in the
gassurfacedensity,modelledaccordingtotheprescriptionbyDuffell
(2020).Thegapinthegasdistributionresultsinapressuremaximum
exteriortotheplanetaryorbit,wheredustgrainsbecometrapped.For
a planet at 10au, the dust trap is formed at≈15au distance for the
adopted model parameters. The planet itself does not evolve in any
way, and its mass and location are solely employed to modify the
radial profile of𝛼multiplying it by a gap profile factor (see Duffell
2020, for details). The modified𝛼is used to calculate viscosity,
locally changing gas surface density and creating a pressure bump
wheredustcanbetrapped.Thediffusionrateandcollisionvelocities
betweendustgrainsthatregulatethemaximumdustsizealsodepend
on𝛼; for them the unchanged value of𝛼=10−3 is used.
The adopted two-population dust evolution model is an analytical
estimate of full dust evolution that was developed and optimised for
smooth discs (Birnstiel et al. 2012). Nevertheless, it has also been
used for modelling discs with substructures (Kalyaan et al. 2023;
Easterwood et al. 2024; Sellek et al. 2025; Sellek & van Dishoeck
2025). In their code comparison, Eriksson et al. (2026) recently
showedthattwo-pop-pydepletesthedustreservoirfasterandtraps
dust grains more efficiently than more sophisticated models. An-
other study by Houge et al. (2026) demonstrates that dust traps are
leakier, i.e. less efficient in blocking dust transport, than previously
thought.Toproperlycapturedustevolutionandtransportinthevicin-
ity of a planet-induced gap would require a better approximation of
dustfragmentationandcoagulationand3Dhydrodynamicmodelling
(Stammler & Birnstiel 2022; Van Clepper et al. 2025). We acknowl-
edge that the adopted treatment of dust evolution has caveats but
proceed to use it as an optimal option for combining with compu-
tationally heavy chemical simulations. We discuss these caveats in
Section 4.1.2.
We run the models up to a time of 10Myr. At this timescale,
the disc evolution should also be affected by photoevaporation. For
simplicity, in this work we neglect its contribution.
2.2 Chemical model
The chemical network in the Booth & Ilee (2019) model already
included a relatively large chemical network, but with only hy-
drogenation reactions on dust grain surface. We updated it to the
model by Walsh et al. (2015), which was also described by Eistrup
et al. (2016). The network is based on the Rate12 chemical net-
work(McElroyetal.2013)andcontainsmorecomplexgrainsurface
chemistry by Garrod et al. (2008). The network includes gas-phase
two-body reactions, photodissociation and photoionisation, ionisa-
tionbycosmic-raysandcosmic-ray-inducedphotonsandradioactive
nuclides.Transitionsbetweenthegasandtheicephasesaredescribed
byadsorptiontograinsurface,thermaldesorption,photo-desorption
by cosmic-ray induced photons, and reactive desorption of products
of surface chemistry. Reactions on dust grains are described by the
Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism, with H and H2 quantum tun-
nelling between binding sites and reaction barriers (see Walsh et al.
2015, for more details).
Because we focus on the disc midplane, photo-reactions by UV
irradiation, X-ray ionisation, Ly-𝛼photons, and reactions with ex-
cited H2 are not considered. We note that the ionisation by X-ray
inducedsecondaryphotonscanbehigherthanCRionisationevenin
themidplane,e.g.iftheemissionsourceishotterthan3×10 7K(see,
e.g., Figure 13 in Bruderer et al. 2009), but here we assume that this
is not the case and neglect its contribution. Ionisation is provided by
cosmic ray-induced photons (CRPHOT). The rates of the CRPHOT
reactions in the model are calculated following Gredel et al. (1989),
where interstellar dust size distribution and classic 0.01 dust-to-gas
mass ratio are adopted, not adjusted to the protoplanetary disc mid-
plane conditions. Cosmic ray attenuation is included following the
simpler approximation by Sano et al. (2000), with the attenuation
column of 96g cm−2. The default value of incident CR ionisation
rate is𝜁=10 −17 s−1, which we decrease or increase by an order of
magnitude in some models. We calculate the column in the vertical
direction only and include a factor of0.5to account for the CR flux
from both sides of the disc. We also add a residual ionisation rate
by radioactive nuclides with𝜁R =6.5×10 −19 s−1 (Semenov et al.
2004).
Surface chemistry is one of the key properties of the updated
model.Weadopttheefficiencyofreactivedesorptionequalto10%,
and the ratio between diffusion and binding energy equal to 0.3
(Karssemeijer&Cuppen2014;Minissale&Dulieu2014;Minissale
etal.2016).Thesurfaceareaofdustgrainsiscalculatedasthemean
surfaceareaofthedustensemblewithlocalminimumandmaximum
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

4Molyarova et al.
sizes and dust mass fraction, assuming the power law exponent of
−3.5.Themodeltreatssurfacechemistryinthetwo-phaseapproach,
without distinguishing between surface layers and the bulk of ice
mantles, unlike some other chemical models of molecular clouds
and protoplanetary discs (see, e.g., Hasegawa & Herbst 1993; Gar-
rod2013;Ruaud&Gorti2019;Borshcheva&Wiebe2022).Instead,
we assume that grain surface reactions are active only in the upper
two monolayers of the ice mantles, by applying an effective reduc-
tion factor to the rates of surface two-body reactions and desorption
reactions. However, no such factor is applied to the ice-phase reac-
tions with cosmic ray-induced photons, as high energy photons are
assumedtoeasilypassthroughiceandinducereactionsinthewhole
ice mantle.
High-energy cosmic ray induced photons can dissociate species
inside the bulk of ice mantles, as well as on the grain surface and
provide surface radicals responsible for the formation of complex
molecules on dust grains (Öberg et al. 2009a,b). In astrochemical
modelling, the rates of CRPHOT reactions for ice-phase species
are assumed to be the same as for the gas phase, implying that the
whole of the ice mantle is affected by the process (e.g., Garrod
et al. 2008). It can potentially lead to overestimation of their role in
surfacechemistry,astheproductsofthesereactionsinthemodelcan
subsequentlyparticipateinreactionsonthesurface,whenotherwise
theyshouldbelockedinthe bulk.Incontrastwiththesurfacewhere
species can move freely, the reaction products in the bulk diffuse
very slowly and might only be able to react with the immediately
nearbymolecules.Ourbaseline chemistrymodelsdonotincludethe
ice-phase reactions with cosmic-ray induced photons. We explore
theireffectwiththefull chemistrymodelsandvarytheircontribution
in Section 3.5.
In the dynamic disc model, gas- and ice-phase species are trans-
ported with the gas and dust components, respectively. Contribution
from ice mantles is included in both size and mass of dust grains,
assuming an average density of solids of 1g cm−3. The chemical
evolutionisacomputationallydemandingproblem,soweonlysolve
kineticequationeveryfewtransportsteps.Thetimestepforchemistry
is∼100yrinallmodels,whichcorrespondsto5dynamicstepsinthe
smoothdiscmodels.Intheregionsaroundtheouterdiscedge,where
thedust-to-gasmassratioandtemperatureareverylow(<10 −6 and
<15Krespectively),thesystemofrateequationsbecomesharderto
solve.Toavoidcomputationalproblems,weonlyconsideradsorption
and desorption of volatiles in these regions because the mobility of
species will be slow, and the surface area available for surface reac-
tionsislow.Thisregioncontains<1%totalgasmassbefore3Myrs.
At times>8Myr, this fraction grows above10%due to viscous
spreading of gas and dust depletion by radial drift. As the viscous
spreadingisdirectedoutwardsintheseregion,itscontributiontothe
disc chemical composition inside 100au is negligible.
The initial chemical composition is adopted from Mah et al.
(2023). It is based on the Solar elemental abundances from Asplund
et al. (2009) and assumes that the volatiles are initially in the ice
phase in form of simple molecular ices: CO, N2, CH4, CO2, NH3,
H2S,andH 2O.Therestoftheelements,includingrefractorycarbon,
is assumed to comprise the cores of dust grains, resulting in a dust-
to-gas mass ratio of 0.0056 without ices and 0.012 with ices. This
setting implies that the disc retains the composition of the parent
molecular cloud, which is supported by the detection of methanol in
discs around Herbig Ae/Be stars where its formation should be sup-
pressedduetohighertemperatures≳20KbecauseitformsfromCO
ice (Booth et al. 2021; Evans et al. 2025). The adopted composition
from Mah et al. (2023) has been debated as having too much CH4,
Chemistry Transport Dust trap CR ionisation
baseline / full no no𝜁=10 −17
freeze-out only fast no / at 15au𝜁=10 −17
baseline / full slow no𝜁=10 −17
baseline fast no / at 15au𝜁=10 −18 /10 −17 /10 −16
full fast at 15au𝜁=10 −18 /10 −17 /10 −16
full fast at 15au𝜁=10 −17,
𝐶iCR =10 −1 /10 −2 /10 −3
baseline / full fast at 7, 45, 100au𝜁=10 −17
baseline C fast no / at 15au𝜁=10 −17
Table 1.Considered model parameters. Transport regimes include models
with no gas or dust transport (no), with gas and dust transport and resilient
icygrains(𝑣 frag =10ms −1,fast),andwithfragileicygrains(𝑣 frag =1ms −1,
slow). The dust trap is either absent, or set at a specified radial distance.𝜁
(s−1) is the incident cosmic ray ionisation rate,𝐶iCR is the efficiency factor
for the cosmic-ray induced dissociation of ices (see Section 3.3.3).
which could affect the degree of chemical enrichment (Houge et al.
2025b). We discuss the caveats of this assumption in Section 4.1.3.
The C/O ratio in the inner disc can also be affected by the irre-
versibledestructionofthecarbonaceouscomponentofdustathigher
temperaturesduetooxydation,pyrolisisorotherchemicalprocesses
(Leeetal.2010;Gail&Trieloff2017;Weietal.2019).Thisprocess
can release additional carbon to the gas, which then can diffuse with
the gas and help sustain more C in the disc, saving it from accretion
to the star with solid grains and increasing the gas-phase C/O ratio
(Li et al. 2021; Penzlin et al. 2024; Houge et al. 2025b). To consider
this process in our model, we follow Houge et al. (2025b) and add
decomposition of refractory carbon at𝑇 >350K. Solid C, which
constitutes around 25% of solid refractory grain material (the rest
beingsilicatesandmetals),isturnedintoacetyleneC 2H2,whichcan
then react with other species in the gas phase, and diffuse with the
gas. We include this process in some of the models to constrain its
effect on the carbon and oxygen balance in the inner disc.
2.3 Models considered
Chemical reactions and dust transport are the main processes re-
distributing carbon and oxygen in the disc and affecting the C/O
ratios. We consider a set of models that covers different chemistry
anddriftregimestodisentangletheseeffects,andtheirpropertiesare
summarised in Table 1.
To remove the dynamical effects entirely, in Section 3.1 we con-
siderthe startingmodels withno gasordust transport(but withdust
growth)similartothemodelsbyEistrupetal.(2016).Thenwemove
on to our main set of models that have different transport regimes.
Models with a high fragmentation velocity for ice-covered grains
(𝑣 frag =10m s −1) have large grains and efficient dust drift (fast
transportmodels). To restrict dust transport, we set𝑣frag =1m s −1
for both icy and bare dust grains; this decreases the maximum dust
size and slows down the radial drift (slow transport). These models
are considered in Section 3.2. Another way to restrict dust transport
is to add a dust trap that will stop large grains from drifting all the
way to the star. We include a dust trap at 15au created by a Jupiter-
massplanetat10autoourfast transportmodels,andvarytheplanet
location in Section 3.4.
To assess the effect of chemistry, we consider thefreeze-out only
models, where no chemistry is active apart from adsorption and
thermal desorption. These models serve to distinguish the effects
of dust evolution and transport from the effects of chemistry and
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

C/O in the inner discs5
to validate our results against the predictions of other models. The
effectofchemistryisstudiedbasedonourbaseline chemistrymodels
with no ice-phase CRPHOT reactions. The contribution of these
reactions is varied in Section 3.5, and they are fully included infull
chemistrymodels that serve as an extreme case, where the effect is
most strongly manifested and likely overestimated. From a physics
point of view, this case corresponds to highly porous and fluffy dust
grains, that have large surface area-to-mass ratio (Okuzumi et al.
2009)andthereforealargerfractionofmantleparticipatinginsurface
reactions. The presence of such porous grains have been inferred in
protoplanetarydiscsbypolarisedscatteredlightobservations(Tazaki
etal.2019,2023).WevarytheincidentCRionisationratebyafactor
often(10 −18 and10 −16 s−1)tocontrolthecontributionofchemistry.
Additionally, we include carbon grain destruction in ourbaseline C
models and analyse its effect in Section 3.6.
3 RESULTS
3.1 Chemistry in discs with no radial transport
In the absence of gas or dust transport, the only way to change
gas- and ice-phase elemental abundances is provided by chemistry,
including freeze-out and desorption. We will first consider how the
abundances of main volatile species evolve due to chemistry in a
model with no viscous transport or dust radial drift. In this purely
chemical model with no transport we still account for the collisional
growth of dust grains; they reach a maximum size of∼0.1−1cm
within10 4 −10 5yrs in most of the disc.
Figure 1 shows radial distributions of main C- and O-bearing
species in the models with chemistry and no transport. Starting with
onlyH2O,CO2,COandCH 4,by0.1Myrchemistryalreadyproduces
a noticeable amount of new species containing carbon and oxygen.
ThisisduetocosmicrayionisationtriggeringdestructionofCOand
methane at distances of up to tens of au. CO is mainly dissociated
by He+ ions produced by CRPHOT ionisation, creating C+ and O.
Methane is destroyed by C+, as well as by He+. Both CO and CH4
additionally react with a suite of other ions (H+
3 , H+, N2H+ etc.),
and produce more complex ions (e.g. HCO+, C2H +
2 , C2H +
3 , CH+
5 ,
CH +
2 ,andCH +
3 ).Theseionscontinuetoreactandeventuallyeither
return carbon back to CO or CH4, or form more complex organic
species, such as C2H2, C2H4, C2H6, CH3CHCH2, CH3CCH, and
CH2CCH2. Since most of these new species have higher binding
energies with snowlines in the range of1−10au, they immediately
freezeout,transferringcarbonfromthegastotheicephase.Overall,
at𝑟 >10au, methane is destroyed an order of magnitude faster
than CO. CO2 is also dissociated by CRPHOT and He+, releasing
carbon and oxygen. Inside the CO2 snowline, the released atomic
oxygen is processed in gas-phase reactions into SO and SO2, also
producing small amounts of NO and N2O. The C+O species form
mostlyintheicephasefromthefrozenoutandprocessedproductsof
the gas-phase cosmic ray ionisation; the most abundant of them are
NH2CHO, OCS and H2CO, with some CH2CO, C3O and HCOOH.
Intheveryinnerdisc,collisionaldissociationandtwo-bodyreactions
inthegasphaseturnCO 2andCH 4intoCOandwater,themoststable
species at inner-disc temperatures and densities, as well as forming
some H2CS and HC3N.
By 3Myr, the amount of newly formed species increases. Their
abundancesrelativetoHnucleireach10 −6 −10 −5 andbecomecom-
parable with those of the primordial species. Between the water
and CO2 snowlines, CO2 is transformed into CO and complex or-
ganic molecules (COMs). Outside the CO2 snowline, CO turns into
CO2 ice via ice-phase reactions, and outside the CH4 and CO snow-
lines, methanol forms on the dust surface (Eistrup et al. 2016, 2018;
Bosmanetal.2018).Allotherorganicscontinuetoformat1−80au,
accumulating carbon and oxygen from the destruction of the main
volatiles.
By3−10Myr, the processing of the initial volatiles continues
both in the ice and in the gas. In the baseline chemistry model, all
gas-phase CO beyond 10au is converted to CO2, CH4 and COMs.
After≈7Myr, no major volatile remains in the gas phase beyond
the CO2 snowline, because they are all converted to more refractory
speciesandfrozenoutondustgrains,reducingthemetallicityofthe
gas by more than three orders of magnitude. Overall, the chemical
evolutionofthediscslowsdownafter3Myrs.However,thechemical
processingbefore3Myrisabletoaffecthowradialdriftredistributes
elements across the disc.
Among these processes, those that channel elements into species
with significantly different binding energies have the largest effect
on the C/O, as they affect the delivery of these species to the inner
disc regions. Carbon from volatile CH4 (𝐸b =1252K, snowline at
≈50au) converted to less volatile COMs (𝐸b ∼5000K, snowlines
at≈1−2au) will be more strongly affected by the radial drift, and
delivered to the inner disc much faster, together with water ice. As
was previously shown by other authors (Booth & Ilee 2019; Price
et al. 2020), conversion of CH4 to less volatile hydrocarbons can
lead to carbon enrichment of the inner disc due to dust radial drift.
Similarly, conversion of CO to methanol moves the elements to less
volatileCOMsaffectedbydusttransport,althoughkeepingthesame
C/O ratio. Finally, conversion of oxygen from water (𝐸b =4880K,
snowlineat≈1au)tomuchmorevolatileO 2 (𝐸b =898K,snowline
at>100au) in the full chemistry model will on the contrary make
some fraction of oxygen less affected by dust transport. Formation
of SO (𝐸b =1800K, snowline at≈15au) or SO 2 (𝐸b =3010K,
snowline at≈5au) should have a similar, but much weaker effect in
relation to the transport.
In the full chemistry model, water ice is additionally being de-
stroyed by CRPHOT dissociation, releasing oxygen in form of OH
radicals on the dust surface. This leads to more efficient conver-
sion of CO to CO2 ice and a higher abundance of methanol (C+O
species at>50au on the lower right panel of Figure 1), a higher
abundance of SO, and efficient formation of molecular oxygen and
H2O2 on dust. After 3Myr, CO gas survives thanks to its additional
production from CRPHOT dissociated water and organic ices. Wa-
ter ice is depleted by a factor of>3, and its oxygen is recycled into
CO2,SOandothermolecules.Similarchemicalevolutionofthemain
volatileswasdemonstratedbyEistrupetal.(2016)at1Myr(seetheir
Figures4andA.1).MorerecentmodellingbyPacettietal.(2025)us-
ing the same chemical network presented here demonstrates similar
trends regarding CH4 depletion, conversion between CO and CO2,
and the formation of carbon-rich organics at 3Myr (see their Fig-
ure 3c). Note that the model of Pacetti et al. (2025) includes erosion
ofcarbongrainsinside5au,whichsignificantlyaffectstheC/Oratio
and chemistry in this region. We exclude the effect of carbon grain
destruction from our main modelling and consider it in Section 3.6.
3.2 Effect of dust transport on the evolution of the C/O ratios
In this section, we look at the C/O ratios throughout the whole disc
and analyse their evolution due to the interplay between transport
and chemistry. We focus on smooth discs without dust traps here.
Gas and dust are subject to viscous disc evolution and diffusion,
and their efficiency is set by the value of𝛼=10−3. Dust is addi-
tionally affected by radial drift, the efficiency of which depends on
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

6Molyarova et al.
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
abundance (w.r.t. <H>)
0.1 Myr
no transport, baseline chemistry
H2O
CO2
CO
CH4
100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
abundance (w.r.t. <H>)
C species
C+O species
O species
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
abundance (w.r.t. <H>)
3.0 Myr
no transport, baseline chemistry
100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
abundance (w.r.t. <H>)
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
abundance (w.r.t. <H>)
3.0 Myr
no transport, full chemistry
100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
abundance (w.r.t. <H>)
Figure1.Abundances(w.r.t.Hnuclei)ofmainCandOcarriersinthebaselineandfullchemistrymodelswithouttransport.C speciesrepresentthecombination
ofallspeciescontainingcarbon,butnotoxygen;O speciesrepresentthespeciescontainingoxygen,butnotcarbon;C+O speciesrepresentthespeciescontaining
both carbon and oxygen. From all the grouped species, the initially present H2O, CO2, CO and CH4 are excluded. Solid lines represent ice-phase species, and
dashed lines represent gas-phase species.
the maximum dust grain size. Dust size is also sensitive to𝛼be-
cause that determines the collision velocity of dust grains, and to
the fragmentation threshold𝑣frag. Here we compare the evolution of
the C/O ratios in the models with baseline chemistry and different
transport regimes. We consider the model with no transport of dust
or gas (presented in Section 3.1), and models with both gas and dust
transport, fast and slow, regulated by𝑣frag (see Section 2.3).
To characterise the elemental composition of gas and ice, we use
theC/Oratiosasadiagnostic.Mostabundantmoleculesobservedin
protoplanetarydiscscontainC,Oorboth,andthevalueoftheC/Ora-
tioallowstodistinguishbetweencarbon-andoxygen-richchemistry
regimes. The C/O ratio in the gas (ice) phase is defined as the total
number of carbon atoms present in species in the gas (ice), divided
by the total number of oxygen atoms in these species. We calculate
the C/O ratios in the gas and in the ice at every radial distance and
show the evolution of their radial distributions in Figure 2.
In the model with no transport, the amount of C and O at a given
radialdistanceisfixed,sothechangesintheC/Oratiocanonlyarise
from conversion between ice and gas phase. Initially, the C/O ratio
has a step-like structure determined by snowlines (cf. Öberg et al.
2011b), and it evolves as the species are converted to each other.
Themainfeaturesofthismodelareoxygen-richgasintheinnerdisc
(inside the water snowline) and carbon-rich gas and oxygen-rich ice
in the outer disc. The gas-phase C/O ratio outside 10au (the CO2
snowline) is initially above 1, the gas composition being dominated
by CO and CH4. It decreases to1after≈1Myr, when methane
depletion removes carbon from the gas phase. Consequently, the
ice-phase C/O in the outer disc gradually increases from∼0.1to
the initial volatile ratio of0.29. By the age of≈8Myr, almost all
carbonandoxygenbeyond20auisremovedfromthegasbychemical
reactions.
TheadditionofdustandgastransportsignificantlyaffectstheC/O
ratio at all radial distances already at the age of∼0.1Myr. Water
ice brought inside 1au by pebble drift decreases the gas-phase C/O
ratio from 0.29 to0.21in the inner disc due to increasing oxygen
content there. Between the H2O and CO2 snowlines, the C/O in the
gasstartsas1,duetoequalinitialabundancesofCO 2 andCH 4,then
it decreases and approaches 0.5 due to CO2 enrichment. Similarly,
gas-phase C/O increases in a region just inside the CH4 snowline.
Accumulation of volatiles at the snowlines leads to additional peaks
in the C/O ratios both in the gas and in the ice (see, e.g., Booth et al.
2017). Unlike in the model with no transport, here the gas does not
become depleted of C and O inside≈200au even at later stages,
thanks to the continued influx of volatiles from the outer disc.
Thechoiceof𝑣 frag determinesthetimescaleatwhichtheresulting
C/O ratio distribution evolves. The slow dust transport model is
qualitatively very similar to the case without transport, until the age
of a few Myr. The most significant differences at these times are
achievedforthegas-phaseC/Oanddonotexceed∼30%.Inthefast
transportmodel,thevariationsintheC/Ocomparedtothemodelwith
notransportarestronger.Theevolutionisonlysimilarbefore1Myr;
afterthat,allthegasinthediscbecomesmorecarbonrich,including
in the inner 1au, and the C/O ratio in the ice also approaches 1 in
most of the disc. This is a result of pebble drift efficiently bringing
in more carbon-rich ices, including CO2 and hydrocarbons formed
from the products of CO and methane destruction. In the absence of
dusttraps,efficientradialdriftdepletesthediscofmostofitsoxygen
on timescales of≈3Myr.
Ultimately, it is the combination of chemical reactions and radial
drift that determines the C/O ratio distribution. In the freeze-out
only model (lower panels of Figure 2), the gas becomes much more
carbon rich at a few Myr, while the ice is still O-rich, except at the
snowlines of C-bearing species. Chemistry creates more complex
carbon-bearingspecies(e.g.,CH 2CHCCH,C 3O,C 2H6),particularly
in the ice, enriching the ice phase with carbon, increasing its C/O
ratio. It also facilitates carbon depletion of the disc as a whole,
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

C/O in the inner discs7
Figure2.EvolutionoftheradialdistributionsofC/Oratiosinthegas(left)andintheice(right).Modelswithnotransport,slowdusttransport(𝑣 frag =1ms −1)
and fast dust transport (𝑣frag =10m s −1) are shown, with baseline or freeze-out only chemistry. The regions where the total abundance of C and O in gas or ice
is lower that 0.001 of their initial total abundance are shown in white. The contours mark C/O values of 0.5, 1 and 2.
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

8Molyarova et al.
resultinginalowerC/Oratioofthegas(≈1vs>2inthefreeze-out
only model).
3.3 Gas-phase C/O ratio in the inner disc
Observations with JWST provide column densities of multiple
molecules in the inner disc, but we cannot directly compare them
with our modelling results. Emission of abundant molecules, partic-
ularlywater,istypicallyopticallythickandtracesthecompositionof
the upper layers (Woitke et al. 2018; Gasman et al. 2023). The com-
position can be relatively reliably characterised by column density
ratios (e.g., Walsh et al. 2015; Colmenares et al. 2024; Díaz-Berríos
et al. 2026). Our modelling simulates the midplane composition,
which is not directly traced by observations. However, it is likely
that the elemental abundances are vertically homogeneous, because
theturbulentmixingallowsefficientexchangeofmatterbetweenthe
midplaneandupperlayers,(see,e.g.,Colmenaresetal.2024;Houge
etal.2025a).Thiscanbeseenfromacomparisonbetweenthemixing
timescale𝑡 mixandaccretiontimescale𝑡 acc.Atagivendistance𝑅they
canbeassessedfromthelocalangularvelocityΩ,radialvelocity𝑣 𝑅
and gas scale height𝐻as
𝑡mix = 1
𝛼Ω < 𝑡 acc = 𝑅
𝑣 𝑅
∼ 𝑅2
𝛼𝑐s𝐻 = 𝑅2
𝛼ΩK𝐻2 =
 𝑅
𝐻
 2
𝑡mix (1)
Here we used the fact that𝑐s =𝐻Ω K, and the local mass accretion
rate ¤𝑀can be expressed either through gas velocity or𝛼-viscosity
¤𝑀=3𝜋𝛼𝑐 s𝐻Σgas =2𝜋𝑅𝑣 𝑅Σgas, whereΣ gas is gas surface density.
Asatypicalscaleheighttoradialdistanceratioisoftheorderof0.1,
mixing should proceed much faster than radial transport. Therefore
thecomparisonsbetweenbulkelementalratiosarelikelymoremean-
ingfulthanthoseofmolecularabundancesderivedfromourmodels,
becausethemolecularcompositionoftheupperlayersisadditionally
affected by photo-reactions (Anderson et al. 2021). Models includ-
ing both radial and vertical transport, as well as chemical evolution,
wouldbeusefultoproperlyassesstherelationbetweentheobserved
upper layers and the bulk chemical composition. Despite the un-
certainties in chemical models and emission of different molecules
coming from different vertical locations (Woitke et al. 2018), gas-
phase C/O ratios in the inner disc can be inferred from flux ratios of
particularmolecules(Andersonetal.2021),e.g.,theHCN/H 2Oratio
hasbeenshowntobecorrelatedwiththeC/Oratio(Najitaetal.2011,
2013).ThermochemicalmodellingshowsthatobservationsofC 2H2
and larger hydrocarbons with JWST is evidence for bulkC/O>1
(Kanwar et al. 2024; Arabhavi et al. 2025).
We adopt 1au as a dividing distance between the inner and the
outer disc. Analysis of JWST observations of molecules in the inner
disc also suggests that emission is coming from a region of approxi-
mately 1au size (Banzatti et al. 2023; Gasman et al. 2023; Pontopp-
idanetal.2024;Romero-Mirzaetal.2024;Salyketal.2025;Sellek
& van Dishoeck 2025). This is also the approximate location of the
watersnowlineinourmodel.Insidethisdistance,mostmoleculesare
in the gas, except for the most refractory organic species. The initial
C/Oratiofortheadoptedcompositionis0.55intotal,and0.29forthe
volatiles, i.e. excluding the dust-grain cores (silicates and refractory
carbon). In this work, we only consider the volatile species, without
taking into account the composition of dust-grain cores that subli-
mate at significantly higher temperature. The gas-phase C/O in the
innerdiscisclosetothetotalvolatileC/Oratio,exceptforthecaseof
active carbon grain destruction, which is considered in Section 3.6.
Figure 3 shows how the chemical composition of the inner disc
evolves in models with different chemistry regimes, with or without
dusttraps.Intheupperpanels,weshowtheintegratedgas-phaseC/O
ratiointheinner1auastheobservationallyrelevantparameter.Then
we plot the metallicity of this gas, i.e. the C/H and O/H elemental
ratios that shape the C/O ratio in this region. To demonstrate the
contribution of different gas-phase volatiles, we show the masses
of the initially present species H2O, CO2, CO and CH4, and the
newlyformedcarbon-andoxygen-bearingspeciesinseparatepanels.
“C species” include various hydrocarbons that contain no oxygen,
suchasC nHm,H2CS,etc.“C+Ospecies”mostlycompriseO-bearing
COMs, such as CH3CHO, CH3OH, HCOOCH3, CH2OHCHO, as
well as some simpler species, such as H2CO. “O species” refer to
oxygen-bearingmoleculescontainingnocarbon,includingSO,SO 2,
O2,aswellasNO,NH 2OHandotherN-bearingspecies.Theinitially
presentmolecules(CO,CH 4,CO 2andH 2O)areexcludedfromthese
groups. Finally, in the lower panels of Figure 3, we demonstrate
the masses of the ice-phase species in the inner 2au. They are not
included in the inner disc C/O ratio, but they show the composition
ofthevolatilesarrivingtotheinner1auintheformoficeondrifting
dust grains. We analyse these results in the following sections for
models with and without (i.e. smooth disc) dust traps.
3.3.1 Smooth discs
In the freeze-out models, H2O, CO2, CO and CH4 are the only
carbon-oroxygen-bearingvolatiles.Withintheinitial∼100kyr,the
C/Ointheinnerdiscdecreases,aswaterarrivestotheinnerdiscwith
drifting pebbles. More volatile CO2 has the snowline farther from
the star, at≈10au, and the excess CO2 arrives later, when the water
reservoir already starts to be exhausted, leading to an increase in the
C/Oratio.Afterthat,carbon-richmaterialandevenmorevolatileCO
and CH4 arrive in the inner disc, causing the C/O to increase above
unity at≳3Myr. This sequence of volatile enrichment by pebble
drift is similar to what was reported in the previous studies (Booth
et al. 2017; Kalyaan et al. 2021, 2023; Mah et al. 2023, 2024).
During the first≈2Myr, the inclusion of chemistry leads to a
slight increase in the inner disc C/O ratio in the model without dust
traps(leftpanelsofFigure3).Withchemistry,lessvolatileC-andO-
carriers are formed all over the disc, and they reside predominantly
in the ice phase, as described in Section 3.3. These new species
continue to chemically evolve as they are being delivered with dust
grains to the inner disc, where they are sublimated to the gas, and
chemically reprocessed mainly to CO. This increases the C/H ratio
at early times (≲0.5Myr), but the C/O remains close to zero, as the
composition is dominated by the pre-existing species such as water,
CO and CO2. This is consistent with earlier studies concluding that
at moderate turbulence and ionisation rate, dust drift has a more
significant effect on chemical composition than chemical reactions
which have a longer timescale (Booth & Ilee 2019; Eistrup et al.
2018).
At≈1Myr, water ceases to be the dominant volatile in the disc.
After dust drift depletes the disc of H2O, ices become carbon-rich
(see the third row of panels in Figure 2). This carbon enrichment of
models with chemistry relative to freeze-out only models is caused
by the cosmic ray-induced destruction of methane and to a lesser
extent, CO, in the outer disc regions, followed by the formation of
more complex molecules. The species formed at10−100au that
inherit the carbon from CH4 and CO include a variety of C species
and C+O species (see Section 3.1). An important source of oxygen
in the inner disc is presented by O species draining oxygen from
water and CO2. They are dominated by SO1 and other S-bearing
1 Unlike in the cold interstellar environment, SO in protoplanetary discs is
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

C/O in the inner discs9
Figure 3.Evolution of integrated masses of main gas-phase volatiles and C/O ratios in the inner disc in the models with fast transport (𝑣frag =10m s −1).
Models with baseline chemistry, freeze-out only, and full chemistry are marked by solid, dotted, and dashed lines, respectively. Left: smooth disc (no dust trap),
Right: planet-induced dust trap at 15au. Purple, lavender, and cyan lines show cumulative amount of groups of species: C species, C+O species, and O species,
respectively. O2 is included in O species. Transparent dotted lines mark the reference levels: 1 and 0.29 (initial value) for the C/O ratio, and solar values for the
C/H (green) and O/H (purple) ratios.
molecules forming from H2S, which is initially the only S-bearing
specieswithaninitialabundanceof1.32×10 −5 relativetoHnuclei.
This initial abundance implies that all the available sulphur is in the
volatile reactive form. However, there is observational evidence that
most of sulphur in protoplanetary discs is stored in some refractory
form(Kamaetal.2019),andotherdiscmodelsassumelowersulphur
notnecessarilyassociatedwithshocks.Attemperaturesabove≈50K,itstays
in the gas phase and in combination with CS can be used as a tracer of C/O
ratio (Le Gal et al. 2021).
abundances to account for this depletion (e.g., Aikawa et al. 2002;
Dutreyetal.2011;LeGaletal.2019).Uponarrivaltotheinnerdisc,
morespeciesareformed,suchasH 2CS,C 9H2,NH 2CHO,CH 3CCH,
SO2.
After≈3Myr, the inner disc composition changes qualitatively.
Inthefreeze-outonlymodeltheC/Oratiocontinuestogrowabove1
asmethanestartstoarriveintheinnerdisc,enrichingitwithcarbon.
At the same time, in the baseline chemistry models, the C/O ratio is
still around 0.7, slowly approaching 1 by 6Myr. In the models with
chemistry, the methane delivery does not happen, as the methane no
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

10Molyarova et al.
longer exists; instead, the delivery of carbon and oxygen to the inner
disc is dominated by gas-phase CO, with minor contributions from
methanol and other COMs.
The transformation of molecules within 1au does not affect the
C/Oratio,althoughitaffectsthemolecularcomposition.Particularly,
at𝑇 >700K (inside 0.3au) collisional dissociation and two-body
reactions in the gas phase destroy CO2 and HCN, as well as newly
formed hydrocarbons and COMs. Products of these reactions form
other molecules, mostly CO, CH4, H2O, and a variety of C species
which are the most stable at these densities and temperatures. De-
struction of refractory organics at high temperatures could release
additionalcarbonfromthedust-graincoresandcontributetotheC/O
ratio in the gas in this inner region (e.g., Penzlin et al. 2024; Houge
et al. 2025b). We consider this effect in Section 3.6.
In a smooth disc without dust traps, the inner disc composition
in the baseline chemistry models is very similar to the full chem-
istry models (which include cosmic ray photo-processing of ices).
AsshowninFigure1,oneofthemaineffectsoffullchemistryisthe
dissociationofwaterthatreleasessomeoxygenintootherO-bearing
species. In the full chemistry model, more O-rich species with bind-
ing energies lower than water are formed, such as SO and SO2. This
leads to more oxygen retained in the gas phase, and thus less oxygen
lost due to rapid dust transport. Overall, it results in a slightly more
oxygen-rich disc and marginally lower gas-phase C/O ratios in the
inner disc.
3.3.2 Discs with a dust trap
Theinclusionofadusttrappreventspebblesfromreachingtheinner
disc, reducing the delivery of ices. The evolution of the gas-phase
C/O ratio and the main volatile components in the models with a
dust trap at 15au is shown in the right panels of Figure 3. Among
the initially present species, the dust trap interrupts the delivery of
water and CO2, but does not affect the more volatile CO and CH4.
ThisleadstoearliergrowthoftheC/Oratiocomparedtothesmooth
disc models. A dust trap situated inside the CO and CH4 snowlines
butoutsidetheH 2OandCO 2 snowlinessuppressesoxygentransport
by pebbles, favouring carbon-rich inner discs, which leads to higher
maximumvaluesoftheC/Oachievedearlierinallchemicalregimes,
compared to the case with no trap. Evolution of radial C/O ratio
distributions in models with dust traps is shown in Appendix A.
In models with chemical reactions, the transport of complex or-
ganics formed from the products of methane destruction is also in-
terruptedbythedusttrap,andmostofthecarbonfrombeyond15au
never reaches the inner disc. After≈1Myr, when dust radial drift
depletes the region interior to the trap of most of its solid-phase
volatile content, carbon enrichment of the inner disc stops, and the
C/O ratio cannot achieve values of>1. CO becomes the dominant
volatile among C- and O-bearing species in both the freeze-out only
and baseline chemistry models.
Inthefullchemistrymodel,cosmic-rayinducedphoto-processing
oficesinthedusttrapleadstoaqualitativelydifferentpicture,which
is discussed in Section 3.3.3. The C/O ratio in the inner disc sharply
decreasesto≈0.25at>2Myr.Thedecreaseiscausedbyadditional
enrichment of the inner disc with molecular oxygen formed in the
dust trap in a reaction sequence triggered by cosmic ray induced
photo-reactions in the ice phase (see Appendix B for details). As a
result, after 2Myr, O2 and CO become the most abundant volatiles
intheinner1auinthismodel.Intheveryinnerregion(inside0.3au)
thesemoleculesarethermallyreprocessedinthegas-phase,forming
water and CO2.
Figure4.C/Oratiointheinnerdiscregionsinthefullchemistrymodelswith
different efficiencies of cosmic ray induced dissociation of ices.
3.3.3 Full chemistry in a dust trap
In the full chemistry model, water ice in a dust trap at 15au can be
dissociatedtoformthehydroxylradicalOH,whichreactswithother
surface species, eventually producing O2 ice (see Appendix B and
Eistrup et al. 2018). The binding energy of O2 (892K, comparable
to CO, 855K) is too low for it to stay on dust surface at 15au
(≈53K), so it immediately escapes to the gas phase, where it is
insteadbeingadvectedwiththegasandcanreachinnerdiscregions.
This mechanism provides a way to release the trapped oxygen and
deliverittotheinnerdisc.ThesameO 2 formationisalsohappening
in the smooth disc with no traps in the full chemistry model, but
it is too slow to make a big difference when transport is accounted
for. We do not see any additional O2 in the inner disc (left panels of
Figure3).Withfreelydriftingpebbles,thesereactionsaremuchless
efficient,asthiswatericereservoirisspreadthroughoutthediscand
quickly depleted by radial drift.
Thepotentialforefficientoxygenproductioninthedusttrapmakes
our predictions for the C/O ratio in the inner disc particularly sensi-
tivetotheefficiencyofcosmicrayinducedphoto-reactionsintheice
phase. Due to the limitations of the two-phase approach to surface
chemistry in the model, the full chemistry model is likely overesti-
mating their contribution, while the baseline chemistry model may
underestimateit(seediscussioninSection4.3andAppendixB).We
tested models with different efficiency factors for these reactions, by
multiplyingtheirratesbya𝐶 iCR factor.𝐶 iCR =1correspondstofull
chemistry, and𝐶iCR =0corresponds to baseline chemistry models.
Wetestintermediatevaluesof𝐶 iCR =10 −3,10 −2 and10 −1 thatcor-
respondtodifferentlevelofinvolvementthatthespeciesproducedin
thebulkmantlecanhaveinsurfacechemistry.Giventhatthetypical
thickness of ice mantles is around102 −10 3 monolayers assuming
compact spherical grains,𝐶iCR =10 −3 −10 −2 would imply that the
reaction products from the bulk of ice mantle have no access to sur-
face chemistry, while at𝐶iCR =10 −2 −10 −1 they would partially
diffuse to the surface or be close enough to each other to react in the
bulk. The𝐶 iCR coefficient can also be interpreted as a measure of
inhomogeneity of dust grain surface, with𝐶iCR =1corresponding
to a fractal and porous ice mantle structure.
The simulated C/O ratios in the inner disc at different values of
𝐶iCR areshowninFigure4.Atreductionfactorsof𝐶 iCR =10 −3 and
10−2, the C/O ratio in the inner disc is marginally lower than in the
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

C/O in the inner discs11
Figure5.Gas-phaseC/Oratiosintheinnerdiscinmodelswithbaselineand
full chemistry and different locations of the dust trap.
baselinechemistrymodel,andsignificantoxygenenrichmentisonly
seeninthe𝐶 iCR =10 −1 case.Theamountofoxygenthatreachesthe
inner disc at 5Myr is roughly proportional to𝐶iCR, leading to the
correspondingchangeintheC/Oratio.ForsignificantO 2 production
and qualitatively lower C/O ratios, about 10% of the dissociation
products in the ice mantle should be able to take part in surface
chemistry.
3.4 Efficiency of radial drift and the location of the dust trap
To test the effect of the dust trap’s location, we put the planet at 5,
30, and 70au from the star, resulting in a dust trap at 7, 45, and
100au,respectively,versusthetrapat15auinthemaingapmodels.
The inner disc C/O ratios for different trap locations are shown in
Figure 5.
The location of the dust trap has the most significant effect on
the C/O ratios before≈1Myr when pebble flux is the highest,
as it affects the timing and the degree of oxygen delivery. As was
previously demonstrated by Kalyaan et al. (2021) and Easterwood
et al. (2024), a trap located further away from the star results in
longer and stronger water enrichment of the inner disc. We note that
modelling with more sophisticated models (e.g.DustPy; Stammler
& Birnstiel 2022), shows lower leakiness intwo-pop-py, which
could weaken these effects (Houge et al. 2026). After 1Myr, the
baselinechemistrymodelsaremoresimilar,withthemostnoticeable
differencesinthemodelswiththetrapat7and100au.Thedusttrap
at 7au is within the CO2 snowline, so it does not interrupt the influx
ofCO 2 totheinnerdisc,makingtheC/Oratiocloserto0.5.Thetrap
at 100au is beyond both the CO and CH4 snowlines, so it blocks the
delivery of CO and CH4 ices via pebble drift. However, only about
a third of the disc material is beyond 100au, which makes this case
qualitatively similar to the model with no traps.
Withfullchemistry,formationofO 2inthedusttrapandthesubse-
quentoxygenenrichmentoftheinnerdiscarealsoaffectedbythetrap
location:itisonlyefficientinmodelswithadusttrapatintermediate
distances (15 and 45au). A close in dust trap (7au) produces a sub-
stantialamountofmolecularoxygenafter7Myr,slightlydecreasing
the C/O ratio of the inner disc to≈0.6. With the trap at 100au, the
innerdiscenrichmentdoesnothappenwithin10Myr,withC/Oratio
staying around unity at later times. However, some amount of O2 is
still produced in all full chemistry models with dust traps. Potential
observational constraints on the efficiency of dissociation of ices by
cosmic ray induced photons is discussed in Section 4.3.
3.5 Ionisation rate
Cosmicrayionisationisthemaindriverofchemicalevolutioninthe
disc midplane. The incident cosmic ray ionisation rate is not very
well known for protoplanetary discs, and it may vary between star
formingregionsandduetothelocalcircumstellarenvironment.The
availableconstraintsreportvaluesbothlower(10 −19 s−1Cleevesetal.
2015)andhigher(upto0.5−1×10 −16 s−1,Dalgarno2006;Aikawa
et al. 2021) than the universally assumed value for local interstellar
clouds of1.3×10 −17 s−1. The model of cosmic ray propagation in
circumstellar discs by Padovani et al. (2018) provides even higher
cosmic ray ionisation rates.
The left panel of Figure 6 demonstrates the effect of different CR
ionisation rates in models with baseline chemistry. At lower𝜁, the
evolution is similar to the freeze-out case both with and without the
trap. The dissociation of methane is less efficient, leading to later
enrichment of the inner disc with carbon-bearing species. At low
cosmic ray ionisation, the effect of chemistry is minor, in agreement
withpreviousfindings(Booth&Ilee2019).However,themaximum
reached C/O value is sensitive to the initial abundance of methane,
whichisrelativelyhighintheinitialcompositionweadopthere(see
Mah et al. 2023; Houge et al. 2025b).
Athigh𝜁=10 −16 s−1,thedestructionofmethaneismoreefficient
and starts affecting C/O ratios earlier, at a few kyr timescale. By
1Myr, the carbon-rich material is already mostly lost to accretion,
while CO2 is still abundant, which results in a C/O ratio below 1.
After 6Myr, the C/O ratio sharply decreases due to destruction of
CO in the gas-phase, leaving water and the rest of COMs as main
carriers of carbon and oxygen. This destruction also happens in the
fiducial model, but less efficiently before 10Myr.
ThisresultisqualitativelydifferenttotheconclusionsofSellek&
van Dishoeck (2025), who found that a high ionisation rate leads to
more carbon enrichment of the inner disc. This different conclusion
comes from the differences in the chemical networks. The main
process responsible for carbon enrichment in the models of Sellek
& van Dishoeck (2025) is the conversion of CO to CH4 through
reactionsoftheC +releasedfromCOwithmolecularhydrogen.Inour
model,inadditiontomethaneproduction,C +destroysCH4,typically
at a faster rate than it is produced, until the methane abundance
becomes very low (∼10−7). This complements the CH4 destruction
pathway from direct CRPHOT dissociation, which Sellek & van
Dishoeck (2025) consider in a subset of their models. As a result,
in our model, methane production from C+ is a factor of a few less
efficient than its destruction. Since both formation and destruction
of CH4 are triggered by the same C+ ions, we see faster methane
destruction at high ionisation rates. Overall, our model predicts net
destructionofCH 4viaC+,whilethemodelofSellek&vanDishoeck
(2025) predicts net production. Thus, a high ionisation rate leads to
more efficient CH4 production in their model, creating the opposite
trend with𝜁. The chemistry of methane as the main primordial
carbon-dominated volatile plays a crucial role in the inner and outer
disc composition and is very sensitive to the ionisation rate. The
global results of chemical modelling are determined by the main
production and destruction routes included in the reaction network.
Forthemodelswithfullchemistry,wealsofindthattheC/Oratios
in the inner disc are lower at higher𝜁(see right panel of Figure 6).
The formation of O2 also depends on the CR ionisation rate, which
leads to more oxygen enrichment and an earlier decrease in the C/O
ratio at higher ionisation rate. As in the baseline chemistry models,
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

12Molyarova et al.
Figure 6.C/O ratio in the inner disc regions in models with different cosmic ray ionisation rates. Left panel shows baseline chemistry models compared with
the freeze-out model (black), with (solid lines) and without (dot dashed lines) dust traps. Right panel shows the baseline (solid lines) and full (dashed lines)
chemistry models with a dust trap at 15au.
a high𝜁also leads to more methane destruction and consequently
weak late carbon enrichment, as well as additional CO destruction
after 6Myr.
3.6 Carbon grain destruction
Gasintheinnerdiscregionscanbeadditionallyenrichedincarbonif
therefractorycarbonfromsoliddustgrainsischemicallyprocessed.
Normally,amorphouscarbonwouldsublimateattemperaturesabove
1000K,butdustgrainscontainmultiplechemicallydiversecarbona-
ceous components, that could be transferred to the gas at different
temperatures(Gail&Trieloff2017).Pathwaysincludepyrolysis(i.e.
thermal decomposition in the absence of oxygen) of refractory or-
ganic material at300−500K (Nakano et al. 2003; Gail & Trieloff
2017),destructionbyOandOHatomsathightemperaturesandUV
radiationfield(Gail2002;Leeetal.2010;Weietal.2019).Basedon
thedatafromSolarSystemcomets,asignificantfractionofcarbonin
the ISM should be present in the dust component (Fomenkova et al.
1994;Gail&Trieloff2017).Thisamountofadditionalcarboncould
contributetohighC/Oratiosintheinnerdiscregions(Lietal.2021;
Penzlinetal.2024;Hougeetal.2025b).Animportantaspectofthis
process its irreversibility: once released, the carbon from grains is
transformedintoamorevolatilespeciesthatwouldcondenseonlyat
much lower temperature.
As was recently shown by Houge et al. (2025b), the contribution
fromcarbongraindestructioncanincreasetheC/Oratiointheinner
disc.Totestthesensitivityofourresultstocarbongraindestruction,
we add this process to the model, following the approach of Houge
et al. (2025b). In our initial abundances, 60% of all elementary
carbon is hidden in the dust grains. In the models with carbon grain
destruction,allthiscarbonisreleasedinstantaneouslyattemperatures
>350K, forming acetylene C2H2. The choice of a relatively low
valueofthecriticaltemperatureandtheamountofcarbondestroyed
atthistemperature(alltherefractorycarbon)shouldprovideuswith
an upper limit on the expected effect of carbon grain destruction.
However, some models include destruction of solid carbon at even
lowertemperatures,e.g.,Pacettietal.(2025).Forayoungsolarmass
star, 350K is achieved at≈0.5au from the star, well inside the
considered inner disc region.
The choice of acetylene as the product is also arbitrary, as the
100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 8
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
abundance (w.r.t. <H>)
baseline chemistry & C destruction 0.1 Myr
CO C2H2 C species C grains
100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 8
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
abundance (w.r.t. <H>)
baseline chemistry & C destruction 1.0 Myr
CO C2H2 C species C grains
Figure 7.Radial distribution of abundances of some carbon-bearing species
in the models with no dust trap and baseline C chemistry (with carbon grain
destruction), at 0.1 and 1Myr. The thick transparent lines refer to the same
model without carbon grain destruction. “C grains” denotes the abundance
ofelementalcarboninsidethedustgrains.AcetyleneC 2H2 isincludedinthe
C species.
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

C/O in the inner discs13
Figure8.Gas-phaseC/Oratiosintheinnerdiscforbaselinechemistrymodels
with no dust trap, with and without carbon grain destruction.
process could release C+, CH4, or other more complex molecules.
The choice of the product of carbon grain destruction could affect
the composition of the carbon-bearing species forming in the inner
disc, which should be considered in a separate study. However, this
process is mostly relevant for the very inner disc (<0.5au), well
inside the considered 1au region. The particular composition of the
products should not significantly affect the total carbon and oxygen
balance in the inner disc, as most of the products will not be able to
escapethisregionthroughdiffusionorviscousspreading.Wedonot
expect the gas-phase C/O ratio in the inner region to be sensitive to
the choice of the product of carbon grain destruction.
Figure 7 shows the radial distribution of the carbon locked in
the grains and released to the gas phase. The inclusion of carbon
grain destruction releases acetylene inside 0.5au, followed by its
outwarddiffusionandtransformationtootherspecies.Inside≈0.3au
it chemically transforms to CO and other carbon-bearing species
(with CO2 and CH4 abundances insensitive to the increase in the
acetylene abundance). At 0.1Myr, this additional acetylene is more
abundant than CO in the inner disc, and contributes a lot to the
carbon-oxygen balance. At 1Myr, the dust is already depleted by
1−2orders of magnitude, and the contribution from solid carbon
is relatively small. C2H2 does spread outwards, but unlike in Houge
et al. (2025b), in our model it does not reach the location of the
acetylene snowline before the dust reservoir is depleted, therefore,
the released carbon is not conserved in the disc. One of the reasons
is a slightly different sublimation temperature of C2H2: we adopt
the binding energy of2090K (Collings et al. 2004; Penteado et al.
2017), which corresponds to the freeze-out at≈60K, while Houge
et al. (2025b) assume that it freezes at 70K.
The main differencebetween our results and Houge etal. (2025b)
is largely due to our higher𝑣frag, which increases the rate of dust
transport and quickly depletes dust from the inner disc, weakening
theeffectofcarbonrelease.TheevolutionoftheinnerdiscC/Oratio
in models with and without carbon grain destruction is shown in
Figure 8. Before0.5−1Myr, the contribution from the destroyed
grains significantly elevates the C/O ratio inside 1au in the fast
drift model (𝑣frag =10m s −1). The amount of the excess carbon is
comparable to the amount of volatiles, particularly water, brought
from the outer disc by the radial drift. However, when the flux of
pebblesisexhausted,thecontributionofcarbongrainsbecomesless
significant. In the model with slow drift (𝑣frag =1m s −1), the effect
of carbon grain destruction is weaker at earlier times, but remains
significant at>1Myr age, increasing the C/O ratio by a factor of
≈2. At 2Myr, the dust-to-gas mass ratio inside 1au is still around
10−2, much higher than the value of10−4 in the fast drift case. The
inclusionofadusttrapwouldfurtherdecreasethedustmassfraction,
weakening the effect of carbon grain destruction.
We find that, in our fast drift models, carbon grain destruction is
onlyefficientinenrichingthegasincarbonattheearlierstages,while
thereisasignificantamountofinwardsdriftingdust.Itincreasesthe
minimum C/O in the inner disc achieved at a few kyr from<0.05
to≈0.2−0.3. After 1Myr its effect is minimal due to the loss of
mostdustintheinnerdisc.ItdoesnothelptoincreaseC/Oratioina
few Myr old protoplanetary discs, assuming dust growth is efficient
(high𝑣 frag, fast dust transport). In the case of a smaller average dust
size, the effect is more significant, as e.g. in Houge et al. (2025b).
4 DISCUSSION
4.1 Effects on the inner disc C/O due to dust drift, chemistry,
and dust traps
JWST observations probe the C/O ratio of the inner discs in a range
of objects from different star forming regions, with and without
substructures, around very low to intermediate mass stars (Banzatti
et al. 2023; Grant et al. 2023; Colmenares et al. 2024; Henning
et al. 2024; Romero-Mirza et al. 2024; Arulanantham et al. 2025;
Cugno & Grant 2025; Long et al. 2025; Kaeufer et al. 2026). To
observationally test the predictions of our modelling, we need to
look at discs at a population level across different ages. Our results
suggest that radial drift will have the major effect on the inner disc
elemental composition, with chemistry being important for discs on
longer than Myr timescales.
The contribution of chemistry to the inner disc composition de-
pends on whether dust transport is efficient or not. We consider a
constant value of𝛼=10 −3, while lower values could be present
in discs. At lower𝛼, dust can grow to larger sizes and drift faster,
increasing the role of transport and leaving chemistry less time to
change the composition of ices (Booth & Ilee 2019). At lower tur-
bulence, the flux of pebbles is stronger but exhausts the dust source
faster (Mah et al. 2024; Houge et al. 2025b). Another uncertain
parameter is the dust fragmentation velocity. At values lower than
the adopted10m s −1, the growth will be restricted, weakening the
transport. With less efficient radial drift, the enrichment of the inner
disc with volatiles is expected to happen later and be weaker. The
observed composition of the inner disc could inform us about the
efficiencyofradialdrift:forexample,observinglowC/Ointheinner
discs of∼Myr old objects could indicate slower transport.
Theearlychemicalprocessingofmethanehastwomainoutcomes
thatsignificantlychangethepreviousunderstandingofvolatiletrans-
port with pebbles. The lack of carbon-rich gas in the outer disc pre-
vents late carbon enrichment of the inner disc, meaning a maximum
C/O of 1 at a few Myr age. The solid carbon is locked in a dust trap
as well as water, meaning that inner discs of old discs with traps are
expectedtobepoorincarbon,aswellasinoxygen.Next,weexpand
on the implications of these two ideas and speculate on alternative
ways to produce the observed high C/O ratios.
4.1.1 Late carbon enrichment prevented by chemical processing
PrevioussimulationsshowthathighC/Oratiointheinnerdisccanbe
achieved at older ages due to viscous spreading of carbon-rich gases
(COandparticularlyCH 4).Boothetal.(2017)andMahetal.(2023)
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

14Molyarova et al.
showed that more volatile species with far out snowlines are less
affected by radial drift and deliver their carbon at>Myrtimescales.
We find that chemical conversion of carbon-rich gas to carbon-rich
organic ice transported by pebble drift leads to early delivery of
carbon in smooth discs and ultimately prevents C/O reaching high
values(>1).Thisconversionisdrivenbycosmic-rayionisation,and
for ionization rates of𝜁 >10 −18 s−1 the inner disc C/O ratio stays
≈1at>Myrage,asCOremainsthemaincarboncarrier,whileCH 4
is destroyed. JWST surveys of>5 Myrold discs in Upper Scorpius
(PID 2970, PI: I. Pascucci) indeed confirmC/O<1in the inner
discs, consistent with this prediction (Xie et al. 2026, in prep.).
Late carbon enrichment requires a high initial abundance of CH4
to achieveC/O>1. The CH4 abundance we adopt from Mah et al.
(2023) (50% of CO abundance) is relatively high, as discussed by
Houge et al. (2025b). In protostellar cores, the CH4 to CO ratio is
around15%(Öbergetal.2011a),similartotheSolarSystemcomets
whereitrangesfromafewpercenttocomparableamounts(Mumma
& Charnley 2011). Sellek & van Dishoeck (2025) proposed a way
to achieve higher methane abundances in the disc, based on the
formation of CH4 from CO and further carbon enrichment at later
stages derived from a phenomenological chemical model. We find
thattheinclusionofmorecomprehensivechemistryleadstoefficient
processing of CH4 into carbon-rich organic ices, thereby restricting
the C/O ratios in the inner disc to values around 1, as discussed in
Section 3.5. This highlights the importance of a more comprehen-
sive treatment of chemistry, including a full chemical network with
surface reactions.
Anotheruncertaintyconcernsthemethanebindingenergytowater
ice:ascalculatedbyBovolentaetal.(2022),itisbelow1000K,which
is lower than that of CO. In most astrophysical models, including
ours, a higher value of≈1100−1300K is adopted based on TPD
measurements(e.g.,Aikawaetal.1996;Eistrupetal.2016;Minissale
etal.2022).Thiscouldhaveamajoreffectonthetimingofmethane
products delivery to the inner disc in case of weak chemistry (𝜁⩽
10−18 s−1). With a lower binding energy, the C/O in the inner disc
would grow more slowly, but without decreasing at later stages, as
CH4 would be the last and most C-rich volatile to be delivered. At
higher ionisation rates (𝜁 >10−17 s−1), methane destruction before
1Myr makes this difference less significant, making it unlikely that
the C/O in the inner disc ever exceeds 1.
4.1.2 Chemical composition in the presence of a dust trap
Dust traps were previously shown to be efficient in blocking oxygen
delivery by trapping water (Kalyaan et al. 2021, 2023; Mah et al.
2024; Easterwood et al. 2024). Our results demonstrate that due
to chemical processing, carbon is also efficiently trapped, which
prevents C/O ratio increase in transition discs. Carbon-rich species
originate from beyond the trap and thus never reach the inner disc,
which also decreases its metallicity compared to smooth discs by
an order of magnitude after1−2Myr. Discs with dust traps retain
more dust and are typically brighter, implying the anticorrelation
between dust flux and the C/H ratio in the inner disc. However, if
CRPHOT dissociation of ices is efficient, an additional chemical
path appears for oxygen to escape the trap. In this case, the inner
disc becomes oxygen-rich: it has super-solar metallicity and a low
C/O ratio. Chemical reactions also provide a way to form CO that
can subsequently escape the trap, but with a lower efficiency (see
Appendix B).
Similar effects can be produced by leaky dust traps, which pro-
vide a way for dust grains and their ice mantles to escape the trap
and reach the inner disc (Stammler et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2025;
Sierra et al. 2025). As discussed by Houge et al. (2026), dust traps
at>5auproduceoxygen-richinnerdiscswithC/O<1withoutany
chemical processing, if dust evolution is modelled with a full dust
sizedistributioncodeaccuratelycapturingcoagulationandfragmen-
tation.Oursimulationsthereforeshouldunderestimatetheamountof
carbon and oxygen escaping the trap with small grains produced in
collisions. This process should be able to balance the overestimated
oxygenproductioninourmodeltosomedegree.However,hydrocar-
bon ices would also be able to escape with leaking grains, adding
carbon to the inner disc.
4.1.3 Perspectives ofC/O>1in the inner disc
JWST observations findC/O>1in the inner discs of a variety of
protoplanetary discs. Carbon-rich chemistry is found to dominate
around lower-mass stars (Arabhavi et al. 2025; Grant et al. 2025),
down to planetary-mass objects (Cugno & Grant 2025). However,
C/O>1was detected in discs around some solar-mass objects
that have low accretion rates as well (Colmenares et al. 2024; Volz
et al. 2025). If carbon-rich gas is destroyed by chemical processing
as suggested here, alternative carbon enrichment mechanisms are
necessary to explain the observations.
In the presence of active chemistry, achieving high C/O ratio val-
ues is not straightforward. Our modelling predicts the inner disc
C/O typically around 1 for a few Myr old objects, ranging from
0.7−1.7depending on𝜁. A C/O noticeably above 1 can only be
produced in low CR environments and when cosmic-ray-induced
photo-dissociation of ices is not included, provided that the initial
methane abundance is high. Such low CR environments could be
a result of cosmic ray exclusion by the stellar wind (Cleeves et al.
2013; Rodgers-Lee et al. 2020), however locally-accelerated stellar
cosmic rays may become important (Rodgers-Lee et al. 2021). Val-
uesmarginallyabove1(≈1.1)canalsobeachievedataround1Myr
for specific combinations of chemistry and ionisation rate (see Fig-
ure 6). Direct dissociation of CO by cosmic rays and O2 production
ongrainsindusttrapscanfurtherdecreasetheC/Odownto0.1−0.5.
A way to increase the C/O ratio is the inclusion of carbon grain
destruction. However we find that when transport is efficient, the
reservoir of carbon solids is quickly depleted by drift anyway, and
the C/O ratio only increases at early times as shown in Section 3.6.
More significant amount of extra carbon could be released to the
gas if dust accumulation were combined with variable temperature
profile,e.g.duetoluminosityoutbursts,asHougeetal.(2025b)also
suggested. This mechanism might explain the solar-mass stars with
unusually high carbon content, particularly if dust accumulated in a
dust trap in the inner disc.
For low-mass stars, a more common mechanism should be at
playtoexplainasystematicallyhighC/O>1.Inthisstudy,weonly
considersolarmassstars.Adustevolutionmodelsuitablefordifferent
stellar masses would be required for such simulations (such as, e.g.,
TriPod, Pfeil et al. 2024). Stellar mass is expected to affect mainly
the timescales of the radial transport, with pebble drift bringing
volatiles faster in discs around low-mass stars as the snowlines are
closer (Mah et al. 2023). Dust growth itself is determined by the
combined effect of lower density, larger scale height and different
temperature profile. Overall, the radial transport of dust is found to
be more efficient around lower-mass stars (Pinilla et al. 2013; Mah
et al. 2023).
From chemical point of view, the timescales of methane process-
ing in the midplane for low-mass stars should be similar to solar-
mass stars. This means that our modelling would not predict C/O
ratio above 1 in the discs of low-mass stars, contrasting the observa-
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

C/O in the inner discs15
tions. Freeze-out based simulations of the chemical composition of
photo-evaporating discs around low-mass stars also showed a C/O
ratio below the typical observed values (Lienert et al. 2025). The
observed correlation of high carbon content with low accretion rate
and low stellar mass might not be a consequence of radial drift or
chemicalprocessingintheouterdisc,andanalternativeexplanation
is required. The effects of chemistry on the composition of discs
around low-mass stars should be investigated in a separate study.
4.2 Scrutiny of the O2 production efficiency
Oneofthesubstantialmodel-dependentresultsofourworkisthecos-
mic ray induced production of O2 in the dust trap (see Appendix B).
This mechanism provides a way to release oxygen locked in the dust
trapatafewMyrage,significantlyaffectingtheinnerdiscC/Oratio.
At the same time, it is unclear what fraction of radicals produced in
the bulk of ice mantles can participate in surface reactions to trigger
the O2 production.
DissociationofwatericebyCRPHOTinthefullchemistrymodels
isassumedtobehappeninginthewholeoftheicemantle,notjustin
theupperlayers,potentiallysignificantlyoverestimatingtheinvolve-
ment of the produced OH radicals in surface reactions. The effect
of O2 formation is an extreme case happening in most favourable
conditions,asweshowinSection3.3.3andFigure4,andissensitive
tothefractionofthemantleaffectedbytheCRPHOTdissociationof
ices.Theuseofathree-phaseormulti-phaseicemodelmaymitigate
O2 formation as well. Even if O2 forms in the ice mantle, a reason-
able fraction of it is expected to remain trapped deep in the bulk,
while only the surface-formed O2 would have a chance to escape
(e.g. Taquet et al. 2016).
Another uncertainty concerns the rate coefficients of cosmic-
ray–induced photo-reactions, adopted from Gredel et al. (1989),
which assume a dust size distribution of small interstellar grains.
However, dust growth in the disc midplane should reduce photon
absorption,leavingastrongerUVfieldandincreasingreactionrates.
A two–order-of-magnitude increase in maximum grain size corre-
sponds to an order-of-magnitude increase in average grain size and
hence in CRPHOT reaction rates, potentially altering ice composi-
tions (Zwicky & Molyarova 2021). This would enhance water-ice
dissociation and accelerate O2 formation. On the other hand, the
dust-to-gas mass ratio in the dust trap is also much higher than was
assumed by Gredel et al. (1989) (∼0.5compared to the standard
0.01). The increased dust abundance should lead to more efficient
adsorption of CRPHOT and thus lower ionisation rates. To some
degree, the effects of dust size and mass fraction should compensate
each other, but their importance should be separately investigated.
4.3 Observational limits on the O2 formation
Ifmolecularoxygenisindeedefficientlyproducedinthedusttrap,it
could be observable. At the moment, ALMA observations aimed at
molecularoxygenhavenotyieldedanydetections.Forthediscaround
TWHya,Williamsetal.(2023)usedtheemissionoftheisotopologue
16O18O to determine an upper limit on the O2 abundance of(6.4−
62) ×10 −7. O2 with an abundance of a few percent relative to water
wasalsodetectedintwoSolarsystemcomets,67P/C-G(Bieleretal.
2015) and 1P /Halley (Rubin et al. 2015). The origin of the O2 ice
is uncertain, but astrochemical modelling suggests that it is likely
primordial (Taquet et al. 2016; Eistrup & Walsh 2019).
Figure9showstheradialdistributionofO 2 inourmodelsincom-
parison with the observational limit from Williams et al. (2023).
With the baseline chemistry, the O2 abundance in the gas stays at
10−10 −10 −7 at all times. With full chemistry and no traps, O2
abundance can exceed the observational limit only in case of slow
transport, which is inconsistent with the>10−9 𝑀⊙ yr−1 accretion
rate of TW Hya (Herczeg et al. 2023). In all models with full chem-
istryandadusttrap,theO 2 abundanceexceeds10 −5 atsomepointin
time,dependingonthetraplocation.ThehighO 2abundancereached
by 5Myr in models with a dust trap at intermediate distances (tens
of au) is comparable with that of CO and covers a large enough disc
region to be potentially detectable at∼40au resolution.
The non-detection of molecular oxygen in TW Hya may point
to a limited contribution of O2 formation, either due to inefficient
CRPHOT-induced ice dissociation or a low ionisation rate. Obser-
vational constraints from HCO+ and N2H+ emission do indicate a
CRionisationratebelow10 −19 s−1 inTWHya(Cleevesetal.2015).
Methanol observations in TW Hya confirm that grain surface chem-
istryplaysanimportantroleinsettingtheabundancesoftheobserved
speciesthere,buttheefficiencyatwhichicesarephotodissociatedis
overestimated in the modelling (Ilee et al. 2025). Alternatively, the
rings of TW Hya might not provide high enough dust-to-gas ratio
(∼0.1) for long enough time (∼1Myr). Observational limits rule
out efficient ice-phase production of molecular oxygen in dust traps
in TW Hya.
An older transition disc with a prominent dust trap at tens of au
distance would be a perfect candidate to look for molecular oxygen.
Efficient O2 formation would lead to super-solar metallicity (see
secondrightpanelinFigure3)andhighwaterabundanceintheinner
disc.Withoutthismechanism,atafewMyragetheinnerdiscshould
bepoorinbothcarbonandoxygen,unlessthedusttrapisleaky.There
are examples of bright water emission and a low C/O ratio in large
discs or older transition discs (Gasman et al. 2025a). Particularly,
PDS 70 and SY Cha (around 5 and 3 Myr old, respectively) each
possess a bright ring in dust emission, a very deep, extended gap,
at the same time demonstrating strong emission of water brighter
thanthatofcarbonspecies.AnotherexampleisSz98(Gasmanetal.
2023), which has no prominent dust rings, but a discontinuity in
its radial emission profile that might indicate the presence of a dust
trap (Ansdell et al. 2018).
Transition discs with oxygen rich inner discs, such as PDS 70 or
SYChacouldbepromisingtargetsforapotentialsearchforO 2emis-
sionwithALMA.SYChahasaccretionrateof3.89×10 −10 𝑀⊙ yr−1
and molecular emission from inside the cavity (Manara et al. 2017;
Orihara et al. 2023; Teague et al. 2025). Its inner disc is rich in both
oxygenandcarbonbearingmolecules(Schwarzetal.2024).PDS70,
anolderobjectandahostofthefirstplanetsdetectedinaprotoplan-
etary discs, also has weak accretion rate of≈2×10 −10 𝑀⊙ yr−1.
ALMA observations show high C/O ratio≈1in the outer disc
around the dust ring and weak line emission from within the cav-
ity (Rampinelli et al. 2024). However, JWST MIRI data show water
emission and no hydrocarbons in the inner disc (Perotti et al. 2023),
indicating a lower C/O ratio. These observations do not necessarily
require O2 production to explain, because a leaky dust trap could
potentially enrich inner disc with water (Sierra et al. 2025), but the
observed composition leaves room for possible O2 production in the
dusttrap.HotwaterisalsodetectedintheinnerdiscofAS209which
has large prominent rings (Romero-Mirza et al. 2024). However, in
sometransitiondiscshydrocarbonsdominatethespectrum,suggest-
ing a high C/O ratio (Volz et al. 2025). The diversity of transition
disc composition and possible reasons for differences in the inner
disc composition are discussed in Section 4 of Volz et al. (2025).
Nevertheless,theirhighconcentrationofdustandthuspotentiallyof
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

16Molyarova et al.
10 1
 100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 14
10 12
10 10
10 8
10 6
10 4
10 2
O2 abundance
1 Myr
2 Myr
5 Myr
10 Myr
trap at 15 au, baseline chemistry, fast transport
10 1
 100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 14
10 12
10 10
10 8
10 6
10 4
10 2
O2 abundance
1 Myr
2 Myr
5 Myr
10 Myr
no trap, full chemistry, fast transport
10 1
 100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 14
10 12
10 10
10 8
10 6
10 4
10 2
O2 abundance
1 Myr
2 Myr
5 Myr
10 Myr
no trap, full chemistry, slow transport
10 1
 100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 14
10 12
10 10
10 8
10 6
10 4
10 2
O2 abundance
1 Myr
2 Myr
5 Myr
10 Myr
trap at 7 au, full chemistry, fast transport
10 1
 100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 14
10 12
10 10
10 8
10 6
10 4
10 2
O2 abundance
1 Myr
2 Myr
5 Myr
10 Myr
trap at 15 au, full chemistry, fast transport
10 1
 100 101 102
radial distance, au
10 14
10 12
10 10
10 8
10 6
10 4
10 2
O2 abundance
1 Myr
2 Myr
5 Myr
10 Myr
trap at 100 au, full chemistry, fast transport
Figure9.RelativeabundancesofO 2 inthegasandintheiceinmodelswithdifferentlocationsofthedusttrapanddifferentchemicalregimes.Theshadedarea
marks the observational upper limit on O2 abundance in TW Hya (Williams et al. 2023).
water ice makes them more favourable candidates for O2 detection
than TW Hya.
Potentiallyoxygen-richgasisobservedalsoinsomeHerbigAe/Be
stars. ALMA observations show water emission just inside the dust
trapinthediscaroundHD100546(Rampinelli2025).Inthisobject,
the emission might be coming from inside of the water snowline,
whichislocatedatasimilardistanceasthetrap(≈20au).Inthedisc
around HD 169142, the C/O ratio inside30−60au is found to be
approximatelysolar,risingabove0.5atlargerdistances(Keyteetal.
2024).TheC/Oratioincreasesapproximatelybetweentheinnerand
outer dust rings, which might be connected with production of O2
in the dust traps. In Herbig stars, their higher mass and luminosity
will have two opposite effects on the radial drift: snowlines further
out will lead to slower transport in the gas after volatiles sublimate,
causinglaterenrichment,whilealargerscaleheightwouldmakethe
drift velocity higher. Dedicated chemical modelling is required to
predict their C/O ratios.
5 CONCLUSIONS
We simulated the chemical evolution of a protoplanetary disc mid-
plane to analyse the elemental composition of the gas in the inner
discregionsofsolar-typestars.Wecombinecomprehensivechemical
modellingincludingcomplexsurfacechemistrywithtwo-population
dustgrowthparametrisationandradialtransportinaviscouslyevolv-
ing disc. We consider models with different transport regimes, with
and without dust traps, and with different trap locations. We analyse
chemical evolution with and without the contribution of ice-phase
dissociationbycosmicrayinducedphotonsandatdifferentlevelsof
cosmic ray ionisation rate.
We find that the C/O ratio in the inner disc regions is affected
by chemical reactions at times longer than 1Myr. Unlike freeze-
out only models, the models with chemistry predict a C/O ratio
aroundandbelow1forafewMyrolddiscs.Wefocusonthemodels
with relatively fast transport, characterised by𝑣frag =10m s −1 and
𝛼=10 −3,andhighlightthatindiscswithlessefficientradialdriftthe
C/Oratiooftheinnerdischardlyevolvesfromtheinitialover10Myr.
The key parameters that govern the contribution of chemistry in our
modellingaretheincidentcosmicrayionisationrate,theefficiencyof
cosmicrayinducedphoto-reactionsintheicephase,andthepresence
and the location of a dust trap accumulating water ice. We find that
with a high fragmentation velocity, the inclusion of carbon grain
destruction only affects the C/O ratio in the inner disc during 1Myr,
increasing it from below0.1to0.2−0.3.
The main effect of chemistry is that it releases carbon from
methane, causing earlier delivery of carbon to the inner disc be-
cause CH4 is converted to less volatile carbon-bearing molecules.
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

C/O in the inner discs17
This process is sensitive to the cosmic ray ionisation rate, and sub-
stantially affects the C/O ratio at𝜁≳10−17 s−1. As a result, CH4 is
nolongerthemaincarboncarrieratMyrtimescales.Instead,theC/O
ratio is primarily determined by CO and CH3OH formed from CO
on the dust near the CO snowline after≈3Myr. This sets an upper
limit of≈1on the C/O in the inner regions after 3Myrs.
The inner disc can be significantly enriched with oxygen due to
O2 formation in the dust trap, if cosmic ray dissociation of ices is
efficient.Thismechanismallowstoreleaseoxygenlockedinthedust
traptransformingittomorevolatileO 2,ifatleastaround10%ofthe
dissociationproductsintheicemantletakepartinsurfacechemistry.
Similarly, CO gas is produced from the destruction of carbon-rich
ices. Molecular oxygen has not yet been observed in protoplane-
tary discs, and the available upper limits are inconsistent with the
predicted abundances for the most optimistic cases. The use of a
three-phase or multi-phase ice model may reduce the production of
O2 andCOcomparedwiththetwo-phasemodelsusedhere,because
even if formed in the ice, they may stay trapped within the water ice
matrix. We expect that this mechanism should be most efficient in
transitiondiscswithhighlyconcentrateddustrings,leadingtowater-
richinnerdiscs,andsuggestthatO 2 detectioninsuchobjectscanbe
asignatureofefficientcosmic-ray-inducedphoto-dissociationofice.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the reviewer for their valuable suggestions, which helped
shape and better present our results. We thank I. Cleeves for pro-
ductive discussions about surface chemistry. T. Molyarova and
R.A. Booth were supported by the Royal Society, award numbers
URF\R1\211799 and RF\ERE\231082. R.A. Booth also acknowl-
edges financial support from UKRI via grant number UKRI1191.
C.WalshacknowledgesfinancialsupportfromtheScienceandTech-
nology Facilities Council and UK Research and Innovation (grant
numbers ST/X001016/1 and MR/Z00019X/1). This work was un-
dertaken on the Aire HPC system at the University of Leeds, UK.
We thank V. Akimkin and V. Ivashkin for providing supplementary
computational resources.
DATA AVAILABILITY
Simulation results and data behind the figures will be shared upon
request.
REFERENCES
Aikawa Y., Miyama S. M., Nakano T., Umebayashi T., 1996, ApJ, 467, 684
Aikawa Y., Umebayashi T., Nakano T., Miyama S. M., 1999, ApJ, 519, 705
Aikawa Y., van Zadelhoff G. J., van Dishoeck E. F., Herbst E., 2002, A&A,
386, 622
Aikawa Y., et al., 2021, ApJS, 257, 13
Akimkin V., Zhukovska S., Wiebe D., Semenov D., Pavlyuchenkov Y.,
Vasyunin A., Birnstiel T., Henning T., 2013, ApJ, 766, 8
AndersonD.E.,BlakeG.A.,CleevesL.I.,BerginE.A.,ZhangK.,Schwarz
K. R., Salyk C., Bosman A. D., 2021, ApJ, 909, 55
Ansdell M., et al., 2018, ApJ, 859, 21
Arabhavi A. M., et al., 2025, A&A, 699, A194
Arulanantham N., et al., 2025, AJ, 170, 67
Asplund M., Grevesse N., Sauval A. J., Scott P., 2009, ARA&A, 47, 481
Banzatti A., et al., 2020, ApJ, 903, 124
Banzatti A., et al., 2023, ApJ, 957, L22
BerginE.A.,DuF.,CleevesL.I.,BlakeG.A.,SchwarzK.,VisserR.,Zhang
K., 2016, ApJ, 831, 101
Bieler A., et al., 2015, Nature, 526, 678
Birnstiel T., Klahr H., Ercolano B., 2012, A&A, 539, A148
Booth R. A., Ilee J. D., 2019, MNRAS, 487, 3998
Booth R. A., Clarke C. J., Madhusudhan N., Ilee J. D., 2017, MNRAS, 469,
3994
BoothA.S.,WalshC.,TerwisschavanScheltingaJ.,vanDishoeckE.F.,Ilee
J.D.,HogerheijdeM.R.,KamaM.,NomuraH.,2021,NatureAstronomy,
5, 684
Borshcheva E. V., Wiebe D. S., 2022, Astronomy Reports, 66, 393
Bosman A. D., Walsh C., van Dishoeck E. F., 2018, A&A, 618, A182
Bosman A. D., et al., 2021, ApJS, 257, 7
Bovolenta G. M., Vogt-Geisse S., Bovino S., Grassi T., 2022, ApJS, 262, 17
Bruderer S., Doty S. D., Benz A. O., 2009, ApJS, 183, 179
Cleeves L. I., Adams F. C., Bergin E. A., 2013, ApJ, 772, 5
Cleeves L. I., Bergin E. A., Alexander C. M. O. D., Du F., Graninger D.,
Öberg K. I., Harries T. J., 2014a, Science, 345, 1590
Cleeves L. I., Bergin E. A., Adams F. C., 2014b, ApJ, 794, 123
Cleeves L. I., Bergin E. A., Qi C., Adams F. C., Öberg K. I., 2015, ApJ, 799,
204
Cleeves L. I., Öberg K. I., Wilner D. J., Huang J., Loomis R. A., Andrews
S. M., Guzman V. V., 2018, ApJ, 865, 155
Collings M. P., Anderson M. A., Chen R., Dever J. W., Viti S., Williams
D. A., McCoustra M. R. S., 2004, MNRAS, 354, 1133
Colmenares M. J., et al., 2024, ApJ, 977, 173
Cridland A. J., Pudritz R. E., Birnstiel T., Cleeves L. I., Bergin E. A., 2017,
MNRAS, 469, 3910
Cugno G., Grant S. L., 2025, ApJ, 991, L46
CuppenH.M.,IoppoloS.,RomanzinC.,LinnartzH.,2010a,PhysicalChem-
istry Chemical Physics (Incorporating Faraday Transactions), 12, 12077
Cuppen H. M., Kristensen L. E., Gavardi E., 2010b, MNRAS, 406, L11
Cuppen H. M., Walsh C., Lamberts T., Semenov D., Garrod R. T., Penteado
E. M., Ioppolo S., 2017, Space Sci. Rev., 212, 1
Dalgarno A., 2006, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 103,
12269
Díaz-Berríos J. K., Walsh C., van Dishoeck E. F., 2026, ApJ, 1000, 217
Drozdovskaya M. N., Walsh C., Visser R., Harsono D., van Dishoeck E. F.,
2014, MNRAS, 445, 913
DrozdovskayaM.N.,WalshC.,vanDishoeckE.F.,FuruyaK.,MarboeufU.,
Thiabaud A., Harsono D., Visser R., 2016, MNRAS, 462, 977
Duffell P. C., 2020, ApJ, 889, 16
Dutrey A., et al., 2011, A&A, 535, A104
Easterwood W., Kalyaan A., Banzatti A., 2024, ApJ, 977, 21
Eistrup C., Henning T., 2022, A&A, 667, A160
Eistrup C., Walsh C., 2019, A&A, 621, A75
Eistrup C., Walsh C., van Dishoeck E. F., 2016, A&A, 595, A83
Eistrup C., Walsh C., van Dishoeck E. F., 2018, A&A, 613, A14
Eriksson L. E. J., Pfeil T., Kaufmann N., Vaikundaraman V., 2026, arXiv
e-prints, p. arXiv:2603.22550
Evans L., et al., 2025, ApJ, 982, 62
FomenkovaM.N.,ChangS.,MukhinL.M.,1994,GeochimicaCosmochim-
ica Acta, 58, 4503
Furuya K., Aikawa Y., Nomura H., Hersant F., Wakelam V., 2013, ApJ, 779,
11
Gail H. P., 2002, A&A, 390, 253
Gail H.-P., Trieloff M., 2017, A&A, 606, A16
Garrod R. T., 2013, ApJ, 765, 60
Garrod R. T., Widicus Weaver S. L., Herbst E., 2008, ApJ, 682, 283
Gasman D., et al., 2023, A&A, 679, A117
Gasman D., et al., 2025a, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2501.04587
Gasman D., et al., 2025b, A&A, 694, A147
Grant S. L., et al., 2023, ApJ, 947, L6
Grant S. L., et al., 2024, A&A, 689, A85
Grant S. L., et al., 2025, A&A, 702, A126
Gredel R., Lepp S., Dalgarno A., Herbst E., 1989, ApJ, 347, 289
Gundlach B., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 479, 1273
Hasegawa T. I., Herbst E., 1993, MNRAS, 263, 589
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

18Molyarova et al.
He J., Vidali G., 2014, ApJ, 788, 50
HeJ.,JingD.,VidaliG.,2014,PhysicalChemistryChemicalPhysics(Incor-
porating Faraday Transactions), 16, 3493
He J., Shi J., Hopkins T., Vidali G., Kaufman M. J., 2015, ApJ, 801, 120
Henning T., Semenov D., 2013, Chemical Reviews, 113, 9016
Henning T., et al., 2024, PASP, 136, 054302
Herczeg G. J., et al., 2023, ApJ, 956, 102
Houge A., et al., 2025a, MNRAS, 537, 691
Houge A., Johansen A., Bergin E., Ciesla F. J., Bitsch B., Lambrechts M.,
Henning T., Perotti G., 2025b, A&A, 699, A227
Houge A., Johansen A., Banzatti A., Grant S., 2026, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2604.11925
Huang P., Yu F., Lee E. J., Dong R., Bai X.-N., 2025, ApJ, 988, 94
Ilee J. D., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 189
IleeJ.D.,WalshC.,CalahanJ.C.,2025,arXive-prints,p.arXiv:2510.04106
Ioppolo S., Cuppen H. M., Romanzin C., van Dishoeck E. F., Linnartz H.,
2008, ApJ, 686, 1474
Jiang H., Macías E., Guerra-Alvarado O. M., Carrasco-González C., 2024,
A&A, 682, A32
Jing D., He J., Brucato J. R., Vidali G., Tozzetti L., De Sio A., 2012, ApJ,
756, 98
Kaeufer T., et al., 2026, MNRAS, 545, staf2056
Kalyaan A., Pinilla P., Krijt S., Mulders G. D., Banzatti A., 2021, ApJ, 921,
84
Kalyaan A., et al., 2023, ApJ, 954, 66
Kama M., et al., 2016, A&A, 592, A83
Kama M., Shorttle O., Jermyn A. S., Folsom C. P., Furuya K., Bergin E. A.,
Walsh C., Keller L., 2019, ApJ, 885, 114
Kamp I., Thi W.-F., Woitke P., Rab C., Bouma S., Ménard F., 2017, A&A,
607, A41
Kanwar J., et al., 2024, A&A, 689, A231
Karssemeijer L. J., Cuppen H. M., 2014, A&A, 569, A107
Keyte L., Kama M., Booth A. S., Law C. J., Leemker M., 2024, MNRAS,
534, 3576
Krijt S., Ciesla F. J., Bergin E. A., 2016, ApJ, 833, 285
Krijt S., Schwarz K. R., Bergin E. A., Ciesla F. J., 2018, ApJ, 864, 78
Krijt S., Bosman A. D., Zhang K., Schwarz K. R., Ciesla F. J., Bergin E. A.,
2020, ApJ, 899, 134
Krijt S., et al., 2025, ApJ, 990, L72
Le Gal R., Öberg K. I., Loomis R. A., Pegues J., Bergner J. B., 2019, ApJ,
876, 72
Le Gal R., et al., 2021, ApJS, 257, 12
Lee J.-E., Bergin E. A., Nomura H., 2010, ApJ, 710, L21
Li J., Bergin E. A., Blake G. A., Ciesla F. J., Hirschmann M. M., 2021,
Science Advances, 7, eabd3632
Lienert J. L., Bitsch B., Henning T., 2024, A&A, 691, A72
Lienert J. L., Bitsch B., Henning T., 2025, A&A, 700, A67
Liu B., Lambrechts M., Johansen A., Liu F., 2019, A&A, 632, A7
Long F., et al., 2025, ApJ, 978, L30
Luo L., et al., 2026, MNRAS, 548, stag423
Lynden-Bell D., Pringle J. E., 1974, MNRAS, 168, 603
Mah J., Bitsch B., Pascucci I., Henning T., 2023, A&A, 677, L7
Mah J., Savvidou S., Bitsch B., 2024, A&A, 686, L17
Manara C. F., et al., 2017, A&A, 604, A127
ManaraC.F.,AnsdellM.,RosottiG.P.,HughesA.M.,ArmitageP.J.,Lodato
G., Williams J. P., 2023, in Inutsuka S., Aikawa Y., Muto T., Tomida
K., Tamura M., eds, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference
SeriesVol.534,ProtostarsandPlanetsVII.p.539(arXiv:2203.09930),
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2203.09930
McElroy D., Walsh C., Markwick A. J., Cordiner M. A., Smith K., Millar
T. J., 2013, A&A, 550, A36
Miley J. M., Panić O., Booth R. A., Ilee J. D., Ida S., Kunitomo M., 2021,
MNRAS, 500, 4658
Minissale M., Dulieu F., 2014, J. Chem. Phys., 141, 014304
Minissale M., Dulieu F., Cazaux S., Hocuk S., 2016, A&A, 585, A24
Minissale M., et al., 2022, ACS Earth and Space Chemistry, 6, 597
Miotello A., et al., 2019, A&A, 631, A69
Molyarova T., Vorobyov E., Akimkin V., 2025, Publ. Astron. Soc. Australia,
42, e004
Mumma M. J., Charnley S. B., 2011, ARA&A, 49, 471
Musiolik G., Wurm G., 2019, ApJ, 873, 58
Najita J. R., Ádámkovics M., Glassgold A. E., 2011, ApJ, 743, 147
Najita J. R., Carr J. S., Pontoppidan K. M., Salyk C., van Dishoeck E. F.,
Blake G. A., 2013, ApJ, 766, 134
Nakano H., Kouchi A., Tachibana S., Tsuchiyama A., 2003, ApJ, 592, 1252
Ndugu N., Bitsch B., Lienert J. L., 2024, A&A, 691, A32
Öberg K. I., Bergin E. A., 2016, ApJ, 831, L19
Öberg K. I., van Dishoeck E. F., Linnartz H., 2009a, A&A, 496, 281
Öberg K. I., Garrod R. T., van Dishoeck E. F., Linnartz H., 2009b, A&A,
504, 891
Öberg K. I., Boogert A. C. A., Pontoppidan K. M., van den Broek S., van
Dishoeck E. F., Bottinelli S., Blake G. A., Evans II N. J., 2011a, ApJ,
740, 109
Öberg K. I., Murray-Clay R., Bergin E. A., 2011b, ApJ, 743, L16
Öberg K. I., et al., 2021, ApJS, 257, 1
Okuzumi S., Tanaka H., Sakagami M.-a., 2009, ApJ, 707, 1247
Orihara R., et al., 2023, PASJ, 75, 424
Pacetti E., et al., 2025, A&A, 701, A194
Padovani M., Ivlev A. V., Galli D., Caselli P., 2018, A&A, 614, A111
Penteado E. M., Walsh C., Cuppen H. M., 2017, ApJ, 844, 71
Penzlin A. B. T., et al., 2024, MNRAS, 535, 171
Perotti G., et al., 2023, Nature, 620, 516
Pfeil T., Birnstiel T., Klahr H., 2024, A&A, 691, A45
Pinilla P., Birnstiel T., Benisty M., Ricci L., Natta A., Dullemond C. P.,
Dominik C., Testi L., 2013, A&A, 554, A95
PinillaP.,BenistyM.,WatersR.,BaeJ.,FacchiniS.,2024,A&A,686,A135
Piso A.-M. A., Pegues J., Öberg K. I., 2016, ApJ, 833, 203
Pontoppidan K. M., et al., 2024, ApJ, 963, 158
Price E. M., Cleeves L. I., Öberg K. I., 2020, ApJ, 890, 154
Rab C., et al., 2017, A&A, 604, A15
Rampinelli L. e. a., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2512.06439
Rampinelli L., et al., 2024, A&A, 689, A65
Rodgers-Lee D., Vidotto A. A., Taylor A. M., Rimmer P. B., Downes T. P.,
2020, MNRAS, 499, 2124
Rodgers-Lee D., Taylor A. M., Vidotto A. A., Downes T. P., 2021, MNRAS,
504, 1519
Romero-Mirza C. E., et al., 2024, ApJ, 964, 36
Ruaud M., Gorti U., 2019, ApJ, 885, 146
Rubin M., Altwegg K., van Dishoeck E. F., Schwehm G., 2015, ApJ, 815,
L11
Salyk C., et al., 2025, AJ, 169, 184
Sano T., Miyama S. M., Umebayashi T., Nakano T., 2000, ApJ, 543, 486
Schneider A. D., Bitsch B., 2021, A&A, 654, A71
Schwarz K. R., Bergin E. A., Cleeves L. I., Zhang K., Öberg K. I., Blake
G. A., Anderson D., 2018, ApJ, 856, 85
Schwarz K. R., Bergin E. A., Cleeves L. I., Zhang K., Öberg K. I., Blake
G. A., Anderson D. E., 2019, ApJ, 877, 131
Schwarz K. R., et al., 2024, ApJ, 962, 8
Sellek A. D., van Dishoeck E. F., 2025, A&A, 701, A239
Sellek A. D., Vlasblom M., van Dishoeck E. F., 2025, A&A, 694, A79
Semenov D., Wiebe D., 2011, ApJS, 196, 25
Semenov D., Wiebe D., Henning T., 2004, A&A, 417, 93
Shakura N. I., Sunyaev R. A., 1973, A&A, 24, 337
Sierra A., et al., 2021, ApJS, 257, 14
Sierra A., et al., 2025, MNRAS, 541, 3101
SilvaJ.R.C.,QueirozL.M.S.V.,FerrãoL.F.A.,PillingS.,2025,ApJ,985,
254
Stammler S. M., Birnstiel T., 2022, ApJ, 935, 35
Stammler S. M., Lichtenberg T., Drążkowska J., Birnstiel T., 2023, A&A,
670, L5
Sturm J. A., McClure M. K., Harsono D., Facchini S., Long F., Kama M.,
Bergin E. A., van Dishoeck E. F., 2022, A&A, 660, A126
Sturm J. A., Booth A. S., McClure M. K., Leemker M., van Dishoeck E. F.,
2023, A&A, 670, A12
TaquetV.,FuruyaK.,WalshC.,vanDishoeckE.F.,2016,MNRAS,462,S99
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

C/O in the inner discs19
Tazaki R., Tanaka H., Kataoka A., Okuzumi S., Muto T., 2019, ApJ, 885, 52
Tazaki R., Ginski C., Dominik C., 2023, ApJ, 944, L43
Teague R., et al., 2025, ApJ, 984, L6
Temmink M., et al., 2025, A&A, 699, A134
TerwisschavanScheltingaJ.,LigterinkN.F.W.,BosmanA.D.,Hogerheijde
M. R., Linnartz H., 2022, A&A, 666, A35
Tong S., Alexander R., Rosotti G., 2026, MNRAS, 545, staf2128
TrapmanL.,ZhangK.,van’tHoffM.L.R.,HogerheijdeM.R.,BerginE.A.,
2022, ApJ, 926, L2
Tscharnuter W. M., Gail H.-P., 2007, A&A, 463, 369
Ueda T., Tazaki R., Okuzumi S., Flock M., Sudarshan P., 2024, Nature As-
tronomy, 8, 1148
Van Clepper E., Bergner J. B., Bosman A. D., Bergin E., Ciesla F. J., 2022,
ApJ, 927, 206
Van Clepper E. R., Alarcón F., Bergin E., Ciesla F. J., 2025, ApJ, 994, L44
Vlasblom M., et al., 2025, A&A, 693, A278
Volz M., et al., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2511.08816
Waggoner A. R., Cleeves L. I., 2019, ApJ, 883, 197
Wakelam V., et al., 2017, Molecular Astrophysics, 9, 1
Walsh C., Nomura H., van Dishoeck E., 2015, A&A, 582, A88
WeiC.-E.,NomuraH.,LeeJ.-E.,IpW.-H.,WalshC.,MillarT.J.,2019,ApJ,
870, 129
Williams B. J., Cleeves L. I., Eistrup C., Ramsey J. P., 2023, ApJ, 956, 135
Williams J., Krijt S., Bitsch B., Houge A., Bergner J., 2025, MNRAS,
Woitke P., Kamp I., Thi W.-F., 2009, A&A, 501, 383
Woitke P., Min M., Thi W. F., Roberts C., Carmona A., Kamp I., Ménard F.,
Pinte C., 2018, A&A, 618, A57
Woods P. M., Willacy K., 2009, ApJ, 693, 1360
Xie C., Pascucci I., Feng L., 2026, in press
Xu R., Bai X.-N., Öberg K., 2017, ApJ, 835, 162
Zwicky L. N., Molyarova T. S., 2021, INASAN Science Reports, 6, 122
vanderMarelN.,BosmanA.D.,KrijtS.,MuldersG.D.,BergnerJ.B.,2021,
A&A, 653, L9
van’t Hoff M. L. R., Leemker M., Tobin J. J., Harsono D., Jørgensen J. K.,
Bergin E. A., 2022, ApJ, 932, 6
APPENDIX A: THE C/O RATIOS IN DISCS WITH DUST
TRAPS
FigureA1summarisestheevolutionofgas-andice-phaseC/Oratios
inthemodelswithadusttrapat15au.Theregioninteriortothedust
trap becomes depleted in ices as the dust drift clears it of solids. In
the full chemistry model, formation of O2, CO and other species in
thetrapallowsvolatilestoescapethetrapandleadstonon-negligible
amount of ice interior to the trap.
APPENDIX B: ICE CHEMISTRY IN THE DUST TRAP
In full chemistry models with dust traps, the disc composition at
≳Myr timescales is qualitatively different from baseline chemistry
models.Dissociationoficesbycosmicray-inducedphotonstriggers
the chemical process that allow oxygen to escape from the trap and
leads to oxygen-rich inner disc with low gas-phase C/O ratio and
high metallicity. Here we show the reaction routes responsible for
this effect.
O2 formation in the dust trap starts with dissociation of water ice
by cosmic ray induced photons:
gH2O
𝐶 𝑅𝑃𝐻𝑂𝑇
− − − − − − − − →gOH+gH.(B1)
Hydroxylradicalsintheicesondustgrainsurfaces,gOH,areinvolved
in multiple reaction cycles (note that here we mark the species on
dust grain surface with a letter g, for grain). Reacting with atomic
hydrogen, they can form water ice again, in a barrier-free reaction
gOH
𝑔𝐻
− − − →gH2O. Multiple reaction routes lead to the formation of
gO2, following the release of atomic oxygen gO:
gOH
𝑔𝑂𝐻
− − − − →gH2O+gO,gO
𝑔𝑂
− − − →gO2
gO
𝑔𝑂𝐻
− − − − →gHO2
𝑔𝑂
− − − →gO2 +gOH
gO
𝑔𝐻𝑆
− − − − →gSO
𝑔𝑂
− − − →gSO2
𝑔𝐻
− − − →gO2
(B2)
These reactions include direct formation of gO2 from gO, a path-
way through the hydroperoxyl radical gHO2 and a cycle catalysed
by sulphur-bearing species. These reactions are summarised in Fig-
ure B1. Sulphur as a possible catalyst of O2 production in a process
involving SO was described in Eistrup et al. (2018). However, this
processisonlyefficientat>1Myrtimescales.Amongtheseforma-
tion paths, the gHO2/gOH route is the most efficient.
Apart from molecular oxygen, the dust trap stimulates the forma-
tion of CO on dust grains. There is an ensemble of reactions that
produce gCO, one of which is directly linked to O2 formation:
gO2
𝑔𝐶
− − − →gCO+gO.(B3)
In the presence of plenty of gO2, gCO will also inevitably form,
becausethereiscarbonprovidedbycosmicraydissociationofcom-
plex hydrocarbons on dust surfaces. These hydrocarbons, such as
gCH2CHCCH, are formed in the outer disc regions and accumulate
in the trap. Their formation is also triggered by methane destruc-
tion and subsequent reactions in the gas and in the ice. Like O2, the
formed CO sublimates and escapes the dust trap. Some of it is con-
verted to CO2 on the way to the inner disc. In addition to Eq. (B3),
there are reaction routes that produce CO in the ice either through
gHCO, gOCN, or sulphur bearing species such as gOCS and gHS.
However, before sublimating to the gas phase, a significant fraction
of the produced gCO also reacts with the available gOH to form
gCO2. This restricts the efficiency of this channel, and helps to lock
theCO 2 inthetrap.OnlyafractionoftheCOproducedinthetrapis
able to escape to the gas phase.
Productionofmolecularoxygencouldbeoverturnedbythecoun-
teracting process of water formation. Water ice can form on dust
surfacethroughstep-by-stephydrogenationofmolecularoxygen,ex-
perimentally studied by Cuppen et al. (2010a):
gO2
𝑔𝐻
− − − →gHO2,gHO 2
𝑔𝐻
− − − →gO+gH2O
gHO2
𝑔𝐻
− − − →gOH
𝑔𝐻
− − − →gH2O.
(B4)
TheseprocessesdependstronglyontheavailabilityofHatomsonthe
grain surface. However, atomic H has a low binding energy (650K
in the model) and desorbs rapidly at 53K, where the trap is located.
This makes the reverse process relatively inefficient. Essentially, the
O2 formation routes are more efficient because they do not rely on
hydrogenation, particularly in the hydroperoxyl branch. For the sul-
phurcatalyticcycle,hydrogenationisnecessarytoproducegHS,but
this species can be formed in the outer disc regions and delivered to
the trap. Conversely, the key formation routes for O2 involve species
with higher binding energies. The key reaction route with hydroper-
oxyl only includes species with binding energies higher than that of
atomic hydrogen: gO (1660K), gOH (3210K) and gHO2 (1510K)
(He & Vidali 2014; He et al. 2014; Penteado et al. 2017), which
allows them to stay on the dust surface and form molecular oxygen
faster than water.
Molecular oxygen formation from water should only be efficient
withinacertaintemperaturerangedependingonthelocationsofthe
snowlines of the involved components. The temperature should be
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

20Molyarova et al.
FigureA1.EvolutionoftheradialdistributionsofC/Oratiosinthegas(left)andintheice(right)inmodelswithadusttrapat15au.Toptobottom:freeze-out,
baselinechemistryandfullchemistrymodels.TheregionswherethetotalabundanceofCandOingasoriceislowerthan0.001oftheirinitialtotalabundance
are shown in white. The contours mark the C/O ratio values of 0.5, 1 and 2.
high enough to prevent significant deposition of atomic hydrogen,
but low enough to still avoid thermal desorption of hydroperoxyl
and atomic oxygen. However even within their snowlines, species
can briefly adsorb to the grain surface and participate in the surface
reactions, because the timescale of diffusion and reaction can be
shorter than the desorption timescales (shown experimentally, e.g.
Terwisscha van Scheltinga et al. 2022). The highest temperature for
theOandHO 2stayingonthedustsurfaceisaround70K,reachedat≈
7au.ThelowesttemperatureforO 2 formationshouldbedetermined
bytheefficiencyofwaterformation,andconsequentlytheamountof
atomic hydrogen, with unclear temperature range. As a hard limit, if
any O2 is formed below the O2 sublimation temperature≈20K, it
will not escape to the gas phase.
The surface chemistry of water and molecular oxygen at lower
temperatures (𝑇≲30K) was experimentally investigated in mul-
tiple studies (Ioppolo et al. 2008; Cuppen et al. 2010a; Jing et al.
2012; Silva et al. 2025). It was shown by Ioppolo et al. (2008) that
water ice can be efficiently formed from O2 ice bombarded with
hydrogen at 10-28K. Water production from O, O2 and O3 through
multiplerouteswasinvestigatedbyCuppenetal.(2010a)at15-25K.
Laboratorydatashowthepresenceofintermediateproductsofthese
formation routes: H2O2, O3, HO2. These species and all water for-
mationroutesareincludedinthepresentlyusednetwork.Inoursim-
ulations, cosmic ray ionisation of ices provides an additional source
of water destruction, increasing OH abundance and enhancing the
reactions with hydroxyl, which shifts the balance to O2 production.
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)

C/O in the inner discs21
gH
CRPHOTgOH
gHS
gOgH2gH gSOgO
gH
gO
gO
gHO2
gO
gOH
FigureB1.MainformationroutesofO 2 ondustsurface.Mostreactionswith
atomic hydrogen are excluded for clarity.
We also consider higher temperatures, which correspond to lower
H abundances, further restricting water production, as well as more
efficient O2 thermal desorption, which obstructs surface formation
of water. The combination of relatively high temperature (≈50K)
and efficient dissociation of water ice are the key factors leading to
efficientO2 productioninthedusttrap.Thereisalsotheassumption
of a two-phase model: in reality, radicals/atoms formed in the bulk
will have slower rates of diffusion which could push the reformation
of water to be favoured over production of molecular oxygen.
The binding energies of H and O are among the key model pa-
rametersinthesurfacechemistryofwaterandmolecularoxygen(He
et al. 2015). They are relatively well constrained by the laboratory
experiments(Cuppenetal.2017),butsomeuncertaintiescouldarise
from the dust material and the type of the bond to it (chemisorption
or physisorption). The gH abundance should also be sensitive to the
H2 production mechanism (see, e.g., Cuppen et al. 2010b; Wakelam
et al. 2017). We consider models with higher H binding energy and
a different H2 formation mechanism in and find that O2 production
is robust to these parameters. These models in comparison with the
fiducial full chemistry model are shown in Figure B2. The increase
of the gH abundance is not enough to surpass the O2 formation and
hasverylittleeffectontheinnerdisccomposition.Inthemodelwith
Langmuir-Hinshelwood formation of H2 (as opposed to Eley-Rideal
mechanismintherestofthemodels),theamountofoxygenescaping
thetrapandreachingtheinnerdiscalsostaysapproximatelythesame,
but the O2 is more efficiently converted to water on its way to the
inner disc. The O2 formation mechanism is robust to the parameters
of surface chemistry of hydrogen.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
Figure B2.Evolution of integrated masses of main gas-phase volatiles and
C/O ratios in the inner disc in the models with full chemistry, different H
bindingenergyanddifferentH 2 formationmechanism.O 2 isalsoincludedin
the O species.
MNRAS000, 1–21 (2026)