Title: Facing the phase: Gravity-mode offset and buoyancy glitches in red--giant branch stars
Authors: T. van Lier, J. Müller, S. Hekker
Published: 2026-05-19
Categories: astro-ph.SR

Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. aa58519-25©ESO 2026
May 20, 2026
Facing the phase: Gravity-mode offset and buoyancy glitches in
red–giant branch stars
T. van Lier1,2,⋆ , J. Müller1,2 , and S. Hekker1,2
1 Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies, Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg 35, D-69118 Heidelberg, Germany
2 Zentrum für Astronomie Heidelberg (ZAH/LSW), Heidelberg University, Königstuhl 12, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany
Received 11 December 2025/Accepted 15 May 2026
ABSTRACT
Context.With the increasing precision of asteroseismic observations, it becomes possible to reliably measure oscillation properties of
an increasing number of stars. Interpreting these measurements requires a good theoretical understanding of their link to fundamental
stellar properties.
Aims.In this study, we focus on the phase offset in gravity(g)-mode frequencies, which is imprinted in the asymptotic eigenfrequency
pattern of mixed dipole modes observed in red–giant branch stars. We aim to unravel its physical origin and thus enable an informed
interpretation of observations.
Methods.Using stellar models, we empirically test the contribution of the g-mode offsetεg (which is related to the wave reflection at
cavity boundaries and commonly considered to be the dominant phase term) and glitches to the total observable phase.
Results.We find that, additionally toεg, buoyancy glitches play an important role in the correct interpretation of the g–mode frequency
phase. We further find that glitches in the evanescent zone also contribute to the phase, and we present a formalism to quantify this
contribution. Finally, we propose a modification to the widely used formula forε g.
Conclusions.The g–mode frequency phase carries more information than previously considered. It has large analytic potential to
study not only the reflection properties of the buoyancy cavity, but also the properties of glitches in the Brunt-Väisälä frequency.
Key words.asteroseismology – stars: interiors – stars: low-mass
1. Introduction
The space-borne observation campaignsKeplerand TESS have
delivered long, high-precision timeseries of a large number of
stars in the Milky Way. Among these are several ten thou-
sand red-giant stars (e.g. Hekker et al. 2011; Mosser et al. 2012;
Yu et al. 2018; Pinsonneault et al. 2014, 2018, 2025). Thanks to
their high luminosity, the sample of red giants bright enough to
achieve a good signal-to-noise ratio in the light curves is also
large, which makes statistical studies of their properties possible.
Due to their large size and therefore cool surface temperatures,
red-giant stars have convective envelopes, which stochastically
drive solar-like oscillations: Energy from the turbulent convec-
tive motions is transferred to resonant global oscillation modes
of the stars. This stochastic excitation leads to observable os-
cillations within a Gaussian power envelope centered around a
frequency of maximum oscillation powerν max, defined by the
typical time scale of convection (Mathur et al. 2012). It scales
with a star’s surface gravitygand effective temperatureT effas
(e.g. Kjeldsen & Bedding 1995)
νmax ∝ g√Teff
.(1)
With advances in the automatization of asteroseismic
analysis (e.g. García Saravia Ortiz de Montellano et al. 2018;
Kallinger 2019; Corsaro et al. 2020; Kuszlewicz et al. 2023), an
increasing number of targets is characterized in terms of oscilla-
tion properties. Asteroseismology uses the variability associated
⋆ Corresponding author; email: tobias.vanlier@h-its.org.
with perturbations to the stellar hydrostatic state – for example
the solar-like oscillations exhibited by red-giant stars – to infer
the properties of the equilibrium structure. A common approach
to this analysis is to apply asymptotic theory, which uses a hand-
ful of parameters to characterize the spectrum of the stellar os-
cillations.
Each of these asymptotic parameters exists in two differ-
ent contexts: Once as an empirical quantity used to reproduce
the pattern of observed oscillation modes, and once as a theo-
retical quantity derived from the shape and behavior of a wave
function. The latter is therefore determined by the fundamental
stellar structure. For the asteroseismic observations to be useful,
they need to be interpretable. Therefore, it is essential to match
the empirical and theoretical counterparts. In this work, we in-
vestigate the phase term in the eigenfrequency pattern of mixed
dipole modes observed in red–giant branch (RGB) stars. It is typ-
ically associated to the phase induced to the wave functions by
partial reflection at turning points of the waves (e.g. Pinçon et al.
2019). Cunha et al. (2015) showed that glitches in the propaga-
tion cavity – sharp features in the stellar structure compared to
the local wavelength – can contribute an additional phase shift
to the mode frequencies. The chemical discontinuity left be-
hind by the first dredge-up creates a narrow spike in the Brunt-
Väisälä frequency, which can act as such a glitch in RGB mod-
els. Jiang et al. (2020) demonstrated that this spike affects the
estimate of asymptotic oscillation parameters for the example of
the coupling strength, for which they obtained unphysical values
when the glitch was not considered. Further, Jiang et al. (2022)
were able to retrieve coupling strengths that matched the val-
ues expected from their models upon including the effects of the
Article number, page 1
arXiv:2605.19862v1  [astro-ph.SR]  19 May 2026

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa58519-25
spike in the asymptotic expression for the eigenfrequencies. This
motivates that considering the spike is also relevant to correctly
interpret other asymptotic parameters, including the g–mode fre-
quency phase.
Applying an observational approach to the eigenfrequencies
of stellar models, we compare the empirical phase term with
both theoretical contributions, the partial reflection at the turn-
ing points and the glitch. We also test different expansions and
approximations that are commonly used for the theoretical cal-
culations. In this way, we aim to gain understanding of the in-
terpretation of observations, and also to enable more informed
asymptotic estimates of eigenfrequencies for theoretical studies.
2. Asymptotic oscillation theory
The fundamental equations of stellar oscillations can be derived
by applying perturbations to the state variables in the stellar
structure equations. Assuming spherical symmetry, the pertur-
bations can be separated into a radial, angular and temporal part.
The angular equations are solved by spherical harmonics of de-
greeℓand azimuthal orderm. Since we focus our analysis in this
work on dipole modes, we implicitly setℓ=1 throughout. Since
we further neglect rotation, magnetic fields, or any other non-
isotropic effects, the ordermis irrelevant to all derivations in the
following. Takata (2006) showed that by asymptotic expansion
(i.e. assuming that the scale of the perturbations is small relative
to the scale of variations in the equilibrium structure) the radial
oscillation equations can be reduced to a single equation for the
radial displacement relative to the center of massξ r:
d2ξr
dr2 =−k 2ξr .(2)
The solutions for the other radial perturbations are proportional
to the solution forξ r up to a phase difference. The squared wave
vectork 2 is linked to the angular frequencyω, which appears in
the solution to the temporal equationsξ(t)∝e iωt, by the asymp-
totic dispersion relation:
k2 = ω2
c2s

 ˆS
ω
!2
−1


 ˆN
ω
!2
−1
 .(3)
Here,c s is the local adiabatic sound speed. The characteristic
Lamb ( ˆS) and Brunt-Väisälä ( ˆN) frequencies in this equation
differ from their canonic forms by a factorJintroduced by the
displacement of the center of mass (Takata 2006),
ˆS=JS, ˆN= N
J ,(4)
J=1− ρ
⟨ρ⟩in
,(5)
whereρis the local density of the stellar medium and⟨ρ⟩ in is the
average density of the stellar material below the radius where it
is evaluated.
The solution to Eq. (2) is oscillatory with local wavelength
2π
k wherek 2 >0. This is the case for eitherω 2 < ˆS 2, ˆN2, in
which case the oscillation is stabilized by buoyancy and corre-
sponding modes are therefore referred to as buoyancy or gravity
(g) modes, or forω 2 > ˆS 2, ˆN2, in which case these acoustic or
pressure (p) modes propagate as sound waves. Wherek 2 <0, a
perturbation decays exponentially with decay lengthκ=ik∈R
according to Eq. (2). Oscillatory regions in a star are called cavi-
ties, regions in which a mode decays are called evanescent zones.
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
r/R*
101
102
103
 [ Hz]
g-mode
cavity evanescent zone p-mode cavity
radiative convective
ra rb rc
S1/(2 )
N/(2 )
max
Fig. 1.Propagation diagram of the inner 30 % by radius of a red-
giant model withM=1.25 M ⊙,Z=0.020. Characteristic frequen-
cies ˆS/(2π) (orange) and ˆN/(2π) (purple) as a function of fractional
radius. The dashed blue line and shaded area show the value ofν max
and the range of dipole mode frequencies used in the analysis. In
the g-mode cavity of a mode, its frequency lies below, and in the p-
mode cavity, it lies above the two characteristic frequencies. Where
ˆN/(2π)< ν < ˆS/(2π), the mode evanesces. Turning points atν max
are shown by crosses. The chemical discontinuity caused by the first
dredge-up (i.e., the spike in ˆN/(2π)) is located just below the evanes-
cent zone of the highest frequency considered in this model.
In Fig. 1, we show the propagation diagram (i.e., the local char-
acteristic frequencies as a function of radius) for a typical RGB
model. The internal g-mode cavity is bound by the modified
Lamb frequency at the inner turning pointr a very close to the
stellar center and by the modified Brunt-Väisälä frequency at
the outer turning pointr b. Above the evanescent zone, a p-mode
cavity begins atrc where the oscillation frequency crosses ˆS. The
respective oscillation frequency of a mode is given byν= ω
2π.
Imposing boundary conditions on the solutions of Eq. (2)
states an eigenvalue problem with eigenvaluesω. The resulting
resonance frequencies of a star are at the heart of the asymp-
totic analysis. Their pattern in frequency space is what can be
observed by a Fourier transform of the light curve.
2.1. Eigenvalues of g modes
By expanding the dispersion relation Eq. (3) in the limit thatω≪
ˆS, ˆNdeep inside the buoyancy cavity, Shibahashi (1979) derived
that pure g modes are evenly spaced in oscillation periodΠ =
2π
ω . The oscillation period of a pure g mode with radial ordern g
(ng <0 by convention) is therefore given by
Πg
ng =(−n g + Φ)·∆Π,(6)
where∆Πis the constant period spacing andΦis some phase
term. In the derivation by Shibahashi (1979),Φ =0. However,
for example Tassoul (1980) suggested that the correct treatment
of the wave function’s behavior at the turning points would lead
to a non-zero phase offset in Eq. (6). Mosser et al. (2012) empir-
ically found that usingΦ,0 improved their asymptotic fits to
observed mode-frequency patterns. In the literature, the empir-
ical observed phaseΦand the theoretical g-mode offset due to
partial reflection at the turning points are commonly identified
with each other (e.g. Mosser et al. 2018; Pinçon et al. 2019).
Article number, page 2

T. van Lier et al.: Facing the phase: Gravity-mode offset and buoyancy glitches in red–giant branch stars
2.2. Eigenvalues of mixed modes
As demonstrated by Fig. 1, modes with frequencies aroundν max
can oscillate in both, the buoyancy cavity in the core and the
acoustic cavity in the envelope of RGB stars. Oscillations in both
cavities couple through the intermediate evanescent zone by the
exchange of mode energy. As for the coupling of mechanical
harmonic oscillators, this shifts the eigenfrequencies of the pure
g and p modes to a joint eigenfrequency of the resulting mixed
mode.
Shibahashi (1979) and Takata (2016b) showed that the eigen-
value condition for mixed modes can be written as
cot(Θg) tan(Θp)=q(7)
in the framework of weak and strong interaction between the two
cavities, respectively. In this expression, the coupling strength
q∈[0,1] represents the degree of interaction between the cav-
ities, whileΘ g,p quantify the deviation of the mixed mode fre-
quency from the frequencies of the closest pure g and p mode,
respectively (Jiang et al. 2018).
Starting from Eq. (7) and using a formalism introduced
by Christensen-Dalsgaard (2012), Hekker et al. (2018) derived
an expression for the asymptotic oscillation periods of mixed
modes1:
Πas = ∆Π·
−npg + Φ−
arctan

qcot(Θ p)

π +n p
 .(8)
In this expression,n p is the radial order of the pure p mode
contributing to the mixed mode, andn pg =n p +n g is the total
radial order. Equation (8) shows that the coupling of the pure
g modes described by Eq. (6) to a p mode introduces a phase
shift to the mode periods. This phase is purely additive toΦ. As
Θp (and hence the phase introduced by the mode coupling) is
a function of frequency, it can be disentangled from the phase
offset found for pure g modes (which is roughly constant across
the observed frequency range, cf. e.g. Pinçon et al. (2019)), and
therefore mixed modes can be used to studyΦ, even though it
is a property of g modes. Equation (8) is a function of the ra-
dial orders and frequencies of the mixed modes, along with five
asymptotic parameters: the coupling strengthq, the g-mode pa-
rameters∆ΠandΦ, and their p-mode equivalents – the large
frequency separation∆νand p–mode phase offsetεp – which are
hidden inΘ p,
Θp =π
 ν
∆ν −(n p +ε p)

.(9)
3. Gravity-mode offsetε g
At the turning points of cavities, propagating waves are partially
reflected, which induces a phase shift to the standing-wave fre-
quencies observed as eigenfrequencies of the star. For the g-
mode component of oscillations in red giants, Takata (2016a)
derived the phase contributed by reflection at the inner turning
point to be 1
2 because the modified Lamb frequency ˆSis very
steep aroundr a (see Fig. 1). The phase shift at the outer turning
point, collected into a termε g, is given by
εg =− 1
π
d
dν
Z rb
˜r
ν·k(r, ν) dr+ Ψ
π (10)
1 Hekker et al. (2018) write arctan
h
qcot(Θ p)
i
as a frequency-depen-
dent phase contributed by the coupling, which they callΦ(ν).
in the framework of strong interaction between the oscillation
cavities introduced by Takata (2016a). The radius coordinate ˜r
is chosen deep inside the buoyancy cavity. In this expression for
εg (inspired by the analysis by Pinçon et al. 2019), the first term
corresponds to the phase contribution by reflection atr b alone,
whileΨrepresents the interaction with the sound cavity across
a narrow evanescent zone. Both terms are discussed in further
detail in the following subsections.
3.1. Numerical evaluation of the reflection atr b
Before numerically evaluating the first term on the right-hand
side of Eq. (10), we simplified it analytically in order to reduce
the numerical noise. Sincer b depends on the oscillation fre-
quency, we use that
∂
∂y
Z g(y)
a
f(x,y) dx=
Z g(y)
a
∂f(x,y)
∂y dx+ ∂g(y)
∂y ·f(g(y),y),
(11)
which we can apply to the expression at hand by identifyingx≡
r,y≡ν,g(y)≡r b, andf(x,y)≡νk(r, ν). Because the oscillation
frequency is constant across the radius of the star,∂ν
∂r =0, we can
promote Eq. (11) from partial to total derivatives in this case. We
therefore obtain
d
dν
Z rb
˜r
νk(r, ν) dr=
Z rb
˜r
∂[ν·k(r, ν)]
∂ν dr+ ∂rb
∂ν ·ν·k(r b, ν).
(12)
The second term on the right-hand side of this equation is equal
to zero sincek(r b, ν)=0 by the definition ofr b and the other fac-
tors are finite. This leaves only one term. The partial derivative
can be evaluated using the asymptotic dispersion relation Eq. (3).
We obtain
∂[ν·k(r, ν)]
∂ν =k·
2− 1
1−
 2πν
ˆS
2 − 1
1−
 2πν
ˆN
2
 .(13)
3.2. Evanescent zone contributionΨ
Takata (2016a) finds the following expression for the phase con-
tributed to the g-mode frequencies by the interaction with the
sound cavity across the evanescent zone:
Ψ = Ψ0(X)− 1
2 arg[D(0)]− π
4 ,(14)
Ψ0 =− 1
2 arg[Γ(1+iX)]− X
2 (1−ln(X))+ π
8 .(15)
Here, arg andΓare the complex argument and gamma functions,
respectively, andD(0) andXare functions of the stellar structure
in the evanescent zone, notably containing gradients of the char-
acteristic frequencies evaluated at √rbrc. For the full form of the
expressions, we refer the reader to Takata (2016a). We note that
arg[Γ(1+iX)] is chosen to be the standard argument with values
in [−π, π] aroundX=0, and then offset by multiples of 2πto
maintain a smooth function for largeX.
Crucially, for wide evanescent zones,Xgoes to infinity and
thereforeΨ 0 goes to zero, whileD(0) becomes real and hence
arg[D(0)] also goes to zero. Therefore
Ψ
X→∞
− − − − → −π
4 (16)
Article number, page 3

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa58519-25
in the limit of a wide evanescent zone. This expansion is
commonly used in the literature when calculatingε g, and
on comparison to observations, it appears to give decent re-
sults (e.g. Pinçon et al. 2019). From a theoretical point of
view, however, it is somewhat inconsistent to use. On the one
hand, in early red giants (when the evanescent zone is narrow,
van Rossem et al. 2024) it is not applicable because the require-
ment of a wide evanescent zone is clearly not met. We will inves-
tigate how strong the deviation of the full expression from this
limit is, and whether it is in agreement with both observations
and models. On the other hand, as the evanescent zone widens,
the underlying assumptions leading to the expression in Eq. (14)
are no longer met, since it was itself derived in the limit of a nar-
row evanescent zone. As shown by, for example, van Lier et al.
(2025), the results derived by Takata (2016a) in this limit are
only valid on the early RGB. It is plausible, however, that
as the interaction with the sound cavity becomes weaker the
evanescent-zone properties contribute less to the phase shift im-
printed on the g-mode frequencies and the terms inXvanish.
Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume that in this case the
limit still holds. We will also test this assumption.
When evaluating the full expression forΨ, Eq. (14), for our
stellar models, we find a strong discrepancy between our re-
sults and the values obtained by Takata (2016a) for an analytical
model of the stellar structure. Most notably, we obtain signifi-
cantly higher values for arg[D(0)], leading to substantially lower
εg. These do not agree well with observed g-mode offsets, while
agreement is increased when omitting that term altogether. The
term arg[D(0)] appears as the antiderivative at the lower limit of
an integral in Eq. (A16) of Takata (2016a). 2 The evaluation of
the corresponding integral is presented in Appendix A.1.3 of the
same paper, and it crucially depends on Eq. (A41) thereof, where
it is assumed that the inverse of the coordinate value at the upper
limit of the integral|x| −1 is of the same order of magnitude or
smaller than the inverse of the coordinate value at the edges of
the evanescent zone|x 0|−1. The coordinatesxare defined in such
a way that 0≤ |x| ≤ |x 0|in the evanescent zone, wherex=0
in the center of the evanescent zone atr= √rbrc. Since the in-
tegral is evaluated with the upper limitx=xsomewhere within
the evanescent zone as part of the wave function atx(which is
why only the lower limit of the integral is a constant that is ab-
sorbed into the phaseΨ),|x| −1 ≥ |x 0|−1. For some values ofx, the
assumption made in Eq. (A41) of Takata (2016a) will therefore
not hold. The full evaluation of the integral for arbitraryxis not
straightforward. Taking the opposite limit, however, and choos-
ing|x| ≈0 everywhere in the integration domain makes part of
the integrand vanish, which removes the term arg[D(0)] from the
phase entirely, so we are only left with
ˆΨ = Ψ0 − π
4 ,(17)
whereΨ 0 is given by Eq. (15).3 This limit is equivalent to assum-
ing that the contribution from the middle of the evanescent zone
dominates the integral.
2 In the form written in this equation, ˜Dis the functionDscaled by a
large quantity such that the absolute value of ˜Dis of order unity. Then
ln
 ˜D(0)

=ln

| ˜D(0)|eiarg[ ˜D(0)]
=ln

| ˜D(0)|

+iarg[ ˜D(0)]≈iarg[D(0)],
because ln(1)=0 and the argument of a complex number is independent
of scaling.
3 This also implies that the antiderivative at the upper limit of the in-
tegral∝ln(D(s)) is missing in the wave function in this limit. It goes
beyond the scope of this work to follow through on the full impact of
this assumption.
3.3. An analytical model for the buoyancy cavity
In an effort to evaluateεg fully analytically, Pinçon et al. (2019)
developed a simplified model of the Brunt-Väisälä frequency
and assumed ˆS≫2πνfor ˜r≤r≤r b. In this toy model, the
profile of ˆNis separated into two regimes, following a power
law inside the buoyancy cavity and abruptly dropping to zero at
the bottom of the convective envelope,
ˆN(r)=

ˆNBCZ
 rBCZ
r
β
,˜r≤r≤r BCZ
0,r BCZ <r .(18)
The subscript ‘BCZ’ refers to quantities at the bottom of the con-
vection zone. The authors further assumed the modifying fac-
torJ(Eq. 5) to be constant due to the high density contrast be-
tween stellar core and envelope. In this case, it relates to the
power-law indexβasJ= 2β
3 .
Under these assumptions, the g-mode offset can be calcu-
lated analytically for two different cases. For 2πν > ˆNBCZ (i.e.,
the buoyancy cavity does not extend all the way to the convec-
tive envelope andr b is a function of frequency), the variations
ofkνandr b with oscillation frequency cancel andε g becomes
independent ofν. Pinçon et al. (2019) refer to this as ‘case a’:
εa
g =
√
2
3 − 1
4 ,2πν > ˆNBCZ ,(19)
where we use the limitΨ≈ − π
4 for wide evanescent zones
for consistency with the assumption that ˆS≫2πν. In ‘case b’
(2πν < ˆNBCZ) the turning point stays fixed atr BCZ when vary-
ing the oscillation frequency, and the induced phase becomes
frequency-dependent (Pinçon et al. 2019):
εb
g = 2
√
2
3π arcsin
 2πν
ˆNBCZ
!
− 1
4 ,2πν < ˆNBCZ .(20)
During evolution along the RGB, the frequency range in which
oscillations are excited decreases as the envelope expands. At
the same time, as the core contracts, ˆNBCZ increases. This means
that a red giant will evolve from case a to case b as it ages.
4. Glitches in the Brunt-Väisälä frequency
Glitches are sharp variations in the stellar structure compared
to the local wavelength of the oscillations. In RGB stars, the
spike in the Brunt-Väisälä frequency (cf. Fig. 1) representing the
chemical discontinuity at the deepest extent of the convective
envelope during the first dredge-up is the most prominent sharp
feature that can act as a glitch. During evolution, it first appears
in the evanescent zone of excited mixed modes and moves into
the buoyancy cavity asν max decreases (cf. also the discussion by
van Lier et al. 2025).
4.1. A Dirac-delta glitch in the evanescent zone
Typically, glitches are understood as narrow features within the
oscillation cavities of a star. Jiang et al. (2022) showed that the
spike in the Brunt-Väisälä frequency affects the inferred cou-
pling strength also when it lies in the evanescent zone of the
dipole modes. Here, we derive the g–mode frequency phase con-
tributed by a glitch in the evanescent zone. We start our deriva-
tion from the formalism introduced by Shibahashi (1979). This
means we implicitly assume weak coupling between the cavi-
ties (which we do as van Lier et al. (2025) have shown that the
Article number, page 4

T. van Lier et al.: Facing the phase: Gravity-mode offset and buoyancy glitches in red–giant branch stars
ra rb
radius coordinate
0wave function
a
c
d
Fig. 2.Sketch of the setup of wave functions used in Sect. 4.1, with
wave functions labeled by their amplitude parameters. The wave func-
tion shown as a solid orange line is the sum of the two dashed orange
lines. When deriving the eigenfrequencies, the solid blue and orange
lines are matched deep inside the cavity (i.e., betweenr a andr b).
strong-coupling formalism introduced by Takata (2016a) is only
valid for less evolved models for which the spike does not ap-
pear in the evanescent zone). In the case of weak coupling, the
interaction is purely additive in the wave functions. This means
that the coupling only adds a (frequency-dependent) phase to the
eigenfrequencies. We further assume that the glitch is far enough
away from the p-mode cavity not to affect the p-mode eigen-
frequencies, so the g-mode phase contributed by the coupling
(arctan
h
qcot(Θ p)
i
/π, cf. Eq. 8) is independent of the presence
of the glitch. Also, we neglect the phase contributed by the be-
havior of the wave function around the turning pointsr a andr b.
Since we are only interested in the relative phase contributed by
the glitch, bothε g and the effect of the (weak) coupling cancel
out when taking the difference between the eigenvalue condition
with and without a spike. This allows us to apply this simplified
framework, in which we can treat the g-mode component of the
mixed modes as isolated g modes. We note, however, that this
framework does not allow for the inclusion of any potential in-
teractions between the phases contributed by the coupling and
the glitch in the evanescent zone.
The eigenvalue condition for g modes is obtained by match-
ing two asymptotic solutions to the oscillation equations that are
expanded around the different turning points. The first solution
describes an outgoing wave to the center of the star with an am-
plitudea, originating from an expansion around the inner turning
pointr a. The second solution is a superposition of an outgoing
wave to and an incoming wave from the stellar envelope with
amplitudescandd, respectively, originating from an expansion
around the outer turning pointrb. This setup is sketched in Fig. 2.
The amplitude of an incoming wave from the stellar center has
to beb≡0 to ensure regularity of the solution atr=0.
Imposing that the solutions aroundr a andr b match deep in-
side the buoyancy cavity for two dependent variables (represent-
ing the radial displacement and pressure perturbation, the latter
of which is essentially a radial derivative of the former), we ar-
rive at a system of equations for the amplitudes:
c=−a·sin
 Z rb
ra
kdr− π
2
!
,(21)
d= +a·cos
 Z rb
ra
kdr− π
2
!
.(22)
We note that the pure g modes considered by Shibahashi (1979)
are different from those studied here since the nature of the turn-
ing points is exchanged. This introduces a phase shift ofπto
the amplitude relation ford, hence Eq. (22) differs from Eq. (21)
in Shibahashi (1979) by a ‘−’ sign. Starting from these ampli-
tude relations, Shibahashi (1979) argued that the incoming wave
from the envelope should have a vanishing amplitude (d=0)
since otherwise the solution would grow exponentially towards
the surface of the star. Using Eq. (22), this leads to the eigenvalue
condition
cos
 Z rb
ra
kdr− π
2
!
=0⇔
Z rb
ra
kdr=nπ(23)
for some integern. As this condition is periodic inπ, we retrieve
the same equation as in the original paper despite the phase shift
due to the turning-point nature.
We now assume that the glitch in the evanescent zone can
lead to a reflection of mode energy. This allowsdto become
non-zero without the need for a growing mode beyond the glitch.
Mathematically, we parametrize this using the following shape
of a generic ‘wave’ function in an evanescent environment:
ψ(r)=

exp

−
R r
rb
κ0dr

+Rexp

+
R r
rb
κ0dr

,r b ≤r<r ∗
Texp

−
R r
rb
κ0dr

,r>r ∗ ,
(24)
wherer ∗ indicates the radial position of the glitch, which we
model as a Dirac-delta function superimposed on a smooth
squared decay lengthκ 2
0(r). This representation ofψ(r) relies
on the assumption that the glitch is located sufficiently far away
from the turning point that the wave function takes its asymptotic
form atr ∗.RandTare amplitude coefficients corresponding to
reflection and transmission at the glitch, respectively. This means
that we can identifydin the framework of Shibahashi (1979) as
d=Rc.(25)
We now requireψto be continuous atr ∗,
lim
r↗r∗
ψ=lim
r↘r∗
ψ=:ψ(r ∗),(26)
which relates the reflection and transmission coefficients:
R=(T−1)·e −2d∗
,(27)
whered ∗ denotes the decay of the mode amplitude up until the
glitch in number of e-foldings,
d∗ =
Z r∗
rb
κ0 dr.(28)
The radial derivative of the wave functiondψ
dr cannot be expected
to be continuous in the presence of a glitch. Instead, we use a
narrow integral of the oscillator equation (2) aroundr ∗ to quan-
tify the discontinuity:
lim
ϵ→0
Z r∗+ϵ
r∗−ϵ
d2ψ
dr2 =−lim
ϵ→0
Z r∗+ϵ
r∗−ϵ
k2ψdr.(29)
Assuming a Dirac-delta function for the glitch, this limit is
equivalent to
lim
r↘r∗
dψ
dr −lim
r↗r∗
dψ
dr =−A·ψ(r ∗),(30)
whereAis the amplitude of the glitch in the sense of the area
under the spike,
A=
Z
glitch
(k2 −k 2
0) dr.(31)
Article number, page 5

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa58519-25
Using Eq. (24) and neglecting derivatives of the decay length,
this leads to
κ0(r∗)·

−Te −d∗
+e −d∗
−Re +d∗
=−A·Te −d∗
.(32)
Combining Eqs. (27) and (32), we obtain the reflection coeffi-
cient
R= 1
A−1 −1 ·e −2d∗
,(33)
with the scaled amplitude parameter
A= A
2κ0(r∗) .(34)
Inserting Eq. (33) into (25) and further into (22), together
with Eq. (21) this leads to a new eigenvalue condition:
cos
 Z rb
ra
kdr− π
2
!
+Rsin
 Z rb
ra
kdr− π
2
!
=0 (35)
⇔
Z rb
ra
kdr=
 
n+
" 1
π arctan

(1−A −1)·e +2d∗
+ 1
2
#!
π .(36)
We call the phase term in square brackets, which is added to the
original condition Eq. (23) due to the presence of the glitch,
ΦEZ B 1
π arctan

(1−A −1)·e +2d∗
+ 1
2 .(37)
ForA<1 (which was the case in all models we analyzed),Φ EZ
is limited from above by 1
2 and goes to zero for large distances
from the turning point to the glitchr∗ −r b (equivalent to larged ∗)
or small glitch amplitudesA. We note that for very large glitches
(A>1),Φ EZ is limited by 1
2 from below and approaches 1 in
the limit of the glitch being very far away fromr b. Since the
g–mode frequency phase is only defined modulo 1, the limit of
a zero effective phase contribution for larged∗ is maintained in
this case, too.
4.2. A Dirac-delta glitch in the g-mode cavity
The phase contribution to the eigenfrequencies of mixed modes
by a spike-like glitch in the buoyancy cavity was first derived
by Cunha et al. (2015). The glitch discussed here is inherently a
feature of the Brunt-Väisälä frequency. When deriving the phase
it contributes to the eigenfunction of an oscillation mode, how-
ever, the sharp variation that the spike causes in the correspond-
ing wave vector is relevant (similarly as in Eq. 29). In the limit
ω2 ≪ ˆN2, ˆS 2, which is valid deep inside the buoyancy cavity,
k2 ≈ 2N2
ω2r2 for dipole modes. Therefore, the amplitude of the re-
sulting spike ink 2 is proportional to that inN 2 and so it can
be parametrized by a frequency-independent amplitude multi-
plied byω −2 in this limit. This approach is taken by Cunha et al.
(2015).
They modeled the glitch as a Dirac-delta perturbation with
amplitudeCto a smooth squared Brunt-Väisälä frequencyN 2
0,
N2(r)=N 2
0(r)· (1+Cδ(r−r ∗)) .(38)
Using the expansion for the wave vector discussed above, they
derived resonance frequencies in the framework developed by
Gough (1993). They continuously matched asymptotic wave
functions expanded aroundr a andr b atr ∗, and quantified the
jump in the radial derivative of the wave function atr ∗ analo-
gously to Eq. (30), whereAneeds to be replaced by
2N2
0 (r∗)
ω2r∗2 C.
Comparing the resulting eigenfrequencies to those derived with-
out a glitch, Cunha et al. (2015) found that a spike inN 2 intro-
duces a phase shift ofΦ δ given by4
Φδ = 1
π arcsin
" C
ωB sin2

ϕ+ π
4
#
,(39)
B2 =
"
1− C
2ω cos (2ϕ)
#2
+
" C
ω sin2

ϕ+ π
4
#2
,(40)
C=
√
2N0(r∗)
r∗ C.(41)
Here,ϕcharacterizes the position of the glitch as the phase of
the eigenfunction atr ∗. This phase is comprised of the phase
the eigenfunction picks up when propagating fromr b tor ∗, ap-
proximated by an integral over the asymptotic wave vector, and
the phase shift induced by the coupling to the p-mode cavity
(Cunha et al. 2015; Cunha et al. 2024):
ϕ=
Z rb
r∗
k0dr+arctan

qcot(Θ p)

.(42)
Applying the discussed limit for the smooth wave vectork 0 and
correcting for the behavior close to the turning point by intro-
ducing a phase offsetδ, the first term can be substituted by
(Cunha et al. 2019):
Z rb
r∗
k0dr≈
Z rb
r∗
√
2N0
ωr dr+δ=:
ω∗
g
ω +δ .(43)
The parameterω ∗
g is the buoyancy depth of the glitch.
Following the arguments in Sect. 3,εg represents the phase in
the resonance frequencies due to corrections close tor b, equiva-
lent to a phaseπε g imparted on the eigenfunction in this region.
While these corrections do not only account for deviations from
the limitk 2 ∝ω −2, but also for corrections of the non-asymptotic
behavior of the wave function aroundr b, and are hence concep-
tually different fromδas it is introduced in the approximation
above, we argue that they should be taken into account in the
calculation of the phase of the eigenfunction atr ∗. We therefore
use the mathematically similar expression:
ϕ=
ω∗
g
ω +πε g,as +arctan

qcot(Θ p)

,(44)
to estimateϕ. However, we note that this constitutes an addi-
tional assumption about the phaseδ, which is left free in the
formulation by Cunha et al. (2024). The subscript ‘as’ indicates
that Eq. (44) refers to the g-mode offset found from the asymp-
totic frequency pattern.
The glitch derived in this framework contributes a negative
phase to the eigenfrequencies, soΦ δ >0 is subtracted from the
integernin the eigenvalue condition of the g modes (Eq. 23).
We note that, analogously to Sect. 4.1, this derivation assumes
that the wave function takes its asymptotic form either side ofr ∗
or, equivalently, that the glitch is located sufficiently deep inside
the buoyancy cavity.
4 We note thatΦδ here differs fromΦas derived by Cunha et al. (2015)
by a factorπ, because Cunha et al. (2015) interpret it as a phase to the
wave function rather than the eigenfrequencies.
Article number, page 6

T. van Lier et al.: Facing the phase: Gravity-mode offset and buoyancy glitches in red–giant branch stars
4.3. A Gaussian glitch in the g-mode cavity
Another assumption inherent to both glitch parametrizations pre-
sented thus far is that the spike in the Brunt-Väisälä frequency
can be modeled by a Dirac-delta function. This is only accurate
for a step-like discontinuity in the chemical abundance profile of
the star producing a Dirac-delta spike in the Brunt-Väisälä fre-
quency. During evolution, diffusive mixing processes will suc-
cessively smooth the sharp transition, making the width of the
spike finite. As the star ages, the glitch moves further into the
cavity and to significantly higher wavenumbersk 0(r∗), further
increasing its width relative to the local wavelength 2π
k0
. When
the glitch becomes too wide, the approximation by a Dirac-delta
function is no longer suitable. Cunha et al. (2019, 2024) pre-
sented a term for the phase contributed by a glitch inNmodeled
by a Gaussian function,
N(ωr
g)=N 0 ·
1+ CG
√
2π∆g
exp
−
(ωr
g −ω ∗
g)2
2∆2g

 ,(45)
instead. Here,ω r
g is the buoyancy depth corresponding to the ra-
dius coordinate (cf. Eq. (43),ω ∗
g =ω r
g(r∗)),∆ g is the width of
the glitch parametrized by the standard deviation of the Gaus-
sian in units of buoyancy depth, andC G is the amplitude of the
Gaussian.
Cunha et al. (2019) used a similar approach to Cunha et al.
(2015) to derive the glitch-induced phase shift, now for a Gaus-
sian instead of a Dirac-delta glitch. The challenge, however, is
that for a finite width of the Gaussian, they needed to assume a
shape of the wave function inside the glitch. This is not straight-
forward, since the asymptotic expansion and the whole analysis
starting from Eq. (2) are not valid in the regime of fast varia-
tions in stellar structure. Cunha et al. (2019) tried out different
formulations and introduced some factors ad-hoc to both match
numerically obtained phases and converge to different limits cor-
rectly, which in the end left them with an expression that is not
rigorously derived but motivated by the mathematical formalism
and supported by numeric results. Cunha et al. (2024) summa-
rized the obtained phase contribution:
ΦG = 1
πarccot

1
CG f
∆g
ω sin2(β2)
−cot(β 2)
 ,(46)
f
∆g
ω = 1
ωe
−2
 ∆g
ω
2
,(47)
β2 ≈
ω∗
g
ω +πε g,as +arctan

qcot(Θ p)

+ π
4 ,(48)
where we replaced the unconstrained phase parameterδintro-
duced by these authors byπε g,as, similarly as in Eq. (44). Again,
the phase contributed by a glitch in the buoyancy cavity is sub-
tracted from the integer parameter in the eigenvalue condition.
Like in Sect. 4.2, the derivation of these terms relies on the
asymptotic shape of the wave function around the glitch and the
proportionalityk 2 ∝ N2
ω2 to isolate the glitch parameters. For in-
stance, the summands
ω∗
g
ω +πε g,as in Eq. (48) originate from the
approximation given in Eq. (44). Therefore, it can only be ex-
pected to be valid once the spike has moved sufficiently far into
the buoyancy cavity.
5. Methods and data
In this section we summarize all the methods we used to test the
various phase contributions.
3.73.83.9
log(Teff/K)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00log(L/L )
Z = 0.020
1.75 M
1.50 M
1.25 M
1.00 M
3.73.83.9
log(Teff/K)
M = 1.25 M
0.015
0.020
0.025
Fig. 3.Evolutionary tracks of stars with various massesMat initial
metallicityZ=0.020 (left panel,Mindicated in the figure) and various
ZatM=1.25 M ⊙ (right panel,Zindicated in the figure). Circles mark
the positions of the models for which g–mode frequency phases are
shown in Sect. 6. The tracks are the same as the ones introduced by
van Lier et al. (2025).
5.1. Stellar models
The main ingredient for our comparisons are stellar models, for
which we can calculate the different phase contributions from
the stellar structure. We used version r24.08.1 of the 1D stel-
lar evolution code MESA (‘Modules for Experiments in Stel-
lar Astrophysics’; Paxton et al. 2011, 2013, 2015, 2018, 2019;
Jermyn et al. 2023) to calculate canonical (i.e. neglecting ro-
tation, magnetic fields, overshooting and stellar winds) stellar
models along evolutionary tracks with varying initial masses
M∈ {1.00,1.25,1.50,1.75}M ⊙ (forZ=0.020) and metallici-
tiesZ∈ {0.015,0.020,0.025}(forM=1.25 M ⊙).5 Hertzsprung-
Russel diagrams with the resulting evolutionary tracks are shown
in Fig. 3. The radial profile data of these models contain the char-
acteristic frequencies and other ingredients needed to calculate
all parameters for the phase contributions outlined in previous
sections. Additionally, we got estimates forνmax from the scaling
relation Eq. (1), and for∆νfrom the sound-crossing time through
the star.
We further used version 7.2.1 of the stellar oscillation code
GYRE (Townsend & Teitler 2013) to calculate the resonance
frequencies of dipole modes within [νmax −3∆ν, ν max +3∆ν] for
all models, where we used the MESA estimates forν max and
∆ν. This roughly corresponds to a typical observable frequency
range. Since GYRE solves the oscillation equations numerically
and does not rely on any asymptotic expansions, we consider
these frequencies to accurately represent observed frequencies
(given the structure of a star as given by the model profile).
5.2. Evaluating theoretical prescriptions forε g
For each of the models marked in Fig. 3, we calculated the g-
mode offset as outlined in Sect. 3.1,
εg,num =− 1
π
Z rb
˜r
k·
2− 1
1−
 2πν
ˆS
2 − 1
1−
 2πν
ˆN
2
 dr+ Ψ
π ,(49)
5 We used the same models as van Lier et al. (2025); the MESA
inlists andrun_star_extras.f90are available on Zenodo (doi:
10.5281/zenodo.15261756).
Article number, page 7

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa58519-25
where the integral still needs to be evaluated numerically as a
Riemann sum. Since the integrand given by Eq. (13) goes to
zero for 2πν≪ ˆN, ˆSdeep inside the buoyancy cavity, the re-
gion around ˜rcontributes only little to the integral. Therefore
the choice of this coordinate is expected not to affect the result
significantly. To minimize the effect of the exact choice in ˜r, we
chose the model cell in which the integrand Eq. (13) had the
minimum value as the lower integration limit. Numerical tests
showed that the dependence decreases with evolution (which
makes sense given thatν max decreases and therefore the assump-
tion that 2πν max ≪ ˆN, ˆSis increasingly fulfilled), but even for
the earliest models discussed in this workε g varies by less that
10−3 when changing ˜ron the order of 1 %. This is below the
numerical noise. For the upper integration bound, we used lin-
ear interpolation from the cells right belowr b tor b to reduce
the dependence on cell boundary positions. For the evanescent
zone termΨwe implemented and compared all three versions
discussed in Sect. 3.2: the formula Eq. (14) as derived by Takata
(2016a), the wide–evanescent zone limit Eq. (16), and the pro-
posed modified ˆΨfrom Eq. (17).
We also computed the g-mode offset analytically using the
prescription introduced in Sect. 3.3. To this end, we fit a seg-
mented model following Eq. (18) to the modified Brunt-Väisälä
frequency given by the stellar profile sufficiently above the
hydrogen-burning shell and determined ˆNBCZ from the fit. We
then evaluated
εg,ana =
( εa
g ,2πν≥ ˆNBCZ
εb
g ,2πν < ˆNBCZ
,(50)
withε a
g andε b
g given by Eqs. (19) and (20), respectively.
We calculated bothε g,num andε g,ana forν=ν max as well as
for all dipole mode frequencies computed by GYRE. This way
we were able to estimate a range of values expected across the
observable range of modes.
5.3. Fitting for the phase
To simulate the asymptotic parameters as they would be derived
from seismic observations and link them to the calculation from
the stellar models, we fit the asymptotic periods (Eq. 8) to the in-
verse of the models’ observed frequencies. The full fitting proce-
dure is outlined in van Lier et al. (2025), we summarize it again
in Appendix A.1. Typically, the phaseΦobtained by such a pro-
cedure is identified with the gravity mode offsetε g + 1
2, even
though it should contain any phase contribution (except for the
phase contributed by the coupling to p modes, which is explicitly
isolated inΠ as), including for example that by glitches. With the
derivations presented in this work, we can write the phase as a
sum of various contributions,
Φ =ε g + 1
2 −Φ cavity + ΦEZ ,(51)
whereΦ cavity is a placeholder for a choice ofΦ δ orΦ G. When-
ever the spike in the Brunt-Väisälä frequency did not lie in the
evanescent zone of a model, we choseΦ EZ ≡0; when it was not
in the buoyancy cavity, we setΦ cavity ≡0. To test whether any
other contributions to this phase are missing, we isolatedε g and
compared it to the theoretically predicted values.
When both glitch contributions to the phase were zero, we
could identify the g-mode offset from an asymptotic fit as:
εg,as = Φ− 1
2 without a glitch. (52)
The calculations with a glitch in the evanescent zone were simi-
larly straightforward. For ˆN≪2πν≪ ˆS, which would be given
deep inside a wide evanescent zone, Eq. (3) can be expanded to
κ≈
√
2
r . While numeric tests showed that this approximation
for the decay length deviates significantly from the full expres-
sion for our stellar models, we still observed that the frequency
dependence ofκwas small, as suggested by this limit. We there-
fore assumed it to be sufficiently small so we could calculateΦEZ
(Eq. 37) just atν max to obtain an estimate suitable across the full
range of fit frequencies. Since we assumeΦ EZ to be frequency-
independent, it becomes fully degenerate withε g,as. Therefore
we fixed its value for each model according to Eq. (37) using the
stellar profile and subtracted it from the phaseΦ− 1
2 obtained in
the fit to get an estimate forε g,as:
εg,as = Φ− 1
2 −Φ EZ with a glitch in the evanescent zone.
(53)
Φδ andΦ G on the other hand are explicitly frequency-dependent,
even though the parametersCandω ∗
g (orC G,∆ g, andω ∗
g) are
only defined by the profile ofN 2 and hence independent of the
oscillation frequency. 6 While Pinçon et al. (2019) argued that
Φcavity should be small compared to observational uncertainties
in the phase offset, we want to study whether this frequency
dependence and resulting different shape of the eigenfrequency
pattern can still affect the convergence of the fit. Therefore, we
included the explicit frequency dependence into the asymptotic
period formula (Eq. 8). The specifics of the new fitting are de-
scribed in Appendix A.2.
5.4. Observational data
The asteroseismic catalog published by Mosser et al. (2018)
contains measurements ofε g in the senseε g = Φ− 1
2 for
more than 150 RGB stars observed by theKeplermission. We
use these measurements to cross-check our results and verify
whether stellar models can accurately reproduce the relevant
properties of real stars. The dataset also contains estimates for
νmax, which we use as an indicator of evolution along which we
can compare models and observations.
In order to identify any potential mass trends, we used
the KIC number to cross-match the sources with APOKASC-2
(Pinsonneault et al. 2018), which contains mass estimates for
many solar-like oscillators in theKeplerfield. We found 114
RGB stars for which we could obtain both a mass and a g-mode
offset from the combination of these two catalogs.
6. Results
In Fig. 4, we show a comparison between the g-mode offset cal-
culated numerically from the stellar model profiles as outlined
in Sect. 3.1 to the asymptotic fit for the phaseΦ− 1
2. The dif-
ferent formulations for the evanescent-zone termΨpresented
in Sect. 3.2 differ most strongly on the early RGB (correspond-
ing to largerν max) since the coupling is strongest in this regime.
The comparison toΦ− 1
2 shows that the commonly used weak-
coupling limit (Eq. 16) is indeed not fully applicable there. For
6 We note thatω ∗
g implicitly depends on frequency via the definition of
the turning point. However, since the spike forms at the lowest extent of
the convective envelope, which has not receded much in the models we
study, we can reasonably assume thatr b ≈r BCZ (see also Fig. 1), and
henceω ∗
g is only weakly frequency-depend.
Article number, page 8

T. van Lier et al.: Facing the phase: Gravity-mode offset and buoyancy glitches in red–giant branch stars
50 100 200 300 400
max [ Hz]
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
g  | 1/2
narrow evanescent zonewide evanescent zone
g, num, = /4
g, num, =
g, num, =
1/2
Fig. 4.Numerically evaluated g-mode offset compared to the asymp-
totic phase shift ‘observed’ from frequencies of models marked in Fig. 3
along theM=1.25 M ⊙,Z=0.020 track, as a function ofν max. Stars
evolve from right to left. Green crosses with error bars show results
of the frequency fitting with uncertainties as defined in Appendix A.1.
Thick purple, pink and red lines showε g,num(νmax) withΨin the wide–
evanescent zone limit, as derived by Takata (2016a), and as defined in
Eq. (17), respectively; corresponding shaded areas show the values ob-
tained across the frequency range used in the fits. The vertical dotted
line shows the transition from the regime of a narrow to a wide evanes-
cent zone as defined by van Lier et al. (2025).
50 100 200 300 400
max [ Hz]
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
g  | 1/2
g, num
g, ana
1/2
Fig. 5.Analytically (blue) and numerically (red) evaluated g-mode off-
set compared to the asymptotic phase shift ‘observed’ from the frequen-
cies of models marked in Fig. 3 along theM=1.25 M ⊙,Z=0.020
track, as a function ofν max. Stars evolve from right to left. See Fig. 4 for
the meaning of different symbols and lines.
our numerical evaluation, ˆΨis the most suitable prescription.
Therefore, whenever we plotε g,num as given by Eq. (49) in the
following, we useΨ = ˆΨ(Eq. 17). For more evolved models,
εg,num converges to agree between all three expressions. How-
ever, forν max <∼ 100µHz the asymptotic phase no longer follows
the trend predicted by our numerical calculations.
The result of estimating the g-mode offset from an analytical
model as described in Sect. 3.3 is shown in Fig. 5. On the early
RGB (νmax >∼ 100µHz),ε g,ana as given by Eq. (50) correctly re-
produces the trend that the g–mode frequency phase is roughly
constant, as it is also visible in bothΦ− 1
2 andε g,num. However,
the application of the weak-coupling limit for the evanescent
zone term means that the value is systematically underestimated.
On the late RGB (νmax <∼ 100µHz), the analytical and numerical
calculation of the g-mode offset give consistent values within the
range of observed frequencies. The analytical model can there-
fore be used to estimateε g for a given model in this regime.
However, the morphology of the time evolution is significantly
different: Whileεg,num decreases smoothly with evolution,ε g,ana
stalls at the constant value from the early RGB for longer, before
showing a kink and steep decrease. The latter trend appears to
agree with the evolution ofΦ− 1
2 better, however, neither theo-
retical prescription for the g-mode offset reproduces the extreme
values the observed phase takes in this regime.
Figure 6 shows the effect of including the glitch effects to
calculateε g,as. Since we used Eq. (52) on the early RGB, only
a subset of models is shown compared to Fig. 5. We observe
that including the glitches into the fitting significantly improves
the agreement betweenε g,as andε g,num. SubtractingΦ EZ causes
the phase to drop below the original constant value earlier, in
good agreement with the evolution of the numerically calculated
g-mode offset. Once the spike in the Brunt-Väisälä frequency
has moved into the buoyancy cavity, the glitch model usingΦ δ
(Cunha et al. 2015, see also Sect. 4.2) significantly improves the
agreement between fit and numerical calculation, however there
are still discrepancies. The agreement for the most evolved mod-
els withν max <∼ 40µHz can be improved using the Gaussian
glitch prescriptionΦ G (Cunha et al. 2019, see also Sect. 4.3), as
demonstrated by the ocher points in Fig. 6. We discuss these find-
ings in the following section.
7. Discussion
From the theoretical perspective on the g-mode offset, the re-
sults presented in Fig. 4 clearly show that the weak-coupling
limitΨ→ − π
4 for the evanescent-zone term is not applica-
ble on the early RGB. This is to be expected since the evanes-
cent zone is relatively narrow during this evolutionary stage
(van Rossem et al. 2024). The difference between this limit and
the numerical evaluation ofΨgiven by Eq. (17) (∼0.06) is
significant compared to some of the observational uncertainties
achieved forΦ− 1
2 by Mosser et al. (2018); with future advances
in observational techniques the significance is likely to increase.
It will therefore become necessary to correctly account for the
evanescent-zone contribution to the g–mode frequency phase.
Our model computations suggest that the formulation we de-
rived in Eq. (17) is promising to match observationally obtained
phases. The fact that the three prescriptions forΨshown in Fig. 4
converge as evolution progresses can be explained by the fact
that the evanescent zone widens (van Rossem et al. 2024) and
therefore the phase contribution by the coupling to the p-mode
cavity decreases.
The results presented in Fig. 5 suggest that the analytical
model might reproduce the morphology of the time evolution of
the g–mode frequency phase better. This is in line with the find-
ings by Pinçon et al. (2019), who compared similarly obtained
εg,ana to an ensemble of observed g-mode offsets. However, the
results shown in Fig. 6 demonstrate that this leads to a misin-
terpretation of the observed phases. While Pinçon et al. (2019)
concluded that the kink as the phase starts to drop is inherent to
the g-mode offset produced by the behavior of the wave function
at the outer boundary of the (smooth) cavity (Eq. 10), we were
able to show that this feature is more likely linked to the spike in
the Brunt-Väisälä frequency acting as a glitch. We were further
able to support this hypothesis by calculating an additional set of
stellar models where we artificially removed the spike. For these
models, the phaseΦ− 1
2 did not show a kink and closely followed
the respectiveε g,num, whileε g,ana still had a similar shape to the
models including the spike (see Fig. B.1).
While the glitch is in the evanescent zone, our calculations
support that subtracting the phase term derived in Sect. 4.1 eval-
uated atν max from the glitch-free observed phaseΦ− 1
2 (Eq. 53),
is suitable to isolate a g-mode offset consistent withε g,num.
SinceΦ EZ is straightforward to calculate from stellar model pro-
files, it enables to predict observed g–mode frequency phases as
Φ− 1
2 =ε g,num + ΦEZ. We note that we observe this good agree-
ment in our models for which we can calculate and fit all possible
dipole modes. In real observations, only modes with sufficient
Article number, page 9

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa58519-25
50 100 150
max [ Hz]
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
g  | 1/2
g, num
g, ana
1/2
Fit including EZ
Fit including 
Fit including G
Fig. 6.Asymptotic g-mode offsets from fits including glitch phase contributions compared toε g,num andε g,ana, as a function ofν max. Stars evolve
from right to left. Light blue markers show results including the phase as introduced in Sect. 4.1 for a glitch in the evanescent zone; for a glitch in
the buoyancy cavity, the prescriptions used are the ones described in Sects. 4.2 (purple) and 4.3 (ocher), respectively. For reference, the observed
phase as in Fig. 4 is shown in gray. Uncertainties onεg,as as defined in Appendix A.2.
power in the p-mode cavity are detectable. These modes are also
those for which the coupling-induced phase is the largest, and
thus the assumption that we can deriveΦ EZ for the isolated g-
mode component is potentially least appropriate for them. We
did test, however, how the fit forΦ− 1
2 is affected by restrict-
ing the mode sample to more p-dominated modes and did not
find a significant difference. This suggests that the treatment of
the glitch in the evanescent zone presented in this work can also
suffice to interpret observed g-mode offsets.
For more evolved models, when the spike has moved into
the cavity, we generally observe improved agreement between
asymptotic fits and theory when introducing any version of
Φcavity. While the prescription usingΦ δ (introduced in Sect. 4.2)
does not allow to isolate a g-mode offset fully consistent with
εg,num, for all but the three most evolved models it bringsε g,as
closer to the value calculated from the stellar profiles (cf. the
purple points versus the gray crosses in Fig. 6). As discussed in
Sect. 4.2, the derivation of this prescription relies on three as-
sumptions that are not completely fulfilled in some of the mod-
els, which could explain the remaining discrepancies.
Firstly, the prescription assumes that the wave function takes
its asymptotic form either side of the glitch. This is only the case
when the spike has moved more than approximatelyk −1 into the
cavity, which would correspond to
R rb
r∗ k0dr∼1 and therefore
does not hold for the earliest models with a glitch in the oscilla-
tion cavity (cf. bottom panel of Fig. B.2).
Secondly, we adopted the expansion of the asymptotic wave
vector in the limitω 2 ≪N 2,S 2 valid deep inside the buoy-
ancy cavity. This approximation enters in two places. On the one
hand, it is used to isolate the frequency dependence of the glitch
amplitude in Eq. (39) such that the amplitude can be written asC
ω.
The top panel of Fig. B.2 shows that this approximation agrees
with the amplitudes estimated from the shape of the spike in the
full asymptotic wave vector (cf. Eq. 3) atνmax within≲10 % for
all models. On the other hand, the approximation in Eq. (44) re-
lies on the assumption that the limit is met everywhere between
r∗ andr b except for a region very near the turning point, and that
the correction for both the deviation of
√
2N
ωr from the full asymp-
totic wave vector in that regime as well as the non-asymptotic
behavior of the wave function nearr b can be absorbed into a
constant phase given by the g-mode offset. The bottom panel of
Fig. B.2 shows that this assumption is increasingly appropriate
as the star evolves. We note that the difference shown in the inset
would never go to zero, because we compare the first two terms
in Eq. (44) to an integral of the asymptotic wave vector which
does not include non-asymptotic corrections. Again, this approx-
imation results in an isolation of the frequency dependence ofϕ,
such that all free glitch parametersC,ω ∗
g (andε g) are frequency-
independent, which enabled us to explore the parameter space in
our fitting. However, the remaining discrepancies betweenε g,as
andε g,num in the regime 40µHz <∼ νmax <∼ 70µHz can likely
be explained by violations of the assumptions discussed so far:
the wave function not taking its asymptotic form aroundr ∗, the
frequency dependence of the glitch amplitude being estimated
incorrectly by taking the limitω 2 ≪N 2,S 2, and the phase shift
πεg,as not adequately correcting for the near–turning point be-
havior. We therefore see the results discussed here more as an
indication that the observed phases need to be interpreted ac-
counting for a glitch, while reliably isolating the pure g-mode
offset from observations will require a different approach.
For the three most evolved models, the third assumption be-
comes relevant. As the star evolves, diffusive mixing smooths
the chemical discontinuity to a finite width and the spike moves
deeper into the buoyancy cavity where the local wavelength is
shorter, causing the glitch to widen over time. Therefore, mod-
eling the glitch by a Dirac-delta function is not suitable for
the most evolved models, which likely explains the significant
disagreement betweenε g,as accounting forΦ δ andε g,num for
νmax <∼ 40µHz. Indeed, we were able to show that using the
finite–width glitch prescriptionΦ G as introduced by Cunha et al.
(2019) mitigates these differences. For even more evolved mod-
els, the width of the spike becomes so large relative to the local
wavelength that it no longer acts as a glitch.
We note that including the phase contributed by a glitch in
the cavity can shiftε g,as to both higher and lower values com-
Article number, page 10

T. van Lier et al.: Facing the phase: Gravity-mode offset and buoyancy glitches in red–giant branch stars
pared toΦ− 1
2 depending on the model (cf. Fig. 6), despite
Φcavity ≥0 for both prescriptions. This demonstrates that in-
cluding it to the fitting does not only induce an absolute phase
shift, but that also the changed frequency pattern affects the con-
vergence of the fit. Therefore, our results do not contradict the
estimate by Pinçon et al. (2019), who argued that the phase con-
tributed by glitches should be small compared toε g, while dif-
ferences
(Φ− 1
2)−ε g,num
 ≫Φ cavity can still be explained by the
presence of a glitch.
Both Eqs. (49) and (20) for the numerical g-mode offset and
εg,ana in case b clearly depend on frequency. Pinçon et al. (2019)
estimated that this dependence is small compared to observa-
tional uncertainties for the g–mode frequency phase. The rep-
resentations of the theoretical g-mode offset in Figs. 4–6 show
the frequency dependence ofε g,num by the width of the shaded
area aroundε g,num(νmax), which represents the range of values
obtained for frequencies in the sample used for the asymptotic
fit. The frequency dependence is indeed quite small on the early
RGB, but becomes stronger with evolution until the range of g-
mode offsets across [νmax −3∆ν, ν max +3∆ν] (a typical observ-
able frequency range) becomes∼0.1 in width. This evolution
can be explained using the arguments for the analytical model
in Sect. 3.3: The early RGB corresponds to case a, which is ex-
pected to have a weak frequency dependence, while in case b the
frequency affects the g-mode offset. A range of∼0.1 is compa-
rable to the precision achieved by Mosser et al. (2018) for some
stars. With both observations and asteroseismic analysis advanc-
ing in the future, the frequency dependence ofε g will therefore
likely become important to correctly interpretΦ− 1
2. The fact that
we also neglected it in our fitting algorithm to be comparable to
current observational techniques is another potential explanation
for the remaining discrepancies in Fig. 6.
7.1. Mass and metallicity dependence
We tested the influence of mass and metallicity on the results
discussed above, using the models marked along all the evolu-
tionary tracks in Fig. 3. Since the results are qualitatively similar
to the ones forM=1.25 M ⊙,Z=0.020 presented before, we
merely summarize them in Fig. B.3.
Across all masses and metallicities, the fit valuesΦ− 1
2 clus-
ter around a roughly constant value well reproduced byε g,num
on the early RGB. As the stars evolve,Φ− 1
2 shows a kink into
a steep drop at some point. The corresponding value ofν max is
also the main difference between the evolutionary tracks, with
the drop occurring at lowerν max for higher masses. Since this
feature is related to the spike in the Brunt-Väisälä frequency
moving from the evanescent zone into the g-mode cavity, this is
consistent with van Lier et al. (2025), who found that the spike
appears in the evanescent zone at lowerν max for higher masses.
Including the glitch into the fitting improves the agreement
betweenε g,as andε g,num, removing the kink as a function ofν max
and making the fit phase values less extreme. The shortcomings
ofΦ δ are also similar for all models. Along all tracks,Φ EZ as
derived in Sect. 4.1 gives good results with one exception: the
most evolved model withΦ EZ ,0 along theM=1.25 M ⊙,Z=
0.015 track (cf. top right panel of Fig. B.3). In this particular
model, the glitch in the evanescent zone happens to be located
very close to the cavity boundary. Therefore, the approximation
that the parametersAandd ∗ are frequency-independent likely
breaks down and subtracting a constantΦ EZ was no longer a
suitable method to isolateε g,as.
50 100 200 300
max [ Hz]
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
1/2
models
observations (Mosser+ 2018)
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.75
M [M ] (APOKASC-2)
Fig. 7.Comparison of observed phaseΦ− 1
2 between observations
by Mosser et al. (2018) and our models marked along the evolutionary
tracks withZ=0.020,M∈ {1.00,1.25,1.50,1.75}M ⊙ (cf. left panel of
Fig. 3) as a function ofν max, color-coded by stellar mass. Stars evolve
from right to left. The displayed range ofΦ− 1
2 for the models relates
to the uncertainties as discussed in Appendix A.1. Stellar masses for
observed stars are taken from the APOKASC-2 catalog, typical uncer-
tainties are∼0.08 M ⊙ (Pinsonneault et al. 2018).
7.2. Comparison to observations
Having empirically shown that the g-mode offset and the glitch
produced by the chemical discontinuity left behind by the first
dredge-up are the dominant contributions to the g–mode fre-
quency phase in our stellar models, we aimed to verify whether
our models are able to reproduce the phase observed for real
stars, and therefore whether these two contributions also suffice
to interpret observations. To this end, in Fig. 7 we compare the
fit phasesΦ− 1
2 from our models with various masses to the
observations mentioned in Sect. 5.4.
Neither the observations nor the observed phases from our
models show a mass dependence forν max >∼ 100µHz – they
all cluster around a constant value. In this regime on the early
RGB, observations and models agree well. The mean of ob-
served phases in the rangeν max ∈[100,300]µHz is given by
*
Φ− 1
2
+
obs.
=0.269±0.011,
*
Φ− 1
2
+
mod.
=0.251±0.007,
(54)
respectively. These values agree within 1.4σ.
As discussed above, the position of the drop in phase values
predicted by our models is mass-dependent. The observational
data at sufficiently lowνmax are too sparse to conclude whether a
similar mass dependence is present in the ensemble of real stars.
However, the decrease ofΦ− 1
2 clearly sets in significantly ear-
lier for the observed stars than for our models. Following the
arguments by Pinçon et al. (2019), this would suggest that ˆNBCZ
is predicted incorrectly by the models. Since we showed that the
morphology of the phase as a function ofν max is closely related
to the spike of the Brunt-Väisälä frequency, however, we can in-
stead interpret this observation as an indication that the spike be-
comes relevant as a glitch earlier (at higherν max) than our mod-
els predict. This corresponds to the convective envelope reaching
further down into the star during the first dredge-up.
One possible modification to the model physics to achieve
this shift of the spike is to include convective overshooting,
which extends the chemical mixing beyond the mathematical
boundary of the convective envelope. We calculated an evolu-
tionary track withM=1.25 M ⊙,Z=0.020 using the same set-
tings as described in Sect. 5.1, now including exponential over-
shooting with a decay constant of 0.04 pressure-scale heights,
starting from 0.01 pressure-scale heights above the convective
boundary to test this possibility. Figure 8 shows that, while we
Article number, page 11

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa58519-25
50 100 200 300
max [ Hz]
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
1/2
models w/o overshoot
models w/ overshoot
observations (Mosser+ 2018)
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.75
M [M ] (APOKASC-2)
Fig. 8.Observed g-mode phaseΦ− 1
2 affected by overshooting. Markers
with error bars show the sub-sample of observations by Mosser et al.
(2018) with 1.15 M ⊙ ≤M≤1.35 M ⊙ (Pinsonneault et al. 2018), the
gray shaded area shows the phases from the fit to the originalM=
1.25 M⊙ models (cf. Figs 5, 7) and the green shaded area shows the fit
to models including overshooting.
did not yet fully reproduce the evolution of the g–mode fre-
quency phase of the ensemble observations with our modified
stellar models, we were able to increase agreement by shifting
the spike in the Brunt-Väisälä frequency in this way. Therefore,
we conclude that the two dominant phase contributions we iden-
tified for the stellar models are also sufficient to describe ob-
served g–mode frequency phases in ensembles of stars. We note
that Villate et al. (2026) showed that for individual stars with
strong core magnetic fields, this magnetic field also impacts the
observed phaseΦ. Previously, Bugnet (2022) had shown the ef-
fect of core magnetic fields on the period spacing∆Π.
With the glitch position linked to the evolution of convec-
tive boundaries in stellar models as demonstrated above, and the
shape of the glitch clearly dependent on the chemical mixing, the
g-mode phase even becomes a potentially interesting observable
to constrain physical processes in stars and their implementation
in stellar evolution codes, especially when the sample of reli-
able observations grows in the future. The morphology ofΦ− 1
2
as a function ofν max could be parametrized in terms of differ-
ent mixing schemes and parameters, extending on our ad-hoc
demonstration in Fig. 8.
8. Conclusions
By comparing theoretical contributions to the phase offset of
g-mode eigenfrequencies to the phases observed from models,
we constrained the interpretation of the g-mode offset. Firstly,
we showed that the common wide–evanescent zone expansion
Ψ→ − π
4 for the evanescent-zone contribution toε g is not appli-
cable on the early RGB. However, it seems to be valid as a limit
as the evanescent zone widens with evolution. We get results
most consistent with the observed phase when using Eq. (17) to
calculate the evanescent-zone term, rather than the term origi-
nally derived by Takata (2016a), given in Eq. (14). The assump-
tion we made when deriving the modified version ˆΨwill also
affect the wave function in the evanescent zone, further studies
would be required to investigate how this affects other results de-
rived by Takata (2016a), including the coupling strength in the
strong-coupling limit.
Secondly, the frequency dependence ofεg as calculated from
our models is significant on the late RGB. It becomes compara-
ble with observational uncertainties and therefore more elaborate
fitting procedures might need to take it into account.
Thirdly, the analytical model of the buoyancy cavity intro-
duced by Pinçon et al. (2019) is suitable to estimate values of
the g-mode offset within observational uncertainties on the late
RGB. However, it predicts a trend in the evolution ofε g with
νmax that is not consistent with the numerical evaluation of the
full expression for the g-mode offset. The trend in the analyt-
ically estimated g-mode offset partly reproduces the effect of
the Brunt-Väisälä spike acting as a glitch in the evanescent zone
and therefore leads to a misinterpretation of the observed phases.
While Pinçon et al. (2019) suggest that the kink inΦ− 1
2 at the
transition fromr b being frequency-dependent tor b ≡r BCZ is in-
herent to Eq. (10), we were able to demonstrate that it is instead
produced by the phase contribution from the glitch.
Lastly, we were able to show that the Brunt-Väisälä spike
contributes significantly to the phase offset of g-mode frequen-
cies. When it acts as a glitch in the buoyancy cavity, not only
the additive phaseΦ cavity but also the changed pattern of the
frequency spectrum lead to a shift in the observedΦ− 1
2 rela-
tive to the g-mode offsetεg given by the (smooth) shape of the
buoyancy cavity. It becomes clear that in this way the g-mode
phase is an observable to investigate both, the shape of the Brunt-
Väisälä spike and the treatment of convective boundaries in stel-
lar models by the remaining discrepancies in a model-to-model
and model-to-observation comparison, respectively.
Acknowledgements.We thank Margarida Cunha for her kind and constructive
referee reports and insightful suggestions which significantly improved the rigor
of the presented work. The research leading to the presented results has received
funding from the European Research Council Consolidator Grant DipolarSound
(grant agreement No. 101000296).
References
Bugnet, L. 2022, A&A, 667, A68
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J. 2012, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Confer-
ence Series, V ol. 462, Progress in Solar/Stellar Physics with Helio- and As-
teroseismology, ed. H. Shibahashi, M. Takata, & A. E. Lynas-Gray, 503
Corsaro, E., McKeever, J. M., & Kuszlewicz, J. S. 2020, A&A, 640, A130
Cunha, M. S., Avelino, P. P., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., et al. 2019, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 490, 909
Cunha, M. S., Damasceno, Y . C., Amaral, J., et al. 2024, A&A, 687, A100
Cunha, M. S., Stello, D., Avelino, P. P., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., & Townsend,
R. H. D. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 805, 127
García Saravia Ortiz de Montellano, A., Hekker, S., & Themeßl, N. 2018, MN-
RAS, 476, 1470
Gough, D. O. 1993, in Astrophysical Fluid Dynamics - Les Houches 1987, ed.
J. P. Zahn & J. Zinn-Justin, 399–560
Hekker, S., Elsworth, Y ., & Angelou, G. C. 2018, A&A, 610, A80
Hekker, S., Gilliland, R. L., Elsworth, Y ., et al. 2011, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 414, 2594
Jermyn, A. S., Bauer, E. B., Schwab, J., et al. 2023, ApJS, 265, 15
Jiang, C., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., & Cunha, M. 2018, MNRAS, 474, 5413
Jiang, C., Cunha, M., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., & Zhang, Q. 2020, MNRAS,
495, 621
Jiang, C., Cunha, M., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Zhang, Q. S., & Gizon, L. 2022,
MNRAS, 515, 3853
Kallinger, T. 2019, Release note: Massive peak bagging of red giants in the Ke-
pler field
Kjeldsen, H. & Bedding, T. R. 1995, A&A, 293, 87
Kuszlewicz, J. S., Hon, M., & Huber, D. 2023, ApJ, 954, 152
Mathur, S., Hekker, S., Trampedach, R., et al. 2012, in Astronomical Society
of the Pacific Conference Series, V ol. 462, Progress in Solar/Stellar Physics
with Helio- and Asteroseismology, ed. H. Shibahashi, M. Takata, & A. E.
Lynas-Gray, 375
Mosser, B., Gehan, C., Belkacem, K., et al. 2018, A&A, 618, A109
Mosser, B., Goupil, M. J., Belkacem, K., et al. 2012, A&A, 540, A143
Paxton, B., Bildsten, L., Dotter, A., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192, 3
Paxton, B., Cantiello, M., Arras, P., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208, 4
Paxton, B., Marchant, P., Schwab, J., et al. 2015, ApJS, 220, 15
Paxton, B., Schwab, J., Bauer, E. B., et al. 2018, ApJS, 234, 34
Paxton, B., Smolec, R., Schwab, J., et al. 2019, ApJS, 243, 10
Pinçon, C., Takata, M., & Mosser, B. 2019, A&A, 626, A125
Pinsonneault, M. H., Elsworth, Y ., Epstein, C., et al. 2014, ApJS, 215, 19
Pinsonneault, M. H., Elsworth, Y . P., Tayar, J., et al. 2018, ApJS, 239, 32
Pinsonneault, M. H., Zinn, J. C., Tayar, J., et al. 2025, ApJS, 276, 69
Shibahashi, H. 1979, PASJ, 31, 87
Article number, page 12

T. van Lier et al.: Facing the phase: Gravity-mode offset and buoyancy glitches in red–giant branch stars
Takata, M. 2006, PASJ, 58, 893
Takata, M. 2016a, PASJ, 68, 109
Takata, M. 2016b, PASJ, 68, 91
Tassoul, M. 1980, ApJ, 43, 469
Townsend, R. H. D. & Teitler, S. A. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 3406–3418
van Lier, T., Müller, J., & Hekker, S. 2025, A&A, 700, A1
van Rossem, W. E., Miglio, A., & Montalbán, J. 2024, A&A, 691, A177
Villate, M., Deheuvels, S., & Ballot, J. 2026, A&A, 707, A366
Yu, J., Huber, D., Bedding, T. R., et al. 2018, ApJS, 236, 42
Article number, page 13

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa58519-25
Appendix A: Asymptotic fitting of mixed modes
A.1. Without a glitch
As we pointed out in van Lier et al. (2025), there are several dif-
ficulties when it comes to extracting asymptotic mixed mode pa-
rameters from a fit to Eq. (8). While we use an observation-like
approach to the problem to simulate how the parameters would
be obtained from observations, there are many advantages to us-
ing model frequencies, which we still utilize to optimize our
results. These advantages consist mainly in knowing the radial
ordersn pg andn p of each mode 7 and not being limited to p-
dominated modes. We tested that restricting our analysis to p-
dominated modes did only increase the uncertainties on some
parameters but did not significantly change the values obtained.
Still, even with the full mode sample the distribution ofχ2 values
across parameter space is complex with multiple local minima
and strong correlations of the parameters, which makes numeri-
cal optimization difficult.
MC-sampling
Filter out
„bad“ guesses
𝜈𝑖
𝑝0
Normalize 𝜒2,
Select lowest 𝜒2 
Median ± quartiles
Initial guesses 𝑝0 for
𝑞as, Δ𝜈, ΔΠ, 𝜖p, 𝜖g
(50 000)
cf. Table A.1
Mode frequencies
Fit Πas(𝜈𝑖; 𝑝) to 𝜈𝑖
Initial guesses 𝑝0 for
𝑞as, Δ𝜈, ΔΠ, 𝜖p, 𝜖g
(~ 30 000)
Perturbed mode 
frequencies 𝜈𝑖
(100 sets)
~ 3 000 000 𝜒2-optimization results for 𝑞as, Δ𝜈, ΔΠ, 𝜖p, 𝜖g
100 „best“ optimization results
Parameter estimates w/ uncertainties
Fig. A.1.Flowchart outlining our fitting procedure without taking
glitches into account.
For each model, we therefore followed the algorithm out-
lined in Fig. A.1. To make sure we sample all local minima, we
generated 50 000 sets of initial guesses for the parameters, which
we drew randomly from the distributions specified in Table A.1.
To reduce computation time, we filtered out sets that produced
a high initialχ 2 sum, suggesting that they lie far away from the
region of convergence. To simulate observational noise (and to
prevent chance alignments from interfering with the statistics)
we also applied a Monte-Carlo sampling to the mode frequen-
cies observed for the model. This left us with roughly 3 Million
combinations of perturbed mode frequencies and initial guesses
for the parameters. For each of these combinations we then per-
formed a numericalχ 2 optimization and saved the optimized
parameters and correspondingχ 2 sum upon convergence. Once
again to ensure that all local minima are sampled, we left the
convergence criteria rather loose. A side effect of this choice was
that we observed many limit convergences for the coupling pa-
rameterq, which has a hard physical limit atq=0. To reduce
their impact on the statistics of our optimization results, we dis-
carded all optimizations that converged to this limit. After this,
we selected the results of the 100 optimizations that converged
to the lowestχ 2 values and calculated the median and quartiles
of each parameter among these to get our final estimate for the
parameter value and uncertainty.
7 In order to allow for potential miss-assignments by GYRE, we rede-
finedn p (see van Lier et al. (2025) for details) and extended the range
ofΦwe search beyond [0,1].
Table A.1.Properties of the initial-guess sampling without a glitch
Parameter Estimate Width Distribution
q0.2 0.2 Gaussian
∆ν∆ν 0 (l=0 fit) 0.03·∆ν 0 Gaussian
∆Π ∆Π N (Nintegral) 0.03·∆Π N Gaussian
εp εp,0 +1/2 0.7 uniform
(εp,0:l=0 fit)
εg = Φ− 1
2 −0.7 1.7 uniform
Notes.For Gaussian distributions, the width refers to the standard de-
viation of the Gaussian; for uniform distributions, the limits were set
to estimate±width. Sinceqcan physically only take positive values, all
instances in which the Gaussian sampling returned a value<0 were
resampled with a uniform distribution over [0,0.8].
Table A.2.Constraints on parameters less affect by including the glitch
Parameter Toleranceτ
q10 %
∆ν1 %
∆Π0.5 %
εp 2 %
A.2. With a glitch
In order to explicitly treat a glitch as discussed in Sect. 4.2 or 4.3
in the fit, we included the different versions of the frequency-
dependent phaseΦ cavity into the asymptotic formula Eq. (8) to
isolate the value forε g:
Φ =ε g,as + 1
2 −Φ cavity .(A.1)
We then followed the fitting algorithm outlined in Fig. A.1 again,
using the new asymptotic periods including Eq. (A.1) and with a
different sampling for the initial parameter guesses.
We found that the fit results for the asymptotic parametersq,
∆ν,∆Π, andε p are only weakly affected by including the glitch
phase toΠ as. Therefore, we used the values obtained from a fit as
outlined in Appendix A.1 to constrain the sampled distribution
and increase the density of the initial guesses in parameter space.
We restricted each of the four parameters to a range defined by
the first and third quartile (Q 1 andQ 3) of the glitch-free best-fit
distributions and a toleranceτas
x∈ [(1−τ)Q 1(x),(1+τ)Q 3(x)] .(A.2)
The different tolerances for the various parameters (as given
in Table A.2) ensured that the corresponding minimum of the
χ2 sum including the glitch was still well sampled for each pa-
rameter in all models. When constructing the sets of initial pa-
rameters, we sampledq,∆ν,∆Πandε p uniformly across their
respective allowed ranges. Forε g,as we still used a uniform sam-
pling over the range [−0.7,1.7] as before.
Since the glitch parameters{C, ω ∗
g}forΦ δ and{C G, ω∗
g,∆ g}
forΦ G are (nearly) frequency-independent, we were able to treat
them as free parameters in the fit. This is necessary for the Gaus-
sian glitch to allow for corrections necessary due to the assump-
tions made in the derivation ofΦ G. For the Dirac-delta glitch
we also observed a slight improvement of the fit results. To fit
for the glitch parameters, we estimated a starting value from the
stellar profile. Then we sampled the initial guesses from a Gaus-
sian distribution around this starting value with a width of 5 %.
To avoid aliases due to the periodicity of the glitch phase in the
glitch parameters, we restricted them to a range with width 25 %
around the starting value during the fit.
Article number, page 14

T. van Lier et al.: Facing the phase: Gravity-mode offset and buoyancy glitches in red–giant branch stars
Appendix B: Additional figures
B.1. Glitch-free phase
50 100 200 300 400
max [ Hz]
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
g  | 1/2
g, num
g, ana
1/2
Fig. B.1.Same as Fig. 5, now for models along an evolutionary track where the mean–molecular weight discontinuity is artificially removed at
each timestep.
B.2. Glitch parameters
10 1
100
glitch amplitude
0.1
0.0
0.1 difference
( max)
/(2 max)
estimated from k2
50 100 150
max [ Hz]
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
101
glitch position
0.20
0.25
0.30
difference
* ( max)
*
g /(2 max) + g, num
rb
r * k0dr
Fig. B.2.Glitch parameters of the models in Fig. 6 with a glitch in the evanescent zone (right) or buoyancy cavity (left) as a function ofν max. The
top panel shows dimensionless glitch amplitudes, the bottom panel shows dimensionless glitch positions. Stars evolve from right to left. Colors
correspond to the colors of the fitting methods in Fig. 6 which use the respective glitch parameters. For comparison to the approximation in the
limitω 2 ≪N 2,S 2, the dashed lines show estimates for the parameters of a glitch in the cavity using the full asymptotic wave vector. Insets show
the difference between the approximated glitch parameter and the estimate calculated usingk.
Article number, page 15

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa58519-25
B.3. Mass and metallicity dependence
50 100 200 300 400
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
g  | 1/2
M = 1.00 M
Z = 0.020
50 100 200 300 400
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Z = 0.015
M = 1.25 M
50 100 200 300 400
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
g  | 1/2
M = 1.25 M
50 100 200 300 400
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Z = 0.020
50 100 200 300 400
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
g  | 1/2
M = 1.50 M
50 100 200 300 400
max [ Hz]
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Z = 0.025
50 100 200 300 400
max [ Hz]
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
g  | 1/2
M = 1.75 M
g, num
g, ana
1/2
Fit including EZ
Fit including 
Fig. B.3.Same as Fig. 6, now evaluated for stellar models marked in Fig. 3 along the tracks withZ=0.020,M∈ {1.00,1.25,1.50,1.75}M ⊙
(left column, corresponding mass indicated in each panel) andM=1.25 M ⊙,Z∈ {0.015,0.020,0.025}(right column, corresponding metallicity
indicated in each panel). For clarity, results of fits includingΦ G are omitted as they show similar behavior as forM=1.25 M ⊙,Z=0.020.
Article number, page 16