Title: Inferring the role of binary neutron star mergers in r-process nucleosynthesis with multi-messenger observations using Cosmic Explorer and Einstein Telescope
Authors: Aman Agarwal, Suvodip Mukherjee, Daniel M. Siegel
Published: 2026-05-22
Categories: astro-ph.HE, gr-qc

MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026) Preprint 25 May 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.2
Inferring the role of binary neutron star mergers in r-process
nucleosynthesis with multi-messenger observations using Cosmic Explorer
and Einstein Telescope
Aman Agarwal,1★ Suvodip Mukherjee,2 Daniel M. Siegel1
1Institute of Physics, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany
2Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 1, Homi Bhabha Road, Colaba, Mumbai 400005, India
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
Identifyingthecosmicoriginofrapidneutron-capture(r-process)elementsremainsanopenproblem.Binaryneutron-star(BNS)
mergers and rare classes of core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe) represent the main contenders as major r-process production
sites. Although BNS mergers could exclusively account for r-process nucleosynthesis, results from chemical evolution studies
takingintoaccounttheirdelayswithrespecttostarformation,observedBNSratesbygravitational-wave(GW)detectors,aswell
as issues with retention in low-mass halos suggest otherwise. Here, we propose a method to measure the contribution of BNS
mergerstocosmicr-processnucleosynthesiswiththethird-generationGWdetectorsCosmicExplorerandEinsteinTelescope.It
exploits the redshift-dependent correlation between the total number of BNS GW events and the average r-process abundances
at redshifts𝑧≲1. We apply this correlation technique to mock GW and abundance data, accounting for expected observational
uncertainties in two limiting scenarios: GW events with electromagnetic counterpart (multi-messenger ‘bright-sirens’) and
without(‘dark-sirens’).UsingFisherforecasts,wedemonstratethatthefractionalcumulativecontributionofBNSmergerstothe
totalcosmicr-process𝐹 BNS,z0 canbeestimatedtothe≲5−6%precisionlevelforbothscenariosat1𝜎forfiducialastrophysical
scenarios with𝐹BNS,z0 ≳0.1−1. Furthermore, the method also yields estimates of the BNS delay-time distribution parameters
comparable to other approaches. Although cosmic r-process abundances may be reconstructed from local observations at low
metallicity,thismethodalsoprovidesasciencecasetoidentifysignaturesofneutron-captureelementsbeyondthelocalUniverse.
Key words:nuclear reactions, nucleosynthesis, abundances – neutron star mergers – gravitational waves – supernovae: general
– galaxies:abundances
1 INTRODUCTION
Thecosmicoriginofrapidneutron-capture(r-process;Burbidgeetal.
1957;Cameron1957)elements—roughlyhalfoftheelementsheav-
ier than iron—remains a fundamental open question in astrophysics
andcosmology(Cowanetal.2021;Siegel2022).Severallinesofevi-
dence,rangingfrommeasurementsofradioactiveisotopesonthesea
floor(Wallneretal.2015;Hotokezakaetal.2015)toobservedabun-
dancesofmetal-poorstarsintheMilkyWayhalo(Macias&Ramirez-
Ruiz 2018) and those formed in the smallest dwarf galaxies (Ji et al.
2016;Tsujimotoetal.2017),suggestthatthedominantsite(s)ofthe
r-process are prolific events much rarer than ordinary core-collapse
supernovae(CCSNe),bothintheearlyhistoryofourGalaxyandto-
day.Thecandidatesitesasmajorcontributorsmostwidelydiscussed
are neutron-star mergers (Lattimer & Schramm 1974; Symbalisty
& Schramm 1982; Eichler et al. 1989; Freiburghaus et al. 1999)
and rare channels of CCSNe, such as those giving birth to a rapidly
spinning magnetar (“magnetorotational SNe”; LeBlanc & Wilson
1970;Symbalistyetal.1985;Cameron2003;Nishimuraetal.2006;
★ E-mail: aman.agarwal@uni-greifswald.de
Metzger et al. 2007; Winteler et al. 2012) and their more energetic
cousins, those leading to a hyper-accreting black hole (“collapsars”;
MacFadyen & Woosley 1999; Pruet et al. 2003; Surman et al. 2006;
Siegel et al. 2019; Siegel et al. 2022).
Whereas the first observed binary neutron star (BNS) merger
GW170817 (Abbott et al. 2017) provided ample evidence that such
mergers can execute an r-process, observed via the associated quasi-
thermalkilonovaemission(seeMetzger2020;Siegel2019;Margutti
&Chornock2021;Pian2021forreviewsontheinterpretationofthe
event), a similar signature has not yet been detected from isolated
broad-lined Type Ic SNe (thought to be generated by magnetorota-
tional SNe) or those observed in coincidence with long gamma-ray
bursts(GRBs;thoughttooriginateincollapsars).Firstobservational
searches for such signatures based on photospheric emission are in-
conclusive (Anand et al. 2024; Rastinejad et al. 2024; Blanchard
etal.2024).Thisfactisnotnecessarilyconstraining,sincer-process
materialanditsphotosphericaswellasspectroscopicsignaturescan
easily be buried behind several solar masses of ordinary SN ejecta
(Siegel et al. 2019; Barnes & Duffell 2023).
Arguments based on the chemical evolution history of the early
MilkyWaygalaxyhavebeenmadeinfavourofbothrareSNe(magne-
©2026 The Authors
arXiv:2605.23554v1  [astro-ph.HE]  22 May 2026

2A. Agarwal et al.
torotational SNe and collapsars, hereafter collectively labelled rCC-
SNe; Cescutti et al. 2015; Wehmeyer et al. 2015; Côté et al. 2019;
Siegel et al. 2019; van de Voort et al. 2020; Yamazaki et al. 2022;
Brauer et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2025; Saleem et al. 2025) and merg-
ers (Shen et al. 2015; Duggan et al. 2018; Macias & Ramirez-Ruiz
2019; Bartos & Márka 2019; Tarumi et al. 2021) as early r-process
sources. A critical difference between the two types of r-process
sources is their relative delay with respect to star formation with
which they enrich the interstellar medium (ISM) with heavy ele-
ments. Collapsars, supercollapsars as their more extreme versions
(Siegeletal.2022;Agarwaletal.2026),andmagnetorotationalSNe
are promptly generated following the deaths of very massive stars
on timescales of∼Myr and can thus naturally explain r-process en-
richment at very small metallicities, as early as the first generation
of stars. Empirically found to occur in small dwarf galaxies at low
metallicity(Fruchteretal.2006),collapsarsprovideanaturalexpla-
nation for early r-process enrichment in ultra-faint dwarf galaxies,
such as Reticulum II (Ji et al. 2016), and metal-poor stars in the
Galactic halo (Brauer et al. 2021). In contrast, due to their inspiral
driven by gravitational-wave (GW) emission, neutron-star mergers
follow a power-law delay-time distribution (DTD) of𝑡−𝑏 relative to
starformation,withitscanonicalsteepnessof𝑏≈1andtheexistence
of a more rapidly merging subpopulation with𝑏≲2being a matter
ofdebate(Beniamini&Piran2019;Zevinetal.2022;Maoz&Nakar
2025).Suchpower-lawDTDsaredisfavouredbychemicalevolution
analyses of r-process abundances in the high-metallicity stars of the
Galacticdisk(Hotokezakaetal.2018;Siegel2019;Côtéetal.2019;
Saleem et al. 2025). ‘Prompt’ rCCSNe also avoid the (larger) sys-
temic kicks of neutron-star binaries, which easily exceed the escape
velocity of small halos, as well as the iron co-production of at least
twosupernovaeperbinary,whichcastdoubtonwhethermergersare
the dominant sources of r-process elements in low-metallicity en-
vironments, including dwarf galaxies and globular clusters (Bonetti
et al. 2019; Zevin et al. 2019; Skúladóttir et al. 2019; Naidu et al.
2022;Simonetal.2023;Kirbyetal.2023).Moreover,leavingissues
of delay times, systemic kicks etc. aside, the downward revision
of neutron-star merger rates as inferred from the recently concluded
fourth observation run of the LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA network of GW
detectors (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2025) raises fur-
theruncertaintyinthetotalcontributionofBNSmergerstor-process
nucleosynthesis in the Universe (Saleem et al. 2025).
In this paper, we propose a novel method to determine the con-
tribution of BNS mergers to the total r-process production in the
Universe.Sinceblack-hole–neutron-starmergersarelikelyinsignifi-
cantrelativetoBNSmergersintermsofr-processenrichment(Chen
etal.2021;Saleemetal.2025),herewesolelyfocusonBNSsystems.
If BNS mergers contribute to the cosmic production of r-process el-
ements in a major way, the redshift evolution of the number of BNS
GW events and some observational tracer of r-process abundances
are correlated. We explore these correlations and demonstrate how
theycanbemeasuredfromfuturedatatoprovideaprecisemeasure-
ment of the fractional contribution of BNS mergers to the cosmic
r-process. The method is inspired by the correlation technique of
Mukherjee & Moradinezhad Dizgah (2022) proposed to infer the
delay-time parameters of binary black-hole mergers with respect to
star formation from the correlation between electromagnetic obser-
vations of emission line galaxies and GW observations of binary
black-hole mergers.
The proposed correlation method requires r-process abundance
and BNS GW data out to redshifts𝑧≳0.1, which are not avail-
ablewithcurrentGWdetectorsandelectromagnetictelescopes.With
third-generation(3G)detectors,suchasCosmicExplorer 1(CE;Pun-
turo et al. 2010; Reitze et al. 2019) and the Einstein Telescope2 (ET;
Maggiore et al. 2020), the detection horizons for BNS mergers are
expected to increase to𝑧≈ O (1)(Iacovelli et al. 2022) and a typ-
ical source localisation within10−100 deg 2 (Mills et al. 2018) is
expected with increased probability for multimessenger follow-up
detectionswithelectromagnetictelescopes(Chassande-Mottinetal.
2011; Ronchini et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2024). Whereas tens to hun-
dreds of electromagnetic counterparts to GW events are expected
in the 3G era, the uncertainties related to the local merger rate of
BNS, the neutron star equation of state and its mass distribution can
vary these estimates by∼60%(Loffredo et al. 2025; Colombo et al.
2025). Furthermore, even though the kilonova detection horizon of
future telescopes, such as the Nancy Grace Roman Space3 (Spergel
et al. 2013; Akeson et al. 2019), will, in principle, be of the order
of𝑧∼ O (1)(Chase et al. 2022), the fraction of detectable kilono-
vae depends on the telescope’s field-of-view, cadence choices and
wavelength sensitivity (Chase et al. 2022; Bartos et al. 2016; Cow-
perthwaite et al. 2019; Bellm et al. 2019). Another possibility for
host-galaxyidentificationandredshiftmeasurementisthefollow-up
ofassociatedshortGRBsinafractionofallBNSmergers(thosesuc-
cessfullygeneratingaGRBjetthatadditionallypointstous).There-
fore, in the absence of guaranteed electromagnetic counterparts, we
considertwolimitingscenariosforGWdetectionwith3Gdetectors:
GW events with and without detected electromagnetic counterpart
(i.e. a ‘bright’ or ‘dark’ siren case, respectively). The bright siren
scenario leads to a more precise estimate of the redshift-dependent
fractionalcontributionofBNSmergerstothetotalcosmicr-process,
due to reduced errors in the inferred luminosity distance and source
redshift for such multimessenger events.
Observing abundances of neutron-capture elements beyond the
localUniverseremainsachallenge.High-resolutionspectroscopyof
individual nearby stars in the Milky Way, its halo, as well as in local
dwarf galaxies and globular clusters has created large databases of
neutron-captureabundancesoverawiderangeofmetallicityanden-
vironments (Abohalima & Frebel 2018; Suda et al. 2008). Based on
a comparison with individual stellar spectra, integrated-light spec-
troscopy of unresolved stellar populations of globular clusters has
demonstratedthefeasibilityofdeterminingneutron-captureelement
abundances including the r-process element Eu for globular clusters
aroundothergalaxies,providingconcreteresultsforglobularclusters
of the Large Magellanic Cloud (Colucci et al. 2009, 2012; Sakari
et al. 2013). Significant efforts have been devoted to determining
abundances of𝛼-elements up to iron—specifically the metallicity—
ofgalaxiesacrossawiderangeofgalaxymassesandredshifts,using
spectroscopy of galaxy continuum emission (e.g. Heckman et al.
1998; Rix et al. 2004; Crowther et al. 2006; Sommariva et al. 2012;
Cullen et al. 2019) and via the gas phase using optical emission
lines from HII regions (e.g. oxygen line measurements in Peimbert
etal.2017;Kewleyetal.2019;Maiolino&Mannucci2019andiron
linemeasurementsinIzotov&Thuan1999;Izotovetal.2006,2018;
Kojimaetal.2020).RecentobservationsbyJamesWebbSpaceTele-
scope (Gardner et al. 2006) have also increased the redshift horizon
of such abundance measurements from emission lines out to𝑧∼10
(Isobeetal.2023;Schaereretal.2024;Jietal.2024;Marques-Chaves
et al. 2024; Curti et al. 2025). Beyond ‘light’ metals up to iron, not
muchisknownregardingabundancesofneutron-captureelementsat
1 https://cosmicexplorer.org/
2 https://einsteintelescope.eu/
3 https://science.nasa.gov/mission/roman-space-telescope/
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

Inferring the role of binary neutron stars in r-process nucleosynthesis3
cosmological distances. In the following, we assume the availability
of an r-process abundance tracer of galaxies at redshifts𝑧≳0.1
by the 3G GW detector era in the mid-to-late 2030s, either directly
through progress on continuum spectroscopy, gas-phase abundance
inference, or, indirectly, by linking neutron-capture element abun-
dances to other observables via galaxy evolution studies. Finally,
as a last resort, our method can also be applied to r-process abun-
dancesextractedfromobservationsoflocalstellarspectraacrossthe
observedmetallicityrange,undertheassumptionthattheobservedr-
process abundances of old low-mass stars at low metallicities reflect
the nucleosynthesis conditions at high redshift—a general premise
ofstellararchaeology.Nonetheless,ourmethodprovidesmotivation
toidentifysignaturesofneutron-captureelementsintheelectromag-
netic emission of galaxies beyond the local Universe.
Thepaperisstructuredasfollows.Weintroducethebasicmethod
to estimate the fractional cumulative contribution𝐹BNS (𝑧=0)of
neutron-star mergers to the cosmic r-process as well as their delay-
time behaviour relative to star formation from the correlations of
their GW signals and r-process abundance data in Sec. 2. In Sec. 3,
we model the dependence of these two observational quantities on
𝐹BNS (𝑧=0)and the parameters of the DTD of BNS mergers with
respecttothestarformationrate(SFR).WepresentaFisherforecast
oftheprecisionwithwhich𝐹 BNS (𝑧=0)andtheDTDparameterscan
be extracted by creating a mock database of GW events expected in
the3Geraandmockestimatesofcosmologicalr-processabundances
in Sec. 4. Section 5 provides further discussion and summarizes our
conclusions.
2 CORRELATION BETWEEN GRA VITATIONAL-W A VE
SOURCES AND R-PROCESS ABUNDANCES
2.1 Correlation Technique
We assume that at least a fraction of the observed cosmic r-process
materialoriginatesinBNSmergers,providingacertaindegreeofcor-
relationbetweenanobservationaltracerAb El (𝑧)ofcosmicr-process
abundancesasafunctionofredshiftandtheredshift-dependentnum-
ber𝑁 GW(𝑧)ofobservedGWeventsfromBNSsystems.Wethinkof
cosmicr-processabundanceshereasayettobedefinedaverageover
mean r-process abundances of galaxies at a certain redshift (see, in
particular,AppendixA).Onemayexpresstheobserved𝑁 GW(𝑧)and
AbEl (𝑧)as functions𝑓and𝑔of the cosmic star formation history
𝜓SF (𝑧), respectively,
𝑁GW(𝑧)=𝑓[𝜓 SF (𝑧)],Ab El (𝑧)=𝑔[𝜓 SF (𝑧)].(2.1)
For concreteness, here we take a tracer for europium (El=Eu),
which is almost exclusively synthesized by the r-process in the solar
system. However, the method can use other tracer elementsEland
can be extended to simultaneously monitor multiple tracer elements
or can use an aggregate proxy of the r-process.
Provided that a unique relation between star-formation history
and an r-process abundance proxy exists, the relations (2.1) may be
written as
𝑁GW(𝑧)=𝑓◦𝑔 −1 [AbEu (𝑧)].(2.2)
In this case, the relation between𝑁GW(𝑧)andAb Eu (𝑧)becomes
independent of the star formation history. It is then most sensitive
to the relative behaviour of how both observables follow the star
formation history.
We investigate this relationship by introducing the correlation
function𝐾(𝜃), defined via
𝑁GW(𝑧)=𝐾(𝜃)Ab Eu (𝑧),(2.3)
where the set of parameters𝜃capture, in particular, the behaviour
of the observables relative to star formation, including the fraction
𝐹BNS,z0 of the BNS mergers’ contribution to the total cosmic r-
process up to𝑧=0. Future observations to measure the redshift-
dependent ratio𝐾(𝜃)=𝑁 GW(𝑧)/Ab Eu (𝑧)can be used to estimate
the parameters𝜃(including𝐹 BNS,z0), e.g. using Bayesian statistics.
2.2 Parameter Estimation
Future observational data ˆ𝑁GW and ˆAb
Eu
(henceforth, hats denote
observational data) in a given redshift rangeΔ𝑧around𝑧will be
estimatedfromindependentandidenticallydistributed(‘iid’,thatis,
derived from the same probability distribution in the particular red-
shift bin) observations of GWs from BNS and r-process abundances
ofgalaxies,respectively.Correlationdata ˆ𝐾(𝑧)willbeobtainedasthe
ratioofthesetwoquantities.Givenastrophysicalmodels𝐾 model (𝜃, 𝑧),
AbEumodel (𝜃, 𝑧),and𝑁 GW,model (𝜃, 𝑧),whichprovideexpectedvalues
ofobservedquantitiesasafunctionoftheparameters𝜃,wecandefine
a likelihood function of observing a certain data valueˆ𝐾(𝑧)given
parameter values𝜃. Using this likelihood function, we can estimate
the parameter values𝜃that best fit our observed correlationsˆ𝐾(𝑧).
Fromthecentrallimittheorem,the‘iid’quantities𝑁 GWandAb Eu,
andtheircombination𝐾,areexpectedtofollowamultivariatenormal
distribution. Given observed valuesˆ𝑁GW(𝑧)and ˆAbEu (𝑧)as vectors
ofsize𝑁,with𝑁beingthenumberofredshiftbins𝑧 𝑖,𝑖=0, . . . , 𝑁,
the log-likelihood of the parameters𝜃can be defined using normal
distributions as
log𝐿∝ −𝐿 1 −𝐿 2
≡ − 1
2
 ˆ𝐾(𝑧) −𝐾 model (𝜃, 𝑧)
 𝑇
C−1
1 (𝑧)
×
 ˆ𝐾(𝑧) −𝐾 model (𝜃, 𝑧)

− 1
2
h ˆAbEu (𝑧) −Ab Eumodel (𝜃, 𝑧)
i 𝑇
C−1
2 (𝑧)
×
h ˆAbEu (𝑧) −Ab Eumodel (𝜃, 𝑧)
i
,(2.4)
whereC 1 (𝑧)andC 2 (𝑧)arecovariancematricesofdimensions𝑁×𝑁,
which take observational errors into account and are described in
detail below.
Thefirstterm𝐿 1 ofthelikelihood𝐿helpsestimatetheparameters
𝜃that best fit the observed correlation dataˆ𝐾, including parameters
of the DTD of BNS mergers relative to star formation as well as the
totalcontributionofBNSmergerstothecosmicr-process.However,
the correlation is scale-invariant in the sense that multiplying both
𝑁GW andAb Eu byaconstantfactorleavesthecorrelationfunctionin
Eq.(2.3)unchanged.Byindividuallyfittingforoneofthetwodatasets
inthesecondterm𝐿 2 ofthelikelihood𝐿,wefixtheabsolutescaleof
thetwodatasetsandexcludethisdegeneracy.Theterm𝐿 1containing
the correlation data can constrain𝐹BNS,z0 largely independently of
assumptions related to the star formation history and other common
astrophysical or cosmological uncertainties underlying both BNS
mergerratesandr-processproductionviaBNSmergers(asmotivated
in Secs. 2.1 and 3). The term𝐿2 further contributes to the precision
in estimating𝐹 BNS,z0, as the abundance terms contained in𝐿2 are
directly sensitive to changes in𝐹 BNS,z0. The above likelihood𝐿
is constructed to only measure the correlation of cosmic r-process
abundances with BNS mergers and the total fractional contribution
to the latter caused by BNS. It is not designed to measure the local
mergerrateofBNS.Suchameasurementwouldrequireanadditional
terminthelikelihoodinvolving ˆ𝑁GW(𝑧)–astraightforward,possible
extension of the current method.
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

4A. Agarwal et al.
The covariance matrices in Eq. (2.4) (i.e., for the given normal
distributions) are defined as follows:
C1 =
D ˆ𝐾(𝑧) −𝐾 model (𝜃, 𝑧)
  ˆ𝐾(𝑧) −𝐾 model (𝜃, 𝑧)
 𝑇E
,
(2.5)
C2 =
D h
ˆAb
Eu
(𝑧) −Ab Eumodel (𝜃, 𝑧)
i
×
h
ˆAb
Eu
(𝑧) −Ab Eumodel (𝜃, 𝑧)
i 𝑇 E
.(2.6)
Theanglebracketsdenotethemeanoveranensembleofdatawithdif-
ferentnoiserealizationsaroundtheexpectedvalue.Sincemultiplere-
alizationsofthetotalnumberofBNSGWevents ˆ𝑁GW(𝑧)orthemean
Euabundances ˆAb
Eu
(𝑧)inacertainredshiftbinarenotpossible,the
covariancematrixmustbeapproximatedaccordingtotheoreticalex-
pectations. We expect individual GW and abundance observations
(and their corresponding observational uncertainties) to be indepen-
dently obtained, andhence, we do not expecta statistical correlation
between observations in different redshift bins. Therefore, the above
covariance matrices are of diagonal form,(C𝑘)𝑖 𝑗 =𝛿 𝑖 𝑗𝐶𝑘 (𝑧 𝑖)for
𝑘=1,2, and the likelihood function (2.4) becomes
log𝐿∝
∑︁
𝑧𝑖
−
 ˆ𝐾(𝑧 𝑖) −𝐾 model (𝜃, 𝑧 𝑖)
2
2𝐶1 (𝑧 𝑖)
−
h ˆAbEu (𝑧 𝑖) −Ab Eumodel (𝜃, 𝑧 𝑖)
i2
2𝐶2 (𝑧 𝑖) .(2.7)
Wemodelthediagonalelementsofthecovariancematrixusingex-
pected observational and instrumental uncertainties in each redshift
bin as
𝐶1 (𝑧 𝑖)=𝜎 2
ˆ𝐾− ˆ𝑁GW
(𝑧 𝑖) +𝜎 2
ˆ𝐾−𝑧 (𝑧 𝑖) +𝜎 2
ˆ𝐾− ˆAbEu (𝑧 𝑖),
(2.8)
𝐶2 (𝑧 𝑖)=𝜎 2
ˆAbEu (𝑧 𝑖).(2.9)
Thecovariancefunction𝐶 1comprisestheuncertaintiesinmeasuring
the number of GW sources (𝜎2
ˆ𝐾− ˆ𝑁GW
), the redshift (𝜎2
ˆ𝐾−𝑧), and the
abundance tracer of the cosmic r-process (𝜎2
ˆ𝐾− ˆAbEu), propagated to
the uncertainty of ˆ𝐾via the chain rule. The covariance function𝐶2
consists solely of the measurement uncertainties in the abundance
tracer of the r-process (𝜎2
ˆAbEu).
The total number of GW events in a redshift binˆ𝑁GW has two
sources of uncertainty: counting statistic errors and redshift uncer-
tainty associated with each event. For the counting uncertainty, we
approximate GW sources in a particular redshift range to occur with
a fixed expected rate, i.e., the BNS rate𝑅BNS,ML (𝑧)for which the
likelihood (2.4) maximizes. The approximation is justified as devi-
ations from this expected rate are quadratically suppressed in the
likelihood function by definition. Since the GW observations are in-
dependent,thecountingstatistic ˆ𝑁GWwithameanrateofoccurrence
𝑅BNS,ML (𝑧)in a particular redshift bin should follow a Poisson dis-
tribution with standard deviation𝜎ˆ𝑁GW =
√︁ˆ𝑁GW. Thus, the error in
measuringthenumberofGWsourcesispropagatedtothecorrelation
data ˆ𝐾as
𝜎2
ˆ𝐾− ˆ𝑁GW
(𝑧 𝑖)=
 
𝜕 ˆ𝐾
𝜕𝑧
𝜕𝑧
𝜕 ˆ𝑁GW

𝑧𝑖
!2
𝜎2
ˆ𝑁GW
(𝑧 𝑖).(2.10)
The redshift uncertainty associated with each GW event has to
be modelled differently for BNS events with and without electro-
magnetic (EM) counterparts. Without an EM counterpart, GW ob-
servations alone can only provide the luminosity distance to the
GW source, which can be converted to a redshift assuming a fixed
cosmology. The observational error in luminosity distance for BNS
assuming a cosmological model with parameters denoted by𝛼𝑐, is
translated to data as
𝜎2
ˆ𝐾−𝑧 (𝑧 𝑖)=
 𝜕 ˆ𝐾
𝜕𝑧
2  
𝜕𝑧
𝜕𝑑 L

𝛼𝑐
!2
𝜎2
𝑑L (𝑧 𝑖),(2.11)
where the derivative 𝜕𝑧
𝜕𝑑L

𝛼𝑐
is the Jacobian of the map between
luminosity distance and redshift, and𝜎𝑑L is the luminosity distance
measurement uncertainty. For BNS events with EM counterparts
thatleadtotheidentificationofthehostgalaxyandthusofaredshift
measurement, the uncertainty in determining𝑧is expected to shrink
significantly4. We assume it to be
𝜎2
ˆ𝐾−𝑧 (𝑧 𝑖)=
 𝜕 ˆ𝐾
𝜕𝑧
2
𝜎2
spec (𝑧 𝑖),(2.12)
where𝜎 spec (𝑧) ≈𝜎 0 (1+𝑧)isthespectroscopicredshiftuncertainty,
with𝜎 0 =10 −4 based on spectroscopic redshift measurement errors
(e.g. Blanchard et al. 2017; Coulter et al. 2017).
The error in measuringˆAb
Eu
is translated toˆ𝐾by
𝜎2
ˆ𝐾− ˆAbEu =
 𝜕 ˆ𝐾(𝜃)
𝜕𝑧
𝜕𝑧
𝜕 ˆAb
Eu
2
𝜎2
ˆAbEu (𝑧),(2.13)
where𝜎 ˆAbEu is the uncertainty in the r-process abundance proxy
measurement.
3 ILLUSTRATION OF THE CORRELATION TECHNIQUE
In this section, we investigate expected correlations concretely by
modelling𝑁 GW andAb Eu and examining their correlation function
and its sensitivity to the parameters𝜃, including𝐹BNS,z0.
Foranestimateof𝑁 GW(𝑧),weintegratethemodelledBNSmerger
rate𝑅 BNS (𝑡;𝑡 min, 𝑏)overcomovingcosmicvolumeandtheobserva-
tion time. The rate𝑅BNS (𝑡, 𝑡 min, 𝑏)as a function of cosmic time𝑡is
assumed to follow the SFR with some delay due to the GW-driven
binary inspiral time,
𝑅BNS (𝑡;𝑡 min, 𝑏)=𝑐 BNS
∫ 𝑡
𝑡(𝑧=10)
𝐷BNS (𝑡−𝑡 ′;𝑡 min, 𝑏)𝜓 SF (𝑡 ′)d𝑡 ′,
(3.1)
where the constant𝑐 BNS normalizes the expression (and thus
𝑁GW,model) to the currently observed rate at redshift𝑧=0of
𝑅BNS,z0 =100 Gpc −3yr−1 (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al.
2025).WeemploythecosmicSFR𝜓 SF (𝑡)ofMadau&Fragos(2017)
and take𝑧=10as the highest redshift of our model. The DTD
𝐷(𝑡;𝑡 min, 𝑏)(see, e.g., Hao & Yuan (2013); Wanderman & Piran
(2015); Anand et al. (2018); Adhikari et al. (2020); Zevin et al.
(2022); Nugent et al. (2022) for an estimation of the DTD from
existing observations) is given by a power law5 as,
𝐷(𝑡)= Θ(𝑡−𝑡 min)𝑡 𝑏,(3.2)
4 This method requires galaxy surveys up to redshifts of𝑧≈1.
5 As a fiducial value, one expects𝑏≃ −1, since the orbital separation𝑎
of BNS progenitor systems is thought to be nearly constant in log space,
d𝑁/d log𝑎≃const.(Sanaetal.2012),andtheinspiraltimescalesas𝑡 insp ∝
𝑎4 for quasi-circular binaries in linearised general relativity (Peters 1964),
which leads tod𝑁/d𝑡insp ∝𝑡 −1
insp. Due to the strong dependence𝑡insp ∝𝑎 4,
theinitialorbitalseparationsmustdeviatestronglyfromtheabovementioned
observations,d𝑁/d𝑎∝𝑎 − (1+𝛾) with|𝛾|≳2−4instead of𝛾=0for the
resultingd𝑁/d𝑡 insp ∝𝑡 − (1+𝛾/4)
insp to deviate significantly from∝𝑡−1
insp.
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

Inferring the role of binary neutron stars in r-process nucleosynthesis5
whereΘis the Heaviside function and𝑡 min and𝑏 <0are free
parameters. Considering the lifetime of BNS progenitor stars, the
minimumdelay𝑡 minrelativetostarformationwithwhichBNSmerge
has a theoretical lower limit of at least≈20–40Myr.
The event numberd𝑁GW,model of BNS in a differential comoving
volumed𝑉and for an observation time𝑡obs is calculated as
d𝑁GW,model = 𝑅BNS
1+𝑧 d𝑉×𝑡 obs.(3.3)
Here, the factor(1+𝑧) −1 accounts for cosmological time dilation
fromsourcetimetoobservertime.Thedifferentialcomovingvolume
is translated into a differential redshift interval usingd𝑉/d𝑧=𝑐(1+
𝑧)2𝐷2
𝐴𝐻(𝑧) −1dΩ, withΩbeing the solid angle,𝐷 𝐴 the angular
distance,𝐻theHubbleparameter,and𝑐thespeedoflight.Inagiven
redshift intervald𝑧, one therefore has
d𝑁GW,model
d𝑧 =
∫
dΩ 𝑅BNS
1+𝑧
d2𝑉
d𝑧dΩ ×𝑡 obs.(3.4)
Assuming isotropy, the integral
∫
𝑑Ωresults in a factor of4𝜋. The
observableBNSsourcepopulationnumber𝑁 GW,modelasafunctionof
redshiftisthuscalculatedbyintegratingtheeventnumberd𝑁 GW,model
over a certain redshift interval[𝑧−Δ𝑧/2, 𝑧+Δ𝑧/2]around redshift
𝑧:
𝑁GW,model (𝑧)=𝜙(𝑧) ×
∫ 𝑡(𝑧+Δ𝑧/2)
𝑡(𝑧−Δ𝑧/2) 4𝜋 𝑅BNS (𝑡 ′ ,𝑡min,𝑏)
1+𝑧(𝑡 ′ )
d2𝑉
d𝑧dΩ
d𝑧
d𝑡 ′ d𝑡′ ×𝑡 obs,(3.5)
where𝜙(𝑧)is the GW event selection function, which is detector-
specific(seeAppendixD)andd𝑧/d𝑡=𝐻(𝑧) (1+𝑧).Thefactors d2𝑉
d𝑧dΩ
andd𝑧/d𝑡areevaluatedasfunctionsofredshiftforthecosmological
parameters obtained by the Planck Collaboration et al. (2020). The
observation time is fixed to a fiducial value of𝑡obs =1yr for the rest
of the analysis.6
To obtain an estimate forAb Eu as a function of redshift, we
modelcosmicr-processenrichmentwiththecosmicchemicalevolu-
tion (CCE) model described in Appendix A. As the proxy quan-
tityAb Eu, we take the usual europium abundance[Eu/H] (𝑧)=
log[𝑁 Eu (𝑧)/𝑁 H (𝑧)] −log(𝑁 Eu/𝑁H)⊙ (where𝑁refers to the num-
ber of atoms), offset by+5to avoid mathematical pathologies when
computing correlations with GW events. The cosmic Eu abundance
[Eu/H] (𝑧)in a certain redshift bin around𝑧is obtained by averag-
ing the Eu content of individual galaxies across a range of masses
with their specific star formation histories. Chemical evolution in
each galaxy is modelled by a simple one-zone approach, in which
both BNS and other astrophysical sources without delay relative to
star formation (subsumed as rCCSNe here) contribute to r-process
nucleosynthesis,
AbEumodel (𝑧(𝑡), 𝜃)=Ab EuBNS (𝑡, 𝜃) +Ab EurCCSNe(𝑡, 𝜃),(3.6)
where𝜃=(𝑡 min, 𝑏, 𝐹BNS,z0). The CCE model has several more pa-
rameters as defined in Appendix A, and the set𝜃only refers to the
parameters that we are interested in estimating.
The fractional cumulative contribution𝐹BNS (𝑧, 𝜃)of BNS to Eu
production at different redshifts is given by
𝐹BNS (𝑧(𝑡), 𝜃)= AbEuBNS (𝑡, 𝜃)
AbEuBNS (𝑡, 𝜃) +Ab EurCCSNe(𝑡, 𝜃) ,(3.7)
with𝐹 BNS (𝑧=0, 𝜃)=𝐹 BNS,z0. For purposes of illustration in
6 The estimated uncertainties of the parameters are only expected to de-
crease as𝑡obs increases due to reduced combined errors of a large number of
observations.
this section, we fix certain target values of𝐹BNS,z0 to represent
different possible astrophysical scenarios and find the correspond-
ing products of volumetric rate and Eu-yield𝑀 s (Eq. (A7)) for
s={BNS,rCCSNe}. Given initial guesses and other input param-
eters, the CCE model performs root finding to obtain the desired
values of𝑀s that yield the target value of𝐹BNS (𝑧(𝑡), 𝜃)at𝑧=0and
that guarantee the obtained abundance proxy to be consistent with
the observed Milky-Way stellar abundances at𝑧=0, with𝑅 BNS,z0
as above (see Appendix A for more details).
The correlations𝐾model are then given by
𝐾model (𝑧;𝑡 min, 𝑏, 𝐹BNS,z0)=
𝑁GW,model (𝑧;𝑡 min, 𝑏)
AbEumodel (𝑧;𝑡 min, 𝑏, 𝐹BNS,z0)
.(3.8)
InFig.1,themodeled𝑁 GW,model andAb Eumodel estimatesareshown
in the top panel for different values of the DTD parameters and
𝐹BNS,z0,withthecorrespondingcorrelationfunctionsdepictedinthe
bottompanel.Thecorrelationfunctionspeakat𝑧≈1,corresponding
to where the slope of the𝑁GW,model −Ab Eumodel trajectories in the
top panel undergo a sign change (or a ‘turning point’), due to a
peak in the BNS merger rate. At smaller redshifts relative to this
peak, the r-process contribution from BNS typically dominates over
rCCSNe for the parameters considered here. Therefore, the position
of the peak (or ‘turning point’) in the𝑁GW,model–AbEumodel space
strongly constrains the contribution of BNS to the cosmic r-process.
As the DTD parameters𝑏or𝑡 min decrease for fixed𝐹BNS,z0, the
‘turning point’ remains almost constant in theAbEumodel direction,
butthetrajectoriesstretchinthe𝑁 GW,model directionduetoenhanced
BNS merger rates. The latter increase, since𝑅BNS,z0 is fixed and the
DTD steepens or extends to smaller minimum delay times. As a
result, the peak of the correlation function also increases. For fixed
DTD parameters, the overall BNS r-process fraction𝐹BNS,z0 shifts
the ‘turning point’ of the trajectory in theAbEumodel direction. It is
unchanged in the𝑁GW direction, since the BNS merger rate is not
affected by𝐹BNS,z0 in this case, with the average per-event yield of
Eu being the only degree of freedom changing here. In particular,
thisillustratesthesensitivityofourmethodtotheper-eventr-process
yield of BNS. The impact of𝐹BNS,z0 on the trajectory slopes is
qualitatively different from the impact of the DTD parameters and
establishes the sensitivity of the correlation method to𝐹BNS,z0. We
discuss this point more quantitatively in Sec. 4.
Thecorrelationtrajectories𝐾 modelinFig.1illustratethesensitivity
tovariousparameters.Thesensitivityof𝐾 modeltoachangein𝐹 BNS,z0
appears to be smaller compared to its sensitivity to changes in the
DTD parameters. However, this is only an effect of the+5offset to
theabundanceproxyAb Eu addedhere.WeverifyinAppendixCthat
withouttheoffset,achangein𝐹 BNS,z0 leadstoasignificantchangein
thecorrelationtrajectory.Eventhoughthecorrelation’ssensitivityto
variations in𝐹BNS,z0 decreases due to the offset, the significance of
the uncertainty estimates on𝐹BNS,z0 from our proposed correlation
modelaremuchhigherthanthoseoftheDTDparameters(seeSec.4
and Table 1). This is because the+5offset toAbEu also leads to a
decrease in the relative observational uncertainty ofAbEu compared
to the original scale, which compensates for the reduced sensitivity
due to the offset, as discussed in more detail in Appendix C.
4 PARAMETER UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATION USING
FISHER INFORMATION
We employ Fisher forecasts to determine the minimum uncertainty
with which one can recover the maximum likelihood values of the
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

6A. Agarwal et al.
[hbt!]
0.0 1.5 3.0 4.5
NGW, model/103
4.8
5.0
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6.0
AbEumodel
tmin = 0.2 Gyr, b = -1.0, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
tmin = 0.5 Gyr, b = -1.0, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
tmin = 0.2 Gyr, b = -1.5, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
tmin = 0.2 Gyr, b = -1.0, FBNS, z0 = 0.9
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75
Redshift (z)
0.0 0.6 1.2 1.8
Redshift (z)
0
200
400
600
800
Kmodel
tmin = 0.2 Gyr, b = -1.0, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
tmin = 0.5 Gyr, b = -1.0, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
tmin = 0.2 Gyr, b = -1.5, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
tmin = 0.2 Gyr, b = -1.0, FBNS, z0 = 0.9
Figure 1.Modeled trajectories of total number of GW events (𝑁GW for 1
year of observations) and r-process abundance proxies (AbEu; top) as well
as the corresponding modeled correlation functions𝐾model (bottom) as a
function of redshift and for different DTD parameters𝑡min,𝑏and fractional
contributions𝐹 BNS,z0 of BNS to r-process enrichment. The colour bar on
the top indicates the redshift of a particular point in the correlation phase
space. The sensitivity of the trajectories in the𝑁GW–AbEu space to different
parameters(particularly𝐹 BNS,z0)isevident,whichformsthebasisofinferring
𝐹BNS,z0 from observational data.
parameters.7 According to the Cramer-Rao bound (Radhakrishna
Rao1945;Cramér1946),theminimumuncertaintyinestimatingthe
7 Whereas a Bayes estimate of posteriors on the parameters𝜃may be de-
sirable when working with actual observational data in the future, here we
choose to use the Fisher matrix to demonstrate the expected precision of the
correlation method in the context of mock data.
parameters around the maximum likelihood point𝜃ML is given by
Δ𝜃 𝑝 =
√︁
(F−1) 𝑝 𝑝, whereΔ𝜃 𝑝 represents the standard deviation of
our parameter estimates𝜃 𝑝 ∈ {𝑡 min, 𝑏, 𝐹BNS,z0 }. For our scenario,
the Fisher information matrixF𝑝𝑞 is given by (see Appendix B)
F 𝑝𝑞 =
 𝜕2 log𝐿
𝜕𝜃 𝑝 𝜕𝜃 𝑞

𝜃ML
(4.1)
=
∑︁
𝑘=1,2
∑︁
𝑧𝑛
𝐶 −1
𝑘 (𝑧 𝑛) 𝜕L 𝑘
𝜕𝜃 𝑝
𝜕L 𝑘
𝜕𝜃 𝑞

𝑡min,0 ,𝑏0,𝐹BNS,z0,0
,
where𝜃 𝑝, 𝜃𝑞 ∈ {𝑡 min, 𝑏, 𝐹BNS,z0} and where we have assumed that
𝜃ML corresponds to the fiducial set of model parameters𝜃fiducial =
{𝑡min,0, 𝑏0, 𝐹BNS,z0,0 }described in Sec. 4.3. Here,L𝑘 represent the
models described in Sec. 3, i.e.,(L1,L 2) ≡ (𝐾 model,Ab Eu
model). The
covariance functions𝐶𝑘 at redshift bin𝑧𝑛 are given by Eqns. (2.8)–
(2.9). They require mock estimates of future observations forˆ𝑁GW
and ˆAb
Eu
, which we discuss in Sec. 4.1, as well as of the associated
measurement errors𝜎 ˆ𝑁GW,𝜎 ˆAbEu, and𝜎 𝑑L, which we calculate in
Sec.4.2.WediscussparametervaluesinSec.4.3,whichcorrespond
todifferentpossibleastrophysicalscenarios.Finally,thecorrespond-
ing Fisher forecasts are summarized in Sec. 4.4.
4.1 Simulated Mock Estimates of Gravitational-Wave and
Abundance Observations
In the absence of observations of GW events and r-process abun-
dances across a redshift range, we use the models𝑁GW,model and
AbEu
model to generate mock data. Individual future observations have
associated observational errors that will shift the observed mean
value within a redshift bin from the true or expected value. To in-
clude this effect in our mock estimates, we takeO (103)8 samples
from a normal distributionN (𝜇(𝑧 𝑛), 𝜎2
N (𝑧 𝑛))in each redshift bin
𝑧𝑛, taking the theoretically expected (modeled) mean values as𝜇
and the expected measurement error as the standard deviation𝜎N.
This generatesO (10 3)Fisher matrix elementsF 𝑝𝑞 (Eq. 4.1) and
thecorrespondingmeanvalueisusedforderivingthe1𝜎uncertain-
ties (Cramer-Rao bound) on𝐹BNS,z0, 𝑡min, and𝑏in Sec. 4.4. This
sampling process generates mock estimates ˆ𝑁GW,mock and ˆAb
Eu
mock
for ˆ𝑁GW and ˆAb
Eu
, respectively. To generateˆ𝑁GW,mock in a redshift
bin𝑧 𝑛, the distributionN [𝜇=𝑁 GW,model (𝑧 𝑛), 𝜎2 =𝜎 2
ˆ𝑁GW
(𝑧 𝑛)]is
sampled, where𝜎 2
ˆ𝑁GW
(𝑧 𝑛)=𝑁 GW,model (𝑧 𝑛)(Sec. 2.2). Similarly,
the mock estimate ˆAb
Eu
mock(𝑧 𝑛)of the abundance proxy is gener-
ated by sampling from the distributionN [𝜇=Ab Eu
model (𝑧 𝑛), 𝜎2 =
𝜎2
ˆAbEu (𝑧 𝑛)],where𝜎 ˆAbEu (𝑧 𝑛)istheexpecteduncertaintyoftheproxy.
The abundance proxy represents the mean of the abundance obser-
vationsofindividualgalaxiesintheredshiftbin𝑧 𝑛,hence𝜎 ˆAbEu (𝑧 𝑛)
is the standard error of the mean (SEM) of the abundance measure-
ments in that redshift bin.
The SEM of the abundance proxy is affected by the intrinsic scat-
ter of the abundance observations of individual galaxies in a given
redshift bin𝑧 𝑛. The individual abundance observations of galaxies
in a redshift bin will exhibit a standard deviation𝜎GAL around the
mean[ ˆAb
Eu
(𝑧)]duetostochasticityofr-processeventsatlowmetal-
licity(rarityofevents),inhomogeneousmixingofr-processmaterial
into the ISM, differences in star formation histories, galaxy masses,
8 Thelargesamplesizeensuresthattherandomsamplingerrorisconverged,
i.e., repeating the sampling process multiple times leads to similar statistical
quantities each time.
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

Inferring the role of binary neutron stars in r-process nucleosynthesis7
Table 1.The1𝜎-uncertainty on estimated parameters for fiducial DTD parameters𝑡min =0.2Gyr,𝑏=−1and a combination of two CEs, one ET (2CE+ET),
one year of observation time, and different assumed total fractional BNS contributions𝐹BNS,z0 to the cosmic r-process. “EM” refers to the bright-siren case
(presenceofelectromagneticcounterpartsprovidinghostgalaxyredshiftinformation).Numbersinparenthesesrepresentthesignificanceorsignal-to-noiseratio
(SNR) of the estimation.
Scenario
√︃ 𝐹 −1
𝐹BNS,z0 𝐹BNS,z0 (SNR)
√︃ 𝐹 −1
𝑡min𝑡min
[Gyr] (SNR)
√︃ 𝐹 −1
𝑏𝑏 (SNR)
2CE + ET,𝐹BNS,z0 =0.50.03 (2×10 1) 0.3 (0.7) 0.2 (0.5×10 1)
2CE + ET,𝐹BNS,z0 =0.90.03 (3×10 1) 0.3 (0.7) 0.2 (0.5×10 1)
2CE + ET + EM,𝐹BNS,z0 =0.50.02 (3×10 1) 0.2 (1) 0.1 (1×10 1)
2CE + ET + EM,𝐹BNS,z0 =0.90.02 (5×10 1) 0.2 (1) 0.1 (1×10 1)
metallicity, etc. Assuming𝜎GAL is typically much larger than the
individual measurement uncertainty at all redshifts9, the SEM is
given by𝜎 ˆAbEu (𝑧 𝑛)=𝜎 GAL(𝑧 𝑛)/
√︁
𝑁obs,Ab (𝑧 𝑛), where we assume
𝑁obs,Ab (𝑧 𝑛) ≥9number of observations in the redshift bin𝑧𝑛. The
abundancedistributioninMilkyWaydiskstarswithstellarmetallic-
ityabovethesolarvalueis[Eu/H]≈0.2±0.06(Battistini&Bensby
2016;Sudaetal.2008).Assumingthemeanabundanceofsuchstars
to be representative of the abundance proxy at𝑧=0, this translates
into𝜎 GAL(𝑧=0) ≈0.06and ˆAb
Eu
model (𝑧=0) ≈5.2for Milky-Way
equivalent galaxies, with an expected SEM𝜎ˆAbEu (𝑧=0)≲0.02.
We take the upper limit𝜎 ˆAbEu (𝑧=0) ≈0.02for our mock es-
timate and obtain a relative SEM for Milky-Way-type galaxies of
𝜎 ˆAbEu (𝑧=0)/ ˆAb
Eu
model (𝑧=0) ≈0.004.Duetothelackofabundance
data for star-forming galaxies with˜M≳8.5other than the Milky
Way,weassumethattherelativeSEMoftheMilkyWayisrepresen-
tative of all galaxies at𝑧=0. To model the𝑧 >0values𝜎 ˆAbEu (𝑧),
weassumetheproxyisderivedfromelectromagnetic(spectral)data.
Since the measured spectral flux𝐹decreases with the source red-
shift as𝐹∝ (1+𝑧) −2 and the Poisson error of photon counting
statistics𝜎 𝐹 ∝
√
𝐹dominates detection errors, the relative error of
theindividualabundancemeasurementsscalesas(𝜎 𝐹 /𝐹) ∝ (1+𝑧)
10. The standard deviation𝜎GAL11 and the relative SEM also follow
the same scaling with redshift. Therefore, we obtain the redshift-
dependent uncertainty𝜎 ˆAbEu (𝑧) ≈0.004(1+𝑧)Ab Eumodel (𝑧).
4.2 The Covariance Functions𝐶 𝑘
The observational uncertainties𝜎 2
ˆ𝑁GW
(𝑧 𝑛)and𝜎 ˆAbEu (𝑧 𝑛)as mod-
elled in Sec. 4.1 contribute to the covariance functions𝐶 𝑘
(Eqns. (2.8)–(2.9)) through Eqns. (2.10) and (2.13). The remain-
ing, unmodelled uncertainty of the luminosity distance measure-
ments (𝜎𝑑L, Eq. (2.11)) is calculated from a mock GW database as
described in Appendix D. For this mock database, we assume a de-
tectorcombinationoftwoCEobservatoriesandoneETingenerating
9 The validity of this assumption is uncertain, but not implausible judging
from abundance observations across metallicity and different environments
in and around the Milky Way.
10 The scaling is also motivated by the(1+𝑧)scaling of uncertainties in
spectralquantitiessuchasthephotometricredshift,assumedinspectroscopic
surveys such as Ilbert et al. (2006); Hernán-Caballero et al. (2021).
11 𝜎(aX )=a𝜎( X ), whereXis a random variable andais a constant
factor(here,a=1+𝑧, whichisconstant ineachredshift bin).However, the
rarity of r-process events at low metallicity and the difficulty of measuring
abundances especially at significant redshifts𝑧≳0.1might, due to low
number statistics, lead to a noisy standard deviation, that is, a larger value of
𝜎GAL.
data for the number of GW events,ˆ𝑁GW,mock. The detector configu-
ration affects the GW detector selection function𝜙(𝑧)as calculated
in Appendix D.
Examining the covariance functions𝐶 𝑘 overall, the assumed
10% relative uncertainty in the mean r-process abundance ([Eu/H]
=0.2±0.02) at𝑧=0and its scaling∝ (1+𝑧), makes it the domi-
nantobservationaluncertaintyinthisanalysis.Hence,anincreaseor
decrease in the mean r-process abundance proxy errors will have a
proportional effect on the overall precision of parameter estimation
with this method.
4.3 Fiducial Parameters for Fisher Forecast
In addition to the modelsL 𝑘, the covariance functions𝐶 𝑘, and
the mock estimates of ˆ𝑁GW and ˆAb
Eu
, the Fisher matrix elements
(Eq. (4.1)) require a fiducial set of parameter choices. As a fidu-
cial astrophysical scenario, we choose the model parameters𝜃fiducial
with𝑡 min,0 =0.2Gyr,𝑏 0 =−1, and𝐹 BNS,z0,0 =0.5. The fiducial
assumption of𝑡 min =0.2Gyr is consistent with𝑡 min =184 +67
−79 Myr
determinedbyZevinetal.(2022)basedonananalysisofshortGRB
host galaxy associations. The fiducial value𝑏=−1is incompatible
with the results of Zevin et al. (2022). However, it represents the
standard expectation (see Sec. 3) and it is within the range of the
parameter bounds determined by other short GRB and DTD studies
(e.g., Wanderman & Piran 2015; Paterson et al. 2020; Beniamini &
Piran2019;Safarzadehetal.2019b;McCarthyetal.2020).Although
BNSmergerslikelycontributeanorderunityfractiontotheGalactic
r-process, a dominant contribution is incompatible both with spec-
troscopic observations of high-metallicity stars in the Galactic disk
as well as with low-metallicity stars in the Galactic halo (Wehmeyer
et al. 2015; Côté et al. 2019; Siegel et al. 2019; van de Voort et al.
2020; Yamazaki et al. 2022; Brauer et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2025;
thoughcf.Shenetal.2015;Dugganetal.2018;Macias&Ramirez-
Ruiz 2019; Bartos & Márka 2019; Tarumi et al. 2021). Even fast
mergingpopulationsofBNSsystems(e.g.,Beniamini&Piran2019;
Maoz&Nakar2025)areinconsistentwithcurrentGWobservations
andabundanceobservationsoftheGalacticdisk(Saleemetal.2025).
Wethereforechooseamoderatefiducialvalueof𝐹 BNS,z0 =0.5here.
The effects of other choices for the value of𝐹BNS,z0 on our analysis
arediscussedinAppendixE.Wealsoinvestigatetheeffectofvarying
our fiducial assumptions regarding the BNS DTD parameters on the
precision of our Fisher estimates in Appendix E.
4.4 Uncertainty of Parameter Estimation from Fisher
Information Matrix
The1𝜎-uncertainties(Cramer-Raobound)ontheparametersforour
fiducial choice𝑡min =0.2Gyr,𝑏=−1, and𝐹 BNS,z0 =0in scenarios
with(‘brightsirens’)andwithout(‘darksirens’)EMcounterparts,are
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

8A. Agarwal et al.
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
b
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
tmin [Gyr]
0.44
0.48
0.52
0.56
0.60
FBNS, z0
1.4
 1.2
 1.0
 0.8
 0.6
b
0.440.480.520.560.60
FBNS, z0
tmin = 0.2 Gyr, b = -1,FBNS, z0=0.5
CE + CE +ET 1 yr
CE + CE +ET + EM 1 yr
Figure 2.Fisher forecasts demonstrating the precision with which the pro-
posedmethodcanestimatethevaluesoftheBNSDTDparameters𝑡 min and𝑏
as well as the total fraction𝐹BNS,z0 that BNS contribute to cosmic r-process
enrichment. The forecasts assume one year of observation time and two CE
observatoriesaswellasoneETobservatory.Resultsareshownforcaseswith
andwithoutEMcounterparts.Thepanelfor𝑡 min hasbeentruncatedtodisplay
only positive (meaningful) parameter values. Contour lines represent the1𝜎
and2𝜎uncertainty ranges. Green lines represent the fiducial values of the
parameters.
presentedinTable1.Wealsopresentthemore‘conservative’choice
of𝐹 BNS,z0 =0.9,whichincreasesthecorrelation𝐾 model betweenthe
redshift-dependentnumberofBNSGWeventsandcosmicr-process
enrichment,thusenhancingthesensitivity(increasedsignal-to-noise,
SNR)ofourmethodto𝐹 BNS,z0.Moredetailsonvaryingthefiducial
parameters (astrophysical scenarios) are discussed in Appendix E.
Table 1 shows that our method is capable of constraining the total
cosmic BNS r-process contribution to the≲6%level, and generally
to better than the≲10%level (Table E1, Appendix E). Regarding
the DTD parameters, our Fisher forecasts for the power law index
𝑏are comparable to the parameter estimation bounds from previous
studies based on GRBs (e.g. Zevin et al. 2022; Wanderman & Piran
2015; Safarzadeh et al. 2019a; McCarthy et al. 2020), whereas that
for the minimum delay time𝑡min and its SNR are worse by at least a
factor of a few. This is because of the average delay⟨𝑡delay⟩of BNS
mergers,
⟨𝑡delay⟩=
∫ 𝑡max
𝑡min
𝑡′ 𝐷(𝑡 ′, 𝑡min, 𝑏)d𝑡 ′
∫ 𝑡max
𝑡min
𝐷(𝑡 ′, 𝑡min, 𝑏)d𝑡 ′
=
 

𝑏+1
𝑏+2

𝑡 𝑏+2max −𝑡 𝑏+2
min
𝑡 𝑏+1max −𝑡 𝑏+1
min

for𝑏≠−1,−2
𝑡max −𝑡min
ln𝑡 max −ln𝑡 min
for𝑏=−1
ln𝑡 max −ln𝑡 min
𝑡 −1
min −𝑡 −1max
for𝑏=−2
,(4.2)
where𝑡 max =𝑡(𝑧=0)is the cosmic age at𝑧=0, is largely
insensitive to𝑡 min relative to𝑏when|𝑏|≳1and𝑡 min ≪𝑡 max.
The fractional sensitivity of this average delay to variations in𝑡min,
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
NGW, mock/103
4.8
5.0
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
AbEu
mock
1  Fisher error
Fiducial
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Redshift (z)
Figure 3.Fiducial mock data correlation trajectory (parameters𝑡 min =
0.2Gyr,𝑏=−1,𝐹 BNS,z0 =0.5) assuming two CE detectors, one ET, one
year of observation time, and no EM counterparts. Error bars represent the
uncertainties as discussed in Secs. 2.2 and 4.1. The gray-shaded band shows
the1𝜎uncertainty range of the estimated trajectory as calculated by sam-
pling from the joint distribution obtained from the Fisher matrix analysis of
the estimated parameters (first row of Table 1; Fig. 2).
𝜕⟨𝑡delay ⟩
𝜕𝑡min
𝑡min
⟨𝑡delay ⟩ =
𝜕ln⟨𝑡 delay ⟩
𝜕ln𝑡 min
,isinsignificantcomparedto
𝜕ln⟨𝑡 delay ⟩
𝜕ln|𝑏| for
the fiducial parameter values (𝑡min ≪𝑡 max). This results in reduced
sensitivity of our correlation method to𝑡min and thus in low signifi-
cance Fisher forecasts for𝑡min in Table 1. However, as the value of
𝑡minincreases,thefractionalsensitivitytovariationsin𝑡 minincreases;
ataparameterchoiceof𝑡 min =1.0Gyr,allotherparametersremain-
ing at their fiducial values, the relative uncertainty of𝑡min drops to
40%as reported in Table E1.
Figure 2 shows the Cramer-Rao bound on the parameter estima-
tion for a combination of two CE detectors and one ET observatory
assuming 1 year of observation time. The DTD parameters can be
estimated with higher precision in the bright-siren case (EM coun-
terparts providing host galaxy redshifts) due to reduced redshift un-
certaintyoftheGWobservations.Theparameterboundson𝐹 BNS,z0
arealmostidenticalwithorwithoutEMsignals,becausetheestima-
tion precision of𝐹BNS,z0 (determined by the correlationL1 and the
abundance termL 2) is dominated by the conservative uncertainty
estimate of the r-process abundance proxy. Hence, the reduced red-
shift uncertainties from the EM signal do not play a significant role
for the precision in estimating𝐹BNS,z0.
Figure 2 shows a strong negative parametric dependence correla-
tion between the DTD parameters. A decrease in𝑏is balanced by
an increase in𝑡min to accommodate the mock data and vice versa.
The absence of a strong parametric dependence correlation between
𝐹BNS,z0 and the DTD parameters is due to the fact that𝐹BNS,z0 is
controlled by the volumetric rate–yield𝑀s of BNS and rCCSNe,
s={BNS,rCCSNe}(see Eq. (A7)).
Figure3showsthecorrelationtrajectoryofourfiducialmockdata
withmodelledobservationalerrorbarsasdescribedinSecs.2.2and
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

Inferring the role of binary neutron stars in r-process nucleosynthesis9
0.5 1.0 1.5
Redshift Horizon (z)
10 1
100
101
SNR
SNRtmin, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
SNRb, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
SNRFBNS, z0, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
SNRFBNS, z0, FBNS, z0 = 0.9
Figure 4.Theexpectedsignal-to-noiseratio(SNR)forinferring𝐹 BNS,z0,𝑡 min
and𝑏withourcorrelationmethodasafunctionoftheredshifthorizonoffu-
turer-processandGWobservationsandforacombinationoftwoCEsandone
ET (2CE+ET), adopting the fiducial astrophysical scenario𝐹BNS,z0 =0.5,
𝑡min =0.2, and𝑏=−1with one year of observation time. For comparison,
the SNR for inferring𝐹BNS,z0 from an almost exclusively BNS dominated
r-process scenario (𝐹BNS,z0 =0.9; otherwise identical to the fiducial one) is
also shown.
4.1. Overlaid as a gray-shaded region is the 1𝜎-uncertainty range in
recovering the trajectory from Fisher parameter estimation. It cor-
responds to the range of model trajectories obtained by sampling
parameters within the Fisher bounds as reported in the first row of
Tab.1.Theseresultsillustratethesensitivityofourmethodtodiffer-
ent parameter values in the1𝜎Fisher forecast range. As discussed
in Sec. 3, a change in DTD parameters causes a trajectory to shift
in the ˆ𝑁GW,mock direction, whereas a variation in𝐹BNS,z0 has an
approximately orthogonal effect. Since our Fisher forecasts predict
smallerrelativeerrorsinthelatterparameter,thegrayregioninFig.3
has a relatively narrow width in theˆAb
Eu
mock direction relative to the
ˆ𝑁GW,mock direction;theDTDparametersareweaklyconstrainedrel-
ative to𝐹 BNS,z0,0, a general property that is evident from the SNR
values in Tab. 1.
Weconcludethissectionbybrieflyelaboratingontherequirements
for future observations to constrain the BNS contribution𝐹BNS,z0.
Figure 4 reports the redshift-dependent SNR for inferring𝐹BNS,z0,
𝑡min and𝑏across a wide range of astrophysical scenarios (fractional
contributions of BNS to the cosmic r-process). We find that largely
irrespective of the astrophysical scenario, observations of r-process
abundances and GWs out to𝑧≲0.7are required to provide an
estimate on𝐹 BNS,z0 with≲20%relative error at1𝜎. Similarly,
observations out to𝑧≲1.0can provide an estimate on𝑏with
≲20%relative error and an absolute error ofΔ𝑡 min =0.4Gyr on
𝑡min (≈200%relative error) at1𝜎. The𝑡 min parameter estimation
uncertainty is large because, as discussed earlier, our correlation
method is only weakly sensitive to𝑡min at the fiducial parameter
value of 0.2Gyr.
5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Whereas previous work has focused on assessing the contribution
of BNS mergers to r-process nucleosynthesis in various local en-
vironments, such as stars in the Milky Way disk (e.g., Côté et al.
2018; Hotokezaka et al. 2018; Siegel et al. 2019; Siegel 2019; Côté
etal.2019;Wanajoetal.2021;Dvorkinetal.2021;Kobayashietal.
2023; Holmbeck & Andrews 2024; Chen et al. 2025; Saleem et al.
2025),metal-poorstarsofthehalo(e.g.,Ishimaruetal.2015;Tarumi
et al. 2021; Amend et al. 2022), and dwarf galaxies (e.g., Tsujimoto
& Shigeyama 2014; Naidu et al. 2022), here we propose a novel
method to quantify the BNS contribution to thecosmicr-process
across cosmic history.
Our method exploits the fact that BNS mergers as sources of
r-process elements and GWs introduce a non-trivial correlation be-
tween r-process abundances of galaxies and the population of GW
events as a function of redshift. These correlations are expected to
be largely independent of the underlying (cosmic) star formation
history(Sec.2.1).Rather,theystronglydependontheoverallcontri-
bution of BNS to the total r-process enrichment in the Universe and
on the DTD of BNS mergers relative to star formation. We devise
a cosmic chemical evolution model (Appendix A) and model the
redshift-dependent correlations𝐾(𝑧)as a function of the cumula-
tive fractional contribution𝐹BNS,z0 of BNS to the cosmic r-process
up to𝑧=0and of the BNS DTD parameters𝑡 min and𝑏(Sec. 3).
The complimentary contribution to the r-process is assumed to be
generated by a star-formation tracking (‘prompt’) source associated
with the death of massive stars, such as collapsars or magnetorota-
tional supernovae (collectively termed rCCSNe here). Empirically,
the presence of multiple sources with different properties regarding
their behaviour relative to star formation (‘delayed’ vs. ‘prompt’) is
not solely motivated by results of chemical evolution analyses (see
above mentioned references), but also by the decreasing inferred lo-
calBNS mergerratedue tonon-detectionsofconfirmed BNSmerg-
ers through GWs (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2025).
Given current rates, the contribution of non-BNS, ‘prompt’ sources
islikelyrequiredeventoexplaintheobservedtotalcurrentr-process
abundances in Galactic stars (Chen et al. 2025; Saleem et al. 2025;
however,seealsoZenatietal.2026).Givenfutureobservationaldata
at𝑧≳0.1, models of𝐾(𝑧)can be fit to infer the BNS DTD and
the value of𝐹 BNS,z0, thus quantifying the role of BNS in cosmic
r-process nucleosynthesis.
The correlation method presented here is designed in view of
the 3G GW detector era. For the time being, we construct mock
estimates of the desired data and use Fisher forecasts to predict the
expecteduncertaintyinestimating𝐹 BNS,z0 andtheDTDparameters.
We assume a combination of two CEs and one ET over one year
of observation time. As our best-case scenario, we assume that all
GWeventsareaccompaniedwithanEMcounterpart(e.g.,afterglow
of a short GRB, orphan afterglow, kilonova) that allows for a direct
inference of the redshift (‘bright-siren’ case). Exploiting the full
redshift range of the correlation, we obtain a relative uncertainty
range of𝛿𝐹 BNS,z0/𝐹BNS,z0 ≤5%at1𝜎and of≈100%on𝑡 min and
≈10%on𝑏at1𝜎, for a fiducial astrophysical scenario of𝐹BNS,z0 =
0.5,𝑡 min =0.2Gyr,and𝑏=−1(Sec.4.4;Tab.1;Fig.2).Inthemore
pessimistic ‘dark-siren’ scenario (absence of EM counterparts and
directredshiftmeasurements),weinsteadobtain𝛿𝐹 BNS,z0/𝐹BNS,z0 ≤
6%at1𝜎andof≈150%on𝑡 min and≈20%on𝑏at1𝜎.Theseresults
arelargelyindependentoftheassumedastrophysicalscenario,except
that the significance of inferring𝐹 BNS,z0 increases strongly with
increasing BNS contributions𝐹BNS,z0 (Appendix E).
One limitation of our current Fisher information approach is the
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

10A. Agarwal et al.
assumption of Gaussianity of the likelihood. Whereas this assump-
tion may break down for actual future abundance data at increasing
redshift due to availability of observations, intrinsic scatter owing
to the rarity of enrichment events, and large error bars of individ-
ual measurements, it will at least be valid for GW data according
to the central limit theorem, given the expectedO (103)BNS events
detectedby3Gdetectors.Futureworkwiththismethodwillemploy
Bayesian inference using Monte-Carlo methods, which can account
for non-Gaussian effects on the likelihood. Such inference will also
be able to consistently measure all parameters involved, including
the per-event yield of BNS and non-BNS r-process sources.
Our method is more general than the somewhat specific illustra-
tion presented here; it allows for several extensions, and has astro-
physical implications beyond solely quantifying the BNS r-process
contribution. For instance, whereas here we constrain the fractional
contribution of BNS to the r-process at𝑧=0, one can simultane-
ouslyquantifythatfractionovercosmictimeasafunctionofredshift
𝐹BNS (𝑧),aswellasthecontribution𝐹 rCCSNe(𝑧)of‘prompt’sources.
Furthermore, the method can be generalized to multiple r-process
proxies and correlations among them can be explored over cosmic
time. These could include observational signatures that trace groups
of elements (e.g., light vs. heavy r-process elements), or even indi-
vidual elements. Furthermore, it is straightforward to include more
astrophysicalchannelsofr-processproduction(e.g.NS–BHmergers
and consider subclasses of CCSNe) and different DTDs, and infer
their support by the data.
The inference of BNS DTD parameters as enabled by our method
hasbroaderconsequences.Theyaretightlyrelatedtothepropertiesof
theirhostgalaxies(Adhikarietal.2020;McCarthyetal.2020;Artale
etal.2020;Broekgaardenetal.2022).TheuncertaintyinBNSDTD
parametersleadstoaspreadinthemassfunctionofBNShostgalaxies
(Roseetal.2021),andareductioninthisuncertaintycanhelptobetter
identifyBNShostgalaxiesandperformtargetedfollow-upsoffuture
BNS-based multi-messenger events. The capability of constraining
the minimum delay time toO (100)Myr as demonstrated here can
provide information on a potential rapidly merging subpopulation
of BNS (‘rapid mergers’; e.g., Beniamini & Piran 2019; Maoz &
Nakar2025).AccurateknowledgeoftheredshiftdistributionofBNS
mergers (as a result of accurate DTD estimation) can help constrain
cosmological parameters with standard siren cosmology, as pointed
out by Ding et al. (2019). The study of BNS formation channels,
including the presence of common-envelope phases, are affected by
assumptions ofthe BNSDTD (Dominiket al.2012), and hencewill
beinformedfromreduceduncertaintiesinthedelaytimeparameters.
Overall, the inference results discussed here sensitively depend
on the availability of future r-process abundance data and their ob-
servational uncertainties (which we model here with a conservative
scaling∝1+𝑧based on local r-process measurements). Our sensi-
tivity analysis of parameter inference to the redshift horizon of joint
GWandabundanceobservations(Sec.4.4;Fig.4)demonstratesthat,
largely irrespective of the astrophysical scenario, the SNR is mainly
acquired using data within𝑧≲1.0. More specifically, observations
outto𝑧≲0.7arerequiredtoconstrain𝐹 BNS,z0 tobetterthan≲20%
at1𝜎.Observationsto𝑧≲1.0canyield𝑡 min and𝑏toabout≈200%
and≲20%at1𝜎, respectively. The 3G GW detectors will be able
to detect BNS mergers out to redshifts≲2(Sathyaprakash et al.
2019;Reitzeetal.2019;Maggioreetal.2020;Evansetal.2021;Ia-
covelli et al. 2022), but whether r-process abundance measurements
outside the local group and out to redshifts𝑧≲0.7will materialize
in the near future remains an open question. Progress on measuring
abundances of𝛼-elements and metallicity using galaxy continuum
emission (Heckman et al. 1998; Rix et al. 2004; Crowther et al.
2006;Sommarivaetal.2012;Cullenetal.2019)aswellasfromthe
gas phase of emission-line galaxies out to redshifts≲2and beyond
(Isobe et al. 2023; Schaerer et al. 2024; Ji et al. 2024; Marques-
Chavesetal.2024;Velichkoetal.2024;Curtietal.2025)aswellas
exploitingcorrelationsbetweenelementalabundancesusingindirect
approaches, e.g., also via cosmological simulations, may not render
thischallengeimpossible.Attheveryleast,ourmethodcouldbeap-
plied to abundance evolution reconstructed with stellar archaeology
from local observations of metal-poor stars, but it motivates identi-
fyingdirectorindirectsignaturesofneutron-captureelementsinthe
emission of galaxies beyond the local Universe.
Code Used:Planck18cosmology module inastropy(Astropy
Collaborationetal.2013,2018,2022),SciPy:Virtanenetal.(2020).
Acknowledgements:The authors gratefully acknowledge the com-
puting time made available to them on the high-performance com-
puters“Emmy”and“Lise”attheNHRCentersNHR@Göttingenand
NHR@ZIB.TheseCentersarejointlysupportedbytheFederalMin-
istryofEducationandResearchandthestategovernmentsparticipat-
ingintheNationalHigh-PerformanceComputing(NHR)jointfund-
ing program (http://www.nhr-verein.de/en/our-partners). The work
of S. M. is a part of the⟨data|theory⟩Universe-Labwhich is
supported by the TIFR and the Department of Atomic Energy, Gov-
ernment of India. We acknowledge the support of the Department
ofAtomicEnergy,GovernmentofIndia,underProjectIdentification
No.RTI4012.ThisresearchissupportedbythePrimeMinisterEarly
CareerResearchAward,AnusandhanNationalResearchFoundation,
Government of India.
DATA A V AILABILITY
The data underlying this article are available in this article. The
observationaldataispresentedwithrelevantcitationsandispublicly
available.
REFERENCES
Abbott B. P., et al., 2017, Phys. Rev. Lett., 119, 161101
Abohalima A., Frebel A., 2018, ApJS, 238, 36
Adhikari S., Fishbach M., Holz D. E., Wechsler R. H., Fang Z., 2020, ApJ,
905, 21
Agarwal A., Siegel D. M., Metzger B. D., Nagele C., 2026, ApJ, 998, 57
Akeson R., et al., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1902.05569
Amend B., Zrake J., Hartmann D. H., 2022, ApJ, 939, 59
Anand N., Shahid M., Resmi L., 2018, MNRAS, 481, 4332
Anand S., Barnes J., Yang S., et al. 2024, ApJ, 962, 68
Artale M. C., Mapelli M., Bouffanais Y., Giacobbo N., Pasquato M., Spera
M., 2020, MNRAS, 491, 3419
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2013, A&A, 558, A33
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2018, AJ, 156, 123
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2022, apj, 935, 167
Barnes J., Duffell P. C., 2023, ApJ, 952, 96
Bartos I., Márka S., 2019, ApJ, 881, L4
Bartos I., Huard T. L., Márka S., 2016, ApJ, 816, 61
Battistini C., Bensby T., 2016, A&A, 586, A49
Bellm E. C., et al., 2019, PASP, 131, 018002
Beniamini P., Piran T., 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 487, 4847
Blanchard P. K., et al., 2017, ApJ, 848, L22
BlanchardP.K.,VillarV.A.,ChornockR.,etal.2024,NatureAstronomy,8,
774
Bonetti M., Perego A., Dotti M., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 490, 296
Bouwens R. J., et al., 2014, ApJ, 795, 126
Brauer K., Ji A. P., Drout M. R., et al. 2021, ApJ, 915, 81
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

Inferring the role of binary neutron stars in r-process nucleosynthesis11
Broekgaarden F. S., et al., 2022, MNRAS, 516, 5737
Burbidge E. M., Burbidge G. R., Fowler W. A., et al. 1957, Rev. Mod. Phys.,
29, 547
Cameron A. G. W., 1957, AJ, 62, 9
Cameron A. G. W., 2003, ApJ, 587, 327
CescuttiG.,RomanoD.,MatteucciF.,ChiappiniC.,HirschiR.,2015,A&A,
577, A139
Chase E. A., et al., 2022, ApJ, 927, 163
Chassande-Mottin E., Hendry M., Sutton P. J., Márka S., 2011, General
Relativity and Gravitation, 43, 437
Chen H.-Y., Vitale S., Foucart F., 2021, ApJ, 920, L3
Chen H.-Y., Landry P., Read J. S., et al. 2025, ApJ, 985, 154
Colombo A., et al., 2025, A&A, 704, A260
ColucciJ.E.,BernsteinR.A.,CameronS.,McWilliamA.,CohenJ.G.,2009,
ApJ, 704, 385
Colucci J. E., Bernstein R. A., Cameron S. A., McWilliam A., 2012, ApJ,
746, 29
Côté B., Fryer C. L., Belczynski K., et al. 2018, ApJ, 855, 99
Côté B., Eichler M., Arcones A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 875, 106
Coulter D. A., et al., 2017, Science, 358, 1556
CowanJ.J.,SnedenC.,LawlerJ.E.,etal.2021,Rev.Mod.Phys.,93,015002
Cowperthwaite P. S., Villar V. A., Scolnic D. M., Berger E., 2019, ApJ, 874,
88
Cramér H., 1946, Princeton, NJ:Princeton Univ. Press
Crowther P. A., Prinja R. K., Pettini M., Steidel C. C., 2006, MNRAS, 368,
895
Cullen F., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 487, 2038
Curti M., et al., 2025, A&A, 697, A89
DingX.,BiesiadaM.,ZhengX.,LiaoK.,LiZ.,ZhuZ.-H.,2019,J.Cosmol-
ogy Astropart. Phys., 2019, 033
Dominik M., Belczynski K., Fryer C., Holz D. E., Berti E., Bulik T., Mandel
I., O’Shaughnessy R., 2012, ApJ, 759, 52
Duggan G. E., Kirby E. N., Andrievsky S. M., et al. 2018, ApJ, 869, 50
Dvorkin I., Daigne F., Goriely S., Vangioni E., Silk J., 2021, MNRAS, 506,
4374
Eichler D., Livio M., Piran T., et al. 1989, Nature, 340, 126
Evans M., et al., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2109.09882
Farr W. M., Fishbach M., Ye J., Holz D. E., 2019, ApJ, 883, L42
Fishbach M., Holz D. E., Farr W. M., 2018, ApJ, 863, L41
Freiburghaus C., Rosswog S., Thielemann F.-K., 1999, ApJ, 525, L121
Fruchter A. S., Levan A. J., Strolger L., et al. 2006, Nature, 441, 463
Gardner J. P., et al., 2006, Space Sci. Rev., 123, 485
Grazian A., et al., 2015, A&A, 575, A96
Halevi G., Mösta P., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 2366
Hao J.-M., Yuan Y.-F., 2013, A&A, 558, A22
HeckmanT.M.,RobertC.,LeithererC.,GarnettD.R.,vanderRydtF.,1998,
ApJ, 503, 646
Hernán-Caballero A., et al., 2021, A&A, 654, A101
Holmbeck E. M., Andrews J. J., 2024, ApJ, 963, 110
Hotokezaka K., Piran T., Paul M., 2015, Nature Physics, 11, 1042
HotokezakaK.,BeniaminiP.,PiranT.,2018,Int.J.Mod.Phys.D,27,1842005
Hu P.-J., et al., 2024, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2401.11399
Iacovelli F., Mancarella M., Foffa S., Maggiore M., 2022, ApJ, 941, 208
Ilbert O., et al., 2006, A&A, 457, 841
Ishimaru Y., Wanajo S., Prantzos N., 2015, ApJ, 804, L35
Isobe Y., et al., 2023, ApJ, 959, 100
Izotov Y. I., Thuan T. X., 1999, ApJ, 511, 639
IzotovY.I.,StasińskaG.,MeynetG.,GusevaN.G.,ThuanT.X.,2006,A&A,
448, 955
IzotovY.I.,ThuanT.X.,GusevaN.G.,LissS.E.,2018,MNRAS,473,1956
Ji A. P., Frebel A., Chiti A., et al. 2016, Nature, 531, 610
Ji X., et al., 2024, MNRAS, 535, 881
Kewley L. J., Nicholls D. C., Sutherland R. S., 2019, ARA&A, 57, 511
Kirby E. N., Ji A. P., Kovalev M., 2023, ApJ, 958, 45
Kobayashi C., Mandel I., Belczynski K., et al. 2023, ApJ, 943, L12
Kojima T., et al., 2020, ApJ, 898, 142
Krüger C. J., Foucart F., 2020, Phys. Rev. D, 101, 103002
Lattimer J. M., Schramm D. N., 1974, ApJ, 192, L145
LeBlanc J. M., Wilson J. R., 1970, ApJ, 161, 541
Loffredo E., et al., 2025, A&A, 697, A36
MacFadyen A. I., Woosley S. E., 1999, ApJ, 524, 262
Macias P., Ramirez-Ruiz E., 2018, ApJ, 860, 89
Macias P., Ramirez-Ruiz E., 2019, ApJ, 877, L24
Madau P., Dickinson M., 2014, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 52, 415
Madau P., Fragos T., 2017, ApJ, 840, 39
Maggiore M., et al., 2020, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2020, 050
Maiolino R., Mannucci F., 2019, A&ARv, 27, 3
Maoz D., Nakar E., 2025, ApJ, 982, 179
Margutti R., Chornock R., 2021, ARA&A, 59, 155
Marques-Chaves R., et al., 2024, A&A, 681, A30
Mastrogiovanni S., et al., 2021, Phys. Rev. D, 104, 062009
McCarthy K. S., Zheng Z., Ramirez-Ruiz E., 2020, MNRAS, 499, 5220
Metzger B. D., 2020, Living Reviews in Relativity, 23, 1
Metzger B. D., Thompson T. A., Quataert E., 2007, ApJ, 659, 561
Mills C., Tiwari V., Fairhurst S., 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 97, 104064
Moster B. P., Naab T., White S. D. M., 2013, MNRAS, 428, 3121
Mukherjee S., Moradinezhad Dizgah A., 2022, Astrophys. J. Lett., 937, L27
Naidu R. P., Ji A. P., Conroy C., et al. 2022, ApJ, 926, L36
Nishimura S., Kotake K., Hashimoto M.-a., Yamada S., Nishimura N., Fuji-
moto S., Sato K., 2006, ApJ, 642, 410
Nitz A., et al., 2022, gwastro/pycbc: v2.0.5 release of PyCBC,
doi:10.5281/zenodo.6912865,https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
6912865
Nugent A. E., et al., 2022, ApJ, 940, 57
Obuljen A., Alonso D., Villaescusa-Navarro F., Yoon I., Jones M., 2019,
MNRAS, 486, 5124
Özel F., Freire P., 2016, ARA&A, 54, 401
Paterson K., et al., 2020, ApJ, 898, L32
Peimbert M., Peimbert A., Delgado-Inglada G., 2017, PASP, 129, 082001
Peters P. C., 1964, Physical Review, 136, 1224
Pian E., 2021,Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sciences, 7, 108
Planck Collaboration et al., 2020, A&A, 641, A6
Press W. H., Schechter P., 1974, ApJ, 187, 425
Pruet J., Woosley S. E., Hoffman R. D., 2003, ApJ, 586, 1254
Punturo M., et al., 2010, Class. Quantum Grav., 27, 194002
Radhakrishna Rao C., 1945, Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathematical Society,
37, 81
Rastinejad J. C., Fong W., Levan A. J., et al. 2024, ApJ, 968, 14
Rastinejad J. C., Fong W., Kilpatrick C. D., et al. 2025, ApJ, 979, 190
Reitze D., et al., 2019, in Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society.
p. 35 (arXiv:1907.04833), doi:10.48550/arXiv.1907.04833
RixS.A.,PettiniM.,LeithererC.,BresolinF.,KudritzkiR.-P.,SteidelC.C.,
2004, ApJ, 615, 98
Ronchini S., et al., 2022, A&A, 665, A97
Rose J. C., Torrey P., Lee K. H., Bartos I., 2021, ApJ, 909, 207
Safarzadeh M., Berger E., Ng K. K. Y., Chen H.-Y., Vitale S., Whittle C.,
Scannapieco E., 2019a, ApJ, 878, L13
Safarzadeh M., Berger E., Leja J., Speagle J. S., 2019b, ApJ, 878, L14
Saintonge A., et al., 2011, MNRAS, 415, 32
Sakari C. M., Shetrone M., Venn K., McWilliam A., Dotter A., 2013, MN-
RAS, 434, 358
Saleem M., Chen H.-Y., Siegel D. M., et al. 2025, Phys. Rev. Lett., under
review, http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.06020
Sana H., et al., 2012, Science, 337, 444
Sathyaprakash B., et al., 2019, BAAS, 51, 248
SchaererD.,Marques-ChavesR.,XiaoM.,KorberD.,2024,A&A,687,L11
Shen S., Cooke R. J., Ramirez-Ruiz E., et al. 2015, Astrophys. J., 807, 115
Siegel D. M., 2019, Eur. Phys. J. A, 55, 203
Siegel D. M., 2022,Nature Reviews Physics, 4, 306
Siegel D. M., Barnes J., Metzger B. D., 2019, Nature, 569, 241
Siegel D. M., Agarwal A., Barnes J., et al. 2022, ApJ, 941, 100
Simon J. D., Brown T. M., Mutlu-Pakdil B., et al. 2023, ApJ, 944, 43
Skúladóttir Á., Hansen C. J., Salvadori S., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A171
Sommariva V., Mannucci F., Cresci G., Maiolino R., Marconi A., Nagao T.,
Baroni A., Grazian A., 2012, A&A, 539, A136
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

12A. Agarwal et al.
SpeagleJ.S.,SteinhardtC.L.,CapakP.L.,SilvermanJ.D.,2014,ApJS,214,
15
Spergel D., et al., 2013, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1305.5422
Suda T., et al., 2008, Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan, 60,
1159
Surman R., McLaughlin G. C., Hix W. R., 2006, ApJ, 643, 1057
Symbalisty E., Schramm D. N., 1982, Astrophys. Lett., 22, 143
Symbalisty E. M. D., Schramm D. N., Wilson J. R., 1985, ApJ, 291, L11
Tarumi Y., Hotokezaka K., Beniamini P., 2021, ApJ, 913, L30
Tegmark M., Taylor A., Heavens A., 1997, Astrophys. J., 480, 22
The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2508.18083
Tsujimoto T., Shigeyama T., 2014, A&A, 565, L5
Tsujimoto T., Matsuno T., Aoki W., et al. 2017, ApJ, 850, L12
Velichko A., De Cia A., Konstantopoulou C., Ledoux C., Krogager J.-K.,
Ramburuth-Hurt T., 2024, A&A, 685, A103
Virtanen P., et al., 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261
Vogeley M. S., Szalay A. S., 1996, ApJ, 465, 34
WallnerA.,FaestermannT.,FeigeJ.,etal.2015,NatureCommunications,6,
5956
Wanajo S., Hirai Y., Prantzos N., 2021, MNRAS, 505, 5862
Wanderman D., Piran T., 2015, MNRAS, 448, 3026
Weaver J. R., et al., 2023, A&A, 677, A184
Wehmeyer B., Pignatari M., Thielemann F.-K., 2015, MNRAS, 452, 1970
Winteler C., Käppeli R., Perego A., et al. 2012, ApJ, 750, L22
Yamazaki Y., He Z., Kajino T., et al. 2022, ApJ, 933, 112
Zenati Y., Beniamini P., Hotokezaka K., 2026, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2604.11885
Zevin M., Kremer K., Siegel D. M., et al. 2019, ApJ, 886, 4
Zevin M., Nugent A. E., Adhikari S., Fong W.-f., Holz D. E., Kelley L. Z.,
2022, ApJ, 940, L18
van de Voort F., Pakmor R., Grand R. J. J., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 4867
APPENDIX A: COSMIC CHEMICAL EVOLUTION MODEL
We model the cosmic r-process abundance proxy by generalizing
the one-zone galactic chemical evolution model described in Siegel
etal.(2019)tothecosmiccontextofgalaxydistributions.Europium
masses and number densities are first modelled as a function of
cosmicage𝑡inagalaxyofarbitrarystellarmass,includingBNSand
rCCSNe as sources. By taking the galaxy density𝑁(˜M, 𝑡)(number
of galaxies per logarithmic galaxy stellar mass˜M=log 10 (𝑀/𝑀 ⊙)
per comoving volume𝑉 𝑐) and integrating over galaxy mass and
comovingvolume,weobtainacosmicr-processabundanceproxyas
afunctionoftime(orredshift).IngeneralizationofPress&Schechter
(1974), the galaxy stellar mass function provides the galaxy density
𝑁( ˜M, 𝑡)= d2𝑛
d ˜Md𝑉𝑐
=
(
𝜁1 for𝑧(𝑡) ≤3.5
𝜁2 for𝑧(𝑡)>3.5 ,(A1)
where
𝜁1 =ln(10)exp
h
−10 ( ˜M − M∗ (𝑡) )
i
(A2)
×
n
𝑁 ∗
1
h
10( ˜M − M∗ (𝑡) )
i 𝛼1 (𝑡)+1
+𝑁 ∗
2
h
10( ˜M − M∗ (𝑡) )
i 𝛼2 (𝑡)+1 o
,
and
𝜁2 =ln(10)exp
h
−10 ( ˜M − M∗ (𝑡) )
i
×𝑁 ∗ (𝑡)
h
10( ˜M − M∗ (𝑡) )
i 𝛼(𝑡)+1
,
(A3)
as adapted from Eq. (7)–(8) of Weaver et al. (2023). Here,𝑛is the
number of galaxies, and the logarithmic cutoff massM∗ (𝑡)below
whichastrophysicalstructuresareexpectedtoformhasthesameunits
0 2 4 6 8 10
z
105
106
107
108
SFR [M Mpc 3Gyr 1]
Galaxy SFR model
Cosmic SFR
UV + IR Data
UV with dust corrections
Figure A1.The cosmic SFR ( Madau & Fragos 2017; green line) and the
galaxy SFR model (Speagle et al. 2014) with galaxy density function of
Eq.(A1)(blueline),integratedovergalaxystellarmassaccordingtotheleft-
hand side of Eq. (A4). The grey circles with error bars represent ultra-violet
andinfra-reddatafromTable1ofMadau&Dickinson(2014)andtheorange
circles with error bars represent dust-corrected ultra-violet data from Table
4 of Bouwens et al. (2014). This comparison illustrates the approximation
in Eq. (A4), which is deficient at redshifts𝑧 >6.5(irrelevant to the present
correlationmethod)duetolimitedobservationsandweaklyconstrainedPress-
Schechter function parameters.
asM. The normalizations𝑁 ∗ (𝑡),𝑁 ∗
1 (𝑡), and𝑁 ∗
2 (𝑡)index −1Mpc−3
and the exponents𝛼(𝑡),𝛼 1 (𝑡), and𝛼 2 (𝑡)are taken from the COS-
MOS2020 survey results for redshifts bins𝑧𝑛 <5.5(Table C.2 of
Weaver et al. 2023) and from Table C.1 of Grazian et al. (2015) for
redshift bins𝑧𝑛 >5.5.
To model the SFR of individual galaxies of stellar mass˜M, we
use the star-forming galaxy main sequence SFR model¯𝜓𝑆𝐹, ˜M (𝑡)
(in𝑀 ⊙ yr−1) as proposed by Speagle et al. (2014) (the “preferred
fit” in their Table 9). The SFR accounts for accretion and outflow of
stellar matter and assumes a galaxy stellar seed mass of107 𝑀⊙. As
illustrated in Fig. A1, we verify that the galaxy SFR model, together
with the galaxy density function, is consistent with the cosmic SFR
¯𝜌𝑆𝐹 (𝑡)(e.g., as reported by Madau & Fragos (2017)), that is,
∫ ˜Mmax
˜Mmin
¯𝜓𝑆𝐹, ˜M (𝑡)𝑁( ˜M, 𝑡)d ˜M ≃¯𝜌𝑆𝐹 (𝑡),(A4)
where ˜Mmin =8.5and ˜Mmax =12define the minimum and max-
imum galaxy stellar masses considered here. The integration limits
are chosen such that the cosmic SFR at𝑧 <6is captured accurately
by the galaxy SFR model without large deviations at𝑧 >6. In this
model, galaxies with stellar mass108 −10 12 𝑀⊙ dominate star for-
mation in the Universe at𝑧 <6(see also Fig. A1). We verify that
our results are converged for𝑧 <6using a step size for numerical
integration of≤10 0.5 𝑀⊙.
In each galaxy of stellar mass ˜𝑀, the BNS and rCCSNe rates
(number of events per time) are calculated by the convolution of
the galaxy SFR with the respective DTD as defined in Eq. (3.2),
𝐷(𝑡;𝑡 min, 𝑏)BNS = Θ(𝑡−𝑡 min)𝑡 𝑏 and𝐷(𝑡) rCCSNe =𝛿(𝑡):
𝑅s, ˜M (𝑡)=𝑁 norm,s
∫ 𝑡
𝑡0
𝐷(𝑡−𝑡 ′;𝑡 min, 𝑏)s ¯𝜓SF, ˜M (𝑡 ′)d𝑡 ′.(A5)
Here,s∈ {BNS,rCCSNe},𝑡 0 =𝑡(𝑧=10), and the DTD parameters
𝑡min, 𝑏of BNS mergers are free parameters. We assume the same
effectiveproductionefficiencyofBNSandrCCSNeeventsperstellar
mass formed across galaxies of all masses and at all times. The
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

Inferring the role of binary neutron stars in r-process nucleosynthesis13
galaxy-specific event rates are then normalized by the constraint
that the galaxy-integrated event rates must match the local observed
volumetric rates𝑅s,z0 at𝑧=0(number of events per time per local
comoving volume),
𝑅s,z0 =
∫ 𝑡(𝑧=0)
𝑡0
d𝑡′
∫ ˜Mmax
˜Mmin
d ˜M𝑁( ˜M, 𝑡 ′)𝑅 s, ˜M (𝑡).(A6)
For the observed current rates of rCCSNe, we take𝑅rCCSNe,z0 ≈
4−20Gpc −3yr−1 at𝑧=0,motivatedbycollapsarsastheprogenitors
oflongGRBs(Siegeletal.2019).ThecurrentobservedBNSmerger
rateat𝑧=0is𝑅 BNS,z0 ≈10−250Gpc −3yr−1 (TheLIGOScientific
Collaboration et al. 2025).
The rate of Eu production𝐶 s, ˜M (𝑡)(i.e., the mass synthesized
per time) by BNS and rCCSNe in the ISM of a given galaxy is
equal to their respective galaxy-specific rates multiplied by their
corresponding average yield per event,𝐶s, ˜M (𝑡)=𝑚 Eu,s 𝑅s, ˜M (𝑡). In
addition to the DTD parameters, the production of Eu is controlled
by the effective parameter
𝑀s =𝑚 Eu,s 𝑁norm,s ,(A7)
whichrepresentsthemassofEuproducedperstellarmassformedfor
agivensource(BNS,rCCSNe).Mass-lossthroughgalacticoutflows
and star formation scales with the SFR and is taken into account via
a simple loss term such that the mass of Eu due to a source s in a
given galaxy with logarithmic stellar mass˜Mevolves according to
d𝑀Eu, ˜M,s (𝑡)
d𝑡 =𝐶 s, ˜M (𝑡) −𝑀 Eu, ˜M,s (𝑡)𝑓 ˜M (𝑡).(A8)
The mass-loss factor is given by𝑓 ˜M (𝑡)=(1+0.25) ×
[ ¯𝜓SF, ˜M (𝑡)/𝑀 ISM, ˜M (𝑡)](see Siegel et al. 2019), where𝑀ISM, ˜M de-
notes the ISM mass of a galaxy of stellar mass˜M, calculated as
detailed below.
Next, we model the hydrogen content of individual galaxies. The
mass𝑀 HI, ˜M,z0 of neutral hydrogen HI of a galaxy of logarithmic
stellar mass ˜Mand halo mass ˜MH at𝑧=0is taken from Obuljen
et al. (2019) as
𝑀HI, ˜M,z0 =𝑀 0
 ˜MH ( ˜M)
Mmin,HI
 𝛼HI
exp

− Mmin,HI
˜MH ( ˜M)

,(A9)
wherelog 10 (𝑀0/𝑀 ⊙) =9.44 +0.31
−0.39 ℎ−1,log 10
 Mmin,HI/𝑀 ⊙
 =
11.18+0.28
−0.35 ℎ−1, and𝛼 HI =0.48±0.08(Obuljen et al. 2019). The
factorℎ=0.7allows for corrections due to the uncertainty in the
Hubble constant. The dark matter halo masses˜MH are related to
the galaxy stellar masses ˜Mvia the redshift-dependent stellar halo
mass (SHM) relationS (𝑧)as given in Moster et al. (2013), i.e.,
˜MH (𝑧)=S (𝑧) ˜M. Henceforth, we substitute the halo masses with
thecorrespondingstellarmass.TheKennicutt-Schmidtrelationthen
provides the evolution of the neutral hydrogen mass as a function of
redshift as12
𝑀HI, ˜M (𝑡)=𝑀 HI, ˜M,z0
" ¯𝜓SF, ˜M (𝑡)
¯𝜓SF, ˜M (𝑧=0)
# 1
1.4
.(A10)
Molecular hydrogen H2 being less abundant and more difficult to
observe than HI is relatively poorly constrained. We approximate
its ISM mass𝑀H2, ˜M by30%of the atomic hydrogen, following the
averagemolecular-to-atomichydrogenratiofoundbySaintongeetal.
(2011).
12 the Kennicutt-Schmidt relation generally refers to the mass of the ISM.
However, hydrogen is the dominant part (≈75%) of the ISM gas.
Taking75%oftheISMmasstobehydrogen,wethereforecalculate
the ISM mass of a galaxy of stellar mass˜Mas
𝑀ISM, ˜M (𝑡)= 4
3
h
𝑀HI, ˜M (𝑡) +𝑀 H2, ˜M (𝑡)
i
=1.73×𝑀 HI, ˜M (𝑡).
(A11)
The galaxy-specific number of europium and hydrogen atoms in the
ISM are given by
𝑁Eu, ˜M,s (𝑡)=
𝑀Eu, ˜M,s
𝑚Eu
, 𝑁 H, ˜M (𝑡)=
𝑀HI, ˜M (𝑡)
𝑚HI
+
2𝑀 H2, ˜M (𝑡)
𝑚H2
,
(A12)
where𝑚 E𝑢 =151.96amu,𝑚 HI =1.00amuand𝑚 H2 =2.01amuare
the corresponding mean atomic weights. The average cosmic ratio
ofthenumberofeuropiumtothenumberofhydrogenatomsattime
𝑡from BNS and rCCSNe is calculated as the average of the galaxy-
specificratioweightedbythegalaxydensityfunctionoverallgalaxy
masses and total comoving volume𝑉𝑐,
𝑁Eu,s
𝑁H
(𝑡)= 1
∫ 𝑉(𝑡)
𝑉(𝑡=𝑡 0 ) d𝑉𝑐 (𝑡 ′)
∫ ˜Mmax
˜Mmin
d ˜M d2𝑛
d ˜Md𝑉𝑐
×
∫ 𝑉(𝑡)
𝑉(𝑡=𝑡 0 )
d𝑉𝑐 (𝑡 ′)
∫ ˜Mmax
˜Mmin
d ˜M d2𝑛
d ˜Md𝑉𝑐
𝑁Eu, ˜M,s (𝑡)
𝑁H (𝑡) ,
(A13)
= 1
∫ 𝑡
𝑡0
d𝑡′ d𝑧
d𝑡 ′
d𝑉𝑐 (𝑡 ′ )
d𝑧
∫ ˜Mmax
˜Mmin
d ˜M d2𝑛
d ˜Md𝑉𝑐
×
∫ 𝑡
𝑡0
d𝑡′ d𝑧
d𝑡′
d𝑉𝑐
d𝑧
∫ ˜Mmax
˜Mmin
d ˜M𝑁( ˜M, 𝑡 ′)
𝑁Eu, ˜M,s (𝑡)
𝑁H (𝑡) .
(A14)
We then define our r-process abundance proxy as the correspond-
ing abundance bracket[Eu/H], shifted by a constant offset+5
to avoid pathological behaviour of the correlation function when
[Eu/H]approaches the solar value[Eu/H]=0:
AbEumodel (𝑡)=log 10
 𝑁Eu,BNS
𝑁H
(𝑡) + 𝑁Eu,rCCSNe
𝑁H
(𝑡)

× 𝑁H,⊙
𝑁Eu,⊙

+5.
(A15)
We define the ‘fractional contribution’ of BNS as
𝐹BNS (𝑧(𝑡))= AbEuBNS (𝑡)
AbEuBNS (𝑡) +Ab EurCCSNe(𝑡) ,(A16)
whereAb Eus (𝑡)=log 10
h 𝑁Eu,s
𝑁H
(𝑡) × 𝑁H,⊙
𝑁Eu,⊙
i
+5.
The fractional contribution of BNS mergers to the r-process as a
function of redshift (specifically at𝑧=0, i.e.,𝐹 BNS,z0 ≡𝐹 BNS (𝑧=
0)) can be constrained jointly with the DTD parameters𝑡min, 𝑏with
future observations of GWs and r-process abundances using this
chemical evolution model. The rate-yield values𝑀s (Eq. (A7)) cur-
rently have large uncertainties; here, we treat these as free input
parameterswithinboundsimposedbyobservationaluncertaintiesin
the rates (see above) and expectations of the range of mean ejecta
yields of these events. We bracket the per-event Eu yield of BNS
mergers by𝑚Eu,BNS =10 −5 −3×10 −4 𝑀⊙, motivated by kilonova
observations and numerical simulations of BNS mergers assum-
ing a solar abundance pattern (e.g., Rastinejad et al. 2025; Krüger
& Foucart 2020). For rCCSNe, we bracket the per-event yield by
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

14A. Agarwal et al.
𝑚Eu,rCCSNe =10 −5 −10 −3 𝑀⊙, based on numerical simulations of
magnetorotational supernovae and collapsar accretion disks (Halevi
& Mösta 2018; Siegel et al. 2019). For our Fisher analysis in Sec. 4,
different possible astrophysical scenarios are considered by making
a fixed choice of model parameters𝜃=(𝑡min, 𝑏, 𝐹BNS,z0). For fixed
𝜃, we adjust the two parameters𝑀s via root-finding such that si-
multaneously the desired value of𝐹BNS,z0 is achieved and that the
observed𝑧≈0EuabundanceinMilkyWay-typegalaxies( ˜M=10)
of[Eu/H]=0.2±0.06(Abohalima&Frebel2018;Sudaetal.2008)
is recovered.
APPENDIX B: THE FISHER MATRIX
For a generic Gaussian log-likelihood,
Lgen =ln detC + (D −𝜇(𝛽))C −1 (D −𝜇(𝛽)) 𝑇 +ln(2𝜋),(B1)
whereCis the data covariance matrix,Dis the data matrix, and
𝜇is the expected data mean. The Fisher matrix is defined as the
expectation of the curvature of the log-likelihood across multiple
datasetswithdifferentnoiserealizations.TheFishermatrixelements
Fgen
𝑝𝑞 are
Fgen
𝑝𝑞 =
 𝜕2Lgen
𝜕 𝛽𝑝 𝜕 𝛽𝑞

𝛽ML
= 1
2 Tr

C −1 𝜕C
𝜕 𝛽p
C −1 𝜕C
𝜕 𝛽q
+ C −1 𝜕 𝜇(𝛽)
𝜕 𝛽p
𝜕 𝜇T (𝛽)
𝜕 𝛽q
+ C −1 𝜕 𝜇(𝛽)
𝜕 𝛽𝑞
𝜕 𝜇T (𝛽)
𝜕 𝛽𝑝

,(B2)
where𝛽 ML isthemaximumlikelihoodparametersetand𝛽 𝑝, 𝛽𝑞 ∈
𝛽ML (see Vogeley & Szalay 1996, their Appendix A, and Tegmark
et al. 1997, their Eq. (15)).
In this work, the covariance matricesC=C 𝑘 and covariance
functions𝐶 𝑘 (refer to Sec. 2) are weakly dependent on the model
parameters𝛽=𝜃as compared to the expected data means𝜇=L 𝑘
(refer to Sec. 4 for the definition ofL𝑘). For example, for count-
ing statistical noise such as𝜎 ˆ𝑁GW =
√︁ˆ𝑁GW ∝
√︁
𝑁GW,model (𝜃)
(see Sec. 2), the dependence of counting uncertainty on𝜃, i.e.,
𝜕𝜎 ˆ𝑁GW
𝜕 𝜃𝑝 ∝ 1
2
√
𝑁GW,model (𝜃)
𝜕𝑁GW,model
𝜕 𝜃𝑝 , where𝜃 𝑝 ∈𝜃, is much smaller
than the expected mean’s dependence on𝜃, i.e.,𝜕𝑁GW,model/𝜕𝜃 𝑝,
when the number of GW observations is large. Similarly, redshift
andabundancemeasurementuncertaintiesareassumedtobedepen-
dent mainly on the detectors and hence weakly dependent on the
model parameters. Therefore, the covariance matrices that quantify
measurement uncertainty are assumed to be independent of model
parameters and are derived from mock data. Consequently, the first
terminEq.(B2)vanishes.Furthermore,theremainingtwotermsare
identical, owing to the diagonal form of the covariance matrix (see
Sec. 2), and hence add up to give the form of the Fisher matrix of
Eq. (4.1).
APPENDIX C: CORRELATION TRAJECTORIES FOR
ABUNDANCE PROXIES WITHOUT THE OFFSET
The correlation trajectories presented in Fig. 1 visually appear to
have less sensitivity to𝐹BNS,z0 compared to the DTD parameters
𝑡min and𝑏. However, the uncertainty estimates of the Fisher fore-
casts in Table 1 show higher significance or signal-to-noise ratio for
𝐹BNS,z0 compared to the DTD parameters. Below we argue that the
0.0 0.6 1.2 1.8
Redshift (z)
103
104
105
Kmodel
tmin = 0.2 Gyr, b = -1.0, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
tmin = 0.5 Gyr, b = -1.0, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
tmin = 0.2 Gyr, b = -1.5, FBNS, z0 = 0.5
tmin = 0.2 Gyr, b = -1.0, FBNS, z0 = 0.9
Figure C1.AnalogoustothebottompanelofFig.1,themodeledcorrelation
functions𝐾 modelasafunctionofredshiftfordifferentDTDparameters𝑡 min,𝑏
andfractionalcontributions𝐹 BNS,z0 ofBNStocosmicr-processenrichment,
except without the offset+5to the abundance proxyAbEu as described in
Sec. 3. Visually, the correlation function is sensitive to𝐹BNS,z0, but𝐾 model
divergesas[Eu/H]approachesthesolarvalue.Thisprecludesapplicationof
a Fisher analysis in this redshift range.
apparent smaller sensitivity in Fig. 1 is due to the constant offset+5
introduced in the abundance proxyAbEu as described in Sec. 3, and
show that the Fisher estimates are unaffected by this constant offset.
For comparison, Fig. C1 shows correlation functions analogous to
Fig. 1, but when removing the constant offset to the abundances.
The correlation function do show strong variations depending on
the assumed value of𝐹BNS,z0. In particular, the redshift at which
thecorrelationfunction‘peaks’(formallydiverges)stronglydepends
on𝐹 BNS,z0. However, Fisher analyses cannot be applied in regions
of mathematical divergences, which motivates applying a constant
offset to the abundances to shift a divergence out of the range of
interest.
TheFisherinformationmatrixelementcorrespondingtoaparam-
eter𝜉for an observableOwith an absolute uncertainty𝜎 O is given
by
F 𝜉 𝜉 ∼ 1
𝜎2
O
 𝜕O
𝜕𝜉
2
=
 1
𝜉
2  O
𝜎O
2  𝜕lnO
𝜕ln𝜉
2
.(C1)
Thus the relative uncertainty estimate from the Cramer-Rao bound
on𝜉scales as
𝜎𝜉
𝜉 ∼
 O
𝜎O
 −1  𝜕lnO
𝜕ln𝜉
 −1
.(C2)
For the likelihood term𝐿1 in Eq. (2.4),O≡ ˆ𝐾,𝜉≡𝐹 BNS,z0, and
since ˆ𝐾∝ [ ˆAbEu (𝑧, 𝐹BNS,z0)] −1, the fractional sensitivity
 𝜕lnO
𝜕ln𝜉
 −1
≡
 𝜕ln ˆK
𝜕ln𝐹 BNS,z0
 −1
=
 
𝜕ln ˆK
𝜕ln ˆAbEu
𝜕ln ˆAbEu
𝜕ln𝐹 BNS,z0
! −1
(C3)
decreases by a factor ˆAb
Eu
/( ˆAb
Eu
+𝑐), for a constant linear offset
𝑐(corresponding to a factor of≳6for ˆAb
Eu
∼0.1−1and𝑐=5).
However, the linear offset also results in an increase by a factor of
( ˆAb
Eu
+𝑐)/ ˆAb
Eu
in the significance of the correlation measurement
( ˆ𝐾/𝜎 ˆ𝐾− ˆAbEu ≡O/𝜎 O; see Eq. (2.13)). The relative uncertainty of
the estimate𝜉=𝐹 BNS,z0 remains unaffected (Eq. (C2)). Similarly,
forthelikelihoodterm𝐿 2inEq.(2.4),thefractionalsensitivityofthe
abundances ˆAb
Eu
to𝐹 BNS,z0 decreases and the significance ofˆAb
Eu
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

Inferring the role of binary neutron stars in r-process nucleosynthesis15
increases by the inverse factor due to the constant offset𝑐, keeping
the relative Fisher uncertainty estimate invariant.
APPENDIX D: MOCK GRA VITATIONAL-W A VE DATA
GENERATION FOR CALCULATION OF LUMINOSITY
DISTANCE UNCERTAINTIES
To estimate the luminosity distance uncertainty in the dark-siren
case (absence of EM counterparts providing a direct redshift mea-
surement), we create a mock GW catalogue of projected future
observations by the 3G detectors CE (Reitze et al. 2019) and ET
(Maggiore et al. 2020). The detector sensitivity is defined by the
noise curves of ET and CE available in the LIGO database13. The
number of GW sources𝑁GW(𝑧 𝑛)per year of observation in a red-
shift bin𝑧 𝑛 for the detectors is calculated using Eq. (3.5). The
total number of GW sources across cosmic history is given by
𝑇GW =
∫ 10
𝑧=0 d𝑧𝑁 GW(𝑧) ≈ Í
𝑧𝑛 𝑁GW(𝑧 𝑛).
Theneutronstar(NS)massdistributioninBNSisassumedtobea
Gaussianwithmean𝜇=1.4𝑀 ⊙ andstandarddeviation𝜎=0.2𝑀 ⊙,
truncated at1𝑀 ⊙ and2.4𝑀 ⊙ (Özel & Freire 2016). Taking one
year of observation time, two setsM1 andM 2 of NS masses with
𝑇GWelementseacharesampledfromtheNSmassdistribution.Upon
pairingthesetelementsS 1 ∈M 1,S 2 ∈M 2,weobtain𝑇 GWBNSsys-
tems with chirp-mass distributionMc ={(S 1S2)3/5/(S1 + S2)1/5}
and mass-ratio distributionQ={S 2/S1}. The redshift distribution
of these sources is given byD=𝑁 GW(𝑧)/𝑇GW. We sample𝑇GW
redshifts from this distribution, which are converted to luminosity
distances assuming the standard Planck Collaboration et al. (2020)
cosmology.
Usingthechirpmassandluminositydistancesamples,thesignal-
to-noise (SNR) ratio𝜌of these events for a combination of two CEs
andoneETcanbecalculatedusingEq.(B1)ofMastrogiovannietal.
(2021),
𝜌=𝜌 ∗ Θ
 𝑀c
𝑀 ∗c
5/6  𝑑∗
L
𝑑L

.(D1)
Here,𝑀 c is the chirp mass and𝑑L is the luminosity distance of the
event,𝑀 ∗
c =1𝑀 ⊙,𝑑 ∗
L =1000Mpc,andΘ∈U(0,1),whereUisthe
uniform distribution. We derive𝜌∗ ≈81.08for CE and𝜌 ∗ ≈61.5
for the ET using frequency domain waveforms generated byPyCBC
(Nitzetal.2022)for1000ofthe𝑇 GWBNSsamples.Wecalculatethe
signal-to-noiseratioofthesewaveformsusingexpecteddetectorsen-
sitivities14 andfitEq.(D1)tocalculatethevaluesof𝜌 ∗.Sincewave-
formgenerationandsubsequentSNRcalculationaretime-consuming
processes, we calculate the SNR for all other samples inMc sepa-
rately for CE (𝜌CE) and ET (𝜌ET) using Eq. (D1). We then add these
in quadrature to obtain the total SNR𝜌total =
√︃
2𝜌2
CE +𝜌 2
ET. Events
with𝜌 total >12are considered detected sources. The detected num-
ber of sourcesˆ𝑁GW,detected is used to calculate the selection function
𝜙(𝑧)of a detector configuration as𝜙(𝑧)= ˆ𝑁GW,detected (𝑧)/𝑁 GW(𝑧).
The uncertainty in luminosity distance measurements𝜎𝑑L for the
detected GW signals is computed using the quick posterior sam-
pling method outlined in Mastrogiovanni et al. (2021), Farr et al.
(2019), and Fishbach et al. (2018). In this method, SNR-dependent
noise is added to the chirp mass, mass ratio, andΘsamples in each
redshift bin, and posteriors of luminosity distance are drawn by in-
vertingEq.(D1).Thecovarianceofthesampledluminositydistance
13 https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-T1500293/public
14 https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-T1500293/public
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
FBNS, z0
0
10
20
30SNR
SNRtmin
SNRb
SNRFBNS, z0
Figure E1.The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in estimating the DTD param-
eters𝑡 min and𝑏as well as the fractional contribution of BNS to r-process
enrichment𝐹 BNS,z0 for different astrophysical scenarios of the true underly-
ing𝐹 BNS,z0, keeping all other parameters fixed to their fiducial assumptions,
assumingoneyearofobservationtimewithoutEMcounterparts.Theincreas-
ing SNR of𝐹BNS,z0 with increasing𝐹 BNS,z0 is expected as the correlation
between the GW and abundance data strengthens.
posterior provides an estimate of luminosity distance uncertainty in
different redshift bins.
APPENDIX E: SENSITIVITY TO FIDUCIAL
ASSUMPTIONS
The Fisher forecasts presented in this work estimate the precision
with which one may be able to retrieve the BNS DTD parameters
and𝐹 BNS,z0 in the future. As the fiducial results are based on the
assumed astrophysical scenario of𝑡 min =0.2Gyr,𝑏=−1, and
𝐹BNS,z0 =0.5and a detector network of two CEs and one ET,
here we explore the robustness of our main conclusions to varying
astrophysicalassumptionsandthedetectornetwork.TableE1shows
theestimatedparameteruncertaintiesfordifferentparameterchoices
and network configurations.
The absolute uncertainty of measuring𝐹BNS,z0 is largely insen-
sitive to parameter variations (Rows1−7of Table E1) and our
fiducial case (Row2of Table E1) remains representative. The sig-
nificance or SNR of the fiducial case is also generally representative
of parameter changes, but decreases with decreasing𝐹BNS,z0 due
to overall weaker correlations. Conversely, as𝐹BNS,z0 increases, the
correlationbetweentheGWandabundancedatasetsincreases,lead-
ing to increased precision in𝐹BNS,z0 parameter estimation. This is
illustrated with a more detailed analysis in Fig. E1.
The absolute uncertainty of the minimum delay time parameter
𝑡min for the fiducial case constitutes a representative value across
all parameter configurations with𝑡min ≪1Gyr and the 2CE + ET
detector network (first six rows of Table. E1).
As𝑡 min increases to≳1Gyr (Row 7 of Table E1), the sensitivity
of the average delay of BNS mergers (Eq. (4.2)) to variations in𝑡min
increases strongly as discussed in Sec. 4.4. Thus, our correlation
method becomes more sensitive to this parameter, and the relative
uncertaintydecreasesbyafactorofafewrelativetothefiducialcase.
For the DTD power-law index𝑏, the absolute uncertainty and
SNRofthefiducialcasearealsorepresentativeofvaryingastrophys-
ical scenarios for the 2CE+ET detection network, with exceptions
probing two extremes. In one case, solely the absolute uncertainty
increases by a factor of≈2when much steeper DTD with𝑏≲−2
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)

16A. Agarwal et al.
Table E1.AnalogoustoTab.1,the1𝜎-uncertaintyonestimatedparametersfordifferentdetectionscenarios:twoCEdetectorsandoneET(2CE+ET),asingle
ET, and a single CE detector. We assume one year of observation time without EM counterparts and different astrophysical scenarios (varying assumptions of
thetrue(underlying)DTDparameters𝑡 min,𝑏andthefractionalBNScontributiontothecurrentcosmicr-processabundances𝐹 BNS,z0).Numbersinparenthesis
represent the significance or signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the result.
Detector Network𝐹 BNS,z0 𝑡min[Gyr]𝑏
√︃ 𝐹 −1
𝐹BNS,z0 𝐹BNS,z0 (SNR)
√︃ 𝐹 −1
𝑡min𝑡min
[Gyr] (SNR)
√︃ 𝐹 −1
𝑏𝑏 (SNR)
2CE + ET 0.1 0.2 -1 0.03 (0.3×10 1) 0.3 (0.7) 0.2 (0.5×10 1)
2CE + ET 0.5 0.2 -1 0.03 (2×10 1) 0.3 (0.7) 0.2 (0.5×10 1)
2CE + ET 0.9 0.2 -1 0.03 (3×10 1) 0.3 (0.7) 0.2 (0.5×10 1)
2CE + ET 0.5 0.2 -2 0.05 (1×10 1) 0.3 (0.7) 0.5 (0.4×10 1)
2CE + ET 0.5 0.1 -1 0.05 (1×10 1) 0.1 (1) 0.2 (0.5×10 1)
2CE + ET 0.5 0.05 -1 0.04 (1×10 1) 0.08 (0.6) 0.1 (1×10 1)
2CE + ET 0.5 1 -1 0.03 (2×10 1) 0.4 (3) 0.1 (1×10 1)
ET 0.5 0.2 -1 0.05 (1×10 1) 1.3 (0.2) 0.7 (0.1×10 1)
CE 0.5 0.2 -1 0.04 (1×10 1) 0.8 (0.3) 0.4 (0.3×10 1)
are considered. For such steep DTDs, the average BNS delay time
becomes similar to our fiducial choice of𝑡min, increasing the param-
eter uncertainty. Conversely, for a very small minimum delay time
of𝑡 min =0.05Gyr, the absolute uncertainty of𝑏decreases and the
significance (SNR) increases by a factor of≈2, since the average
BNSdelaytimeisthenmorestronglycontrolledby𝑏(seeEq.(4.2)).
WhenconsideringadetectornetworkcomprisedofasingleCEor
a single ET (Rows8−9of Table E1), the uncertainty of estimating
the DTD parameters𝑡min and𝑏increases by a factor of3−4and
thesignificancedecreases accordingly.Thisisbecause asmallerde-
tector network leads to a decreased number of detected GW sources
ˆ𝑁GW and a decrease in the radius of the detection horizon of BNS
mergers.Thisdecreasesthesensitivityofthecorrelation ˆ𝐾(whichis
proportionalto ˆ𝑁GW)inthelikelihood(𝐿 1 inEq.(2.4))tochangesin
DTD parameters. Since the likelihood term𝐿1 is the dominant term
controlling the precision of the estimation of DTD parameters, as
discussedinSec.2.2,thisdecreaseinsensitivityleadstoanincrease
in uncertainty of the estimation of DTD parameters. However, the
r-processabundanceterm𝐿 2 inEq.(2.4)isnotaffectedbysuchade-
creaseinthenumberofGWsources.Hence,theabsoluteuncertainty
ofestimating𝐹 BNS,z0,whichislargelycontrolledby𝐿 2,issimilarto
thefiducialcaseofthe2CE+ETconfiguration(Row2ofTableE1).
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2026)