Title: The EDGES Analysis Pipeline: Description and Validation
Authors: Steven G. Murray, Nivedita Mahesh, Akshatha K. Vydula, Peter Sims, Judd Bowman, Raul A. Monsalve, Alan E. E. Rogers, Rigel C. Capallo, John P. Barrett, Colin J. Lonsdale
Published: 2026-05-15
Categories: astro-ph.IM, astro-ph.CO

Draft version May 19, 2026
Typeset using LATEXtwocolumnstyle in AASTeX7.0.1
The EDGES analysis pipeline: description and validation
Steven G. Murray
 ,1, 2 Nivedita Mahesh
 ,3, 4 Akshatha K. Vydula
 ,4, 5 Peter Sims
 ,4, 6, 7 Judd Bowman
 ,4
Raul A. Monsalve
 ,8, 4, 9 Alan E. E. Rogers
 ,10 Rigel C. Capallo
 ,10 John P . Barrett
 ,10 and Colin J. Lonsdale
 10
1Scuola Normale Superiore, Piazza dei Cavalieri 7, 56126, Pisa, Italy
2Physics Department, Stellenbosch University, 42 Merriman Ave, Stellenbosch, South Africa, 7600
3Cahill Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
4School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
5Physics Department, University of Richmond, 138 UR Drive, Richmond, VA 23173, USA
6Astrophysics Group, Cavendish Laboratory, J. J. Thompson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK
7Kavli Institute for Cosmology, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK
8Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
9Departamento de Ingeniería Eléctrica, Universidad Católica de la Santísima Concepción, Alonso de Ribera 2850, Concepción, Chile
10Massachusetts institute of Technology, Haystack Observatory, Westford, MA 01886, USA
ABSTRACT
The sky-averaged redshifted 21cm signal from Cosmic Dawn is expected to provide a unique view of the
first compact objects. However, its measurement remains daunting. Difficulties are driven by the large dynamic
contrastbetweentheinterveningforegroundsandthesignal-of-interest,whichplacesextremelyhighdemandson
instrumentalcalibrationanddataqualitymeasures. Theongoingdebatewithinthefieldconcerningtheevidence
of a potential first detection by the EDGES experiment highlights the need for a more robust set of analysis
methodsandtoolsthatarereliableandaccessible. Inthispaper,wedetailforthefirsttimetheprecisecalibration
andanalysismethodologyadoptedinpreviousEDGESdatareleases. Thesemethodsarepresentedinthecontext
of a new open-source end-to-end analysis and simulation package for 21cm global signal experiments that both
formalizes these methods and provides general tools for the broader community. Finally, we describe the raw
data used in previous EDGES papers and release these data publicly for extended scrutiny.
Keywords:Astronomydataanalysis(1858);Intergalacticmedium(813);Reionization(1383);Galaxyformation
(595); Cosmology (343)
1.INTRODUCTION
The sky-averaged line-intensity of redshifted 21cm radia-
tionfromneutralhydrogen(Hi)isasought-afterprobeofthe
firstbillionyearsofcosmichistory–theDarkAges(𝑧≳50),
Cosmic Dawn (50≳𝑧≳12) and Epoch of Reionization
(12≳𝑧≳5). The intergalactic medium (IGM) during these
epochs is dominated by neutral hydrogen, whose differen-
tial temperature with respect to the cosmic microwave back-
ground (CMB) encodes a number of key physical processes,
bothofcosmologyandgalaxyformation(seeS.R.Furlanetto
et al. (2006); J. R. Pritchard & A. Loeb (2012); R. Barkana
(2016); A. Mesinger (2019) for excellent reviews). To access
this sky-averaged information, several low-frequency radio
experiments have been designed and implemented over the
past decade, including EDGES (J. D. Bowman et al. 2008),
BIGHORNS(M.Sokolowskietal.2015),LEDA(D.C.Price
etal.2018),SARAS(B.S.Girishetal.2020;T.J.Nambissan
Corresponding author: Steven G. Murray
et al. 2021), REACH (E. de Lera Acedo et al. 2022), MIST
(R. A. Monsalve et al. 2024), EIGSEP (C. H. Bye 2025),
RHINO (P. Bull et al. 2025), and GINAN (L. McKay et al.
2025).
Since these experiments are aimed at measuring the sky-
averaged brightness temperature, they typically consist of
a single antenna (or multiple antennas working separately)
recording spectra over a wide frequency bandwidth (gener-
allya100MHzsub-bandintherange∼50−250 MHz),ona
cadenceofseveral-to-tensofseconds. Followingthestrategy
developedforEDGES,manyoftheseexperimentsimplement
internalmeansofabsolutecalibrationtohighprecision. This
cannot be achieved by externally calibrating to known sky-
basedsources,sincetherecordeddatahavelittle-to-nospatial
resolution to isolate specific sources.
The pursuit of a measurement of the sky-averaged 21cm
signal (hereafter ¯𝑇21) has been recently accelerated due to
the reported observation by the EDGES collaboration (J. D.
Bowman et al. 2018, hereafter B18) of significant residual
structureintheglobalsignalafteraccountingforforegrounds
arXiv:2605.16643v1  [astro-ph.IM]  15 May 2026

2
and many instrumental systematics. This structure can be
described as an absorption feature centred at 78MHz with a
‘flattened Gaussian’ shape. B18discussed a number of hard-
ware configuration tests that disfavor various scenarios in
which this excess structure arises from non-cosmic origins.
For example, beam effects (G. Bernardi et al. 2015) were
disfavoredbycomparingmeasurementsofantennaswithdif-
ferent ground-plane sizes, and different orientations. Con-
versely, polarized sky emission (M. Spinelli et al. 2018) was
disfavored by comparing measurements from the same an-
tenna rotated by 90◦. Further tests also disfavour reflections
of sky power from surrounding objects including the con-
trol hut, receiver calibration errors, multiplicative gains and
losses and RFI. If this excess structure is cosmic in origin,
it would constitute the first direct evidence for the formation
of the first stars at𝑧∼17. However, the structure contains
several features that are difficult to reconcile with theoreti-
calpredictions. Thedepthofthisfeaturewouldrequireeither
excesscoolingoftheIGM—beyondwhatispossibleviaadia-
baticcoolinginstandardcosmologicalscenarios(R.Barkana
et al. 2018; J. B. Muñoz et al. 2018)— or an enhanced radio
background (A. Ewall-Wice et al. 2018; J. Cang et al. 2025).
Potentially even more difficult to reconcile with predictions
is its shape; the ‘sharpness’ at the boundaries of the feature
would require extremely rapid global evolution of the IGM
temperature, which seems to be inconsistent with physical
timescales of evolution on these spatial scales (e.g. J. Cang
et al. 2025). Furthermore, the flattened bottom of the fea-
ture is difficult to explain, as it would require essentially no
evolution over a significant amount of time.
However, B18 and a number of following works (e.g. R.
Hills et al. 2018; R. F. Bradley et al. 2019; S. Singh & R.
Subrahmanyan 2019; P. H. Sims & J. C. Pober 2020) have
cautioned that instrumental systematics may form a signifi-
cantcontributiontotheestimatedcosmicsignal. Theinherent
dynamic range between radio foregrounds and the expected
21cm signal at these frequencies is very large: about104.
While the radio foregrounds are expected to be intrinsically
spectrally smooth—in contrast to ¯𝑇21 over a wide enough
band (e.g.50−100MHz)—the peculiar properties of the
instrumentitselfintroducespectralstructurethatcanobscure
the signal. Due to the high dynamic range between fore-
grounds and signal, any multiplicative spectrally structured
instrumentalsystematicsmusteitherbeintrinsicallyatalevel
below∼10 −4, or calibrated to this same precision as part
of the data analysis. These systematics arise from a number
of potential sources, including: internal reflections of the re-
ceiver(R.A.Monsalveetal.2016,2017a;S.Sunetal.2024),
spatial and spectral variations of the instrument’s beam (K.
Tauscher et al. 2020; P. H. Sims & J. C. Pober 2020; D.
Anstey et al. 2020; N. Mahesh et al. 2021; P. H. Sims et al.
2023, 2025), reflections of foregrounds from nearby objects
(R. Hills et al. 2018; A. E. E. Rogers et al. 2022), and mis-
calibratedgains(S.G.Murrayetal.2022;C.J.Kirkhametal.
2025b). Beyondinstrumentalsystematics,terrestrialandsky-
based effects can distort incoming radiation, or add spurious
power, for example Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) and
ionospheric distortions (C. H. Jordan et al. 2017).
Onestrategyfortestingthesensitivityoftheinferredsignal
tosystematicsisjackknifetests. ThelargeamountofEDGES
dataavailableallowsforverificationtestsoftheconsistencyof
thecosmicsignalforchangesinhardwareconfigurationslike
antenna location and orientation as well as different ground
planes and different processing configurations (e.g. with and
without beam correction). A number of such tests were per-
formed in support of the results of B18 (c.f. Extended Data
Table 1 of that paper).
Since the number of potential systematic sources is large,
and the space of possible perturbations of the signal due to
thesesystematicsisbothlargeandcomplex,itisunsurprising
that several techniques have been developed in an attempt
to deal with them. Implementing these techniques requires
sophisticateddata-processingpipelinesthatmakeanumberof
choices: howtomodelcalibration,identifyandflagbaddata,
and average data together in an unbiased manner. Without
insight into the precise choices made in these pipelines, it
is incredibly difficult for the community to make informed
judgments about the interpretations that proceed from the
final processed data.
In this paper, we present a new data analysis package for
global 21cm signal data, detailing the range of data anal-
ysis algorithms it provides, focusing on those used within
the EDGES experiment. This pipeline has been developed
from the ground up to increase the reproducibility and trans-
parencyofEDGES’results—bothitshistoricaldatasetsfrom
EDGES-2aswellasupcomingdatasetsfromEDGES-3(R.C.
Cappallo et al. 2025). This approach has been purposefully
adoptedtoincreasethevisibilityofthewidercommunityinto
the processes underlying analysis of EDGES data, and may
become more useful as new experiments begin to share their
results.
Thepipelineisextremelyflexible. Manystagesoftheanal-
ysis admit different approaches—for example, flagging RFI
can be performed using many different techniques for iden-
tifying outlier observations—and here we describe the range
of techniques we have implemented thus far within EDGES.
Thepipelineallowsforthesedifferentalgorithmsandparam-
eters to be used in a plug-and-play manner. In particular,
we exemplify the pipeline by presenting the exact analysis
choicesmadetoproducethefinalaverageddataproductused
in B18, and releasing all the raw data and pipeline code to
reproducethisformativeresult. Wenoteattheoutsetthatthe
data in B18 were processed using an entirely different code
thantheonedescribedhere,whichwewillhererefertoasthe

3
‘legacy pipeline’, and which is also publicly available11 and
minimally documented.
The paper is organized as follows: in §2 we give a high-
level overview of the task of calibrating and processing sky-
averaged 21cm data, and introduce the basic mathematical
structure. In §3 we describe the software pipeline we have
developed, highlighting aspects that are more broadly appli-
cabletootherexperiments. In§4weoutlinehowthissoftware
handles fast linear modeling. In §5 we detail how EDGES
data is calibrated, in §6 how data is flagged, and in §7 how
it is averaged. In §8 we give an example application of the
pipeline, reproducing the results of B18 and highlighting the
sensitivity of the results to various analysis choices. Finally,
in §9 we summarize this work.
2.HIGH-LEVEL OVERVIEW
Sky-averaged low-frequency radio observations are mea-
suredaspowerspectraldensities(PSDs)𝑃 obs,andweassume
that they are described by
𝑃obs =𝑔  𝑇BWsky +𝑇 RFI +𝑇 rcv −𝑇 loss +𝑁  ,(1)
whereeachcomponentofthemodelisafunctionofbothfre-
quency𝜈andobservationtime,𝑡(butwehavelefttheseoutfor
notationalclarity). Themultiplicativegain,𝑔andtheadditive
receivertemperature𝑇 rcvarepropertiesofthereceiver/signal-
chain that are direction-independent and applied to the noise
temperature of the antenna at the calibration plane. In prac-
tice,𝑔can include contributions from losses/gains inside the
receiver, as well as external losses such as loss to the ground
andinefficienciesintheantenna. Ingeneral,losseshaveboth
a multiplicative and additive component, and𝑇loss represents
theadditivecomponent. Conversely, thebeam-weightedsky,
𝑇BWsky,and𝑇 RFI areintrinsicallydirection-dependentproper-
ties of the skythat are integrated over the horizon-to-horizon
field-of-view of the instrument, with a weighting defined by
the primary beam of the antenna:
𝑇BWsky+𝑇RFI =
∫
2𝜋
𝑑Ω𝐵(𝜈,Ω)

𝑇sky(𝜈,Ω, 𝑡) +𝑇 RFI (𝜈,Ω, 𝑡)

.
(2)
The final term in Eq. 1,𝑁, is the thermal noise.
In this work we will consider the beam-weighted sky tem-
perature to be the sum of the global 21-cm temperature and
another term representing all (beam-weighted) foregrounds:
𝑇BWsky =𝑔 beam (𝜈, 𝑡) [𝑇21 (𝜈) +𝑇 BWFG(𝜈, 𝑡) ] ,(3)
where𝑔 beamrepresentsthe‘chromaticity’ofthebeam(i.e. the
extra factor that arises due to𝐵being dependent on𝜈, rather
than simplyΩ). We write𝑇21 instead of ‘𝑇BW21’ because the
11 https://github.com/edges-collab/alans-pipeline
21cm signal is expected to be homogeneous on the scale of
the beam size. Furthermore, due to this homogeneity,𝑇21 is
not time-dependent.
Since real observations are discrete in time and frequency,
wewritethevarioustemperaturesandobservedpowerinstead
asdatavectorswithlengthgivenbytheproductofnumberof
frequencychannelsbynumberofobservedintegrationtimes,
𝑁𝜈 𝑁intg:
𝑷obs =G (Gbeam [𝑻21 +𝑻 BWFG] +𝑻 RFI +𝑻 rcv −𝑻 loss +𝑵 ) ,
(4)
Here,italic-boldrepresentsavector,upright-boldGindicates
a matrix, and in practiceGis diagonal.
We assume the noise𝑵to be Gaussian-distributed with a
meanofzeroandadiagonalcovariancewhosediagonalterms
are given by the radiometer equation:
𝜎2
𝑇 ≈ (𝑇BWsky +𝑇 rcv +𝑇 RFI +𝑇 loss)2
Δ𝜈Δ𝑡 .(5)
Indetail,thespectrometercorrelatesneighbouringfrequency
channels and times. However, this correlation is negligible
for practical applications.
Our formulation in Eq. 4 supports our goal in the EDGES
analysispipeline,whichistodetermineanunbiasedestimate
ofthetruespectrumofthesky, ˆ𝑻BWsky(ultimately,thegoalis
to produce unbiased estimates of𝑻21, but the careful separa-
tionoftheforegroundsfromthe21-cmsignalismoreproperly
within the scope ofinferencerather thananalysisand is thus
beyond the scope of this paper)12. There are three aspects of
this process:
1.Calibrationrefers to the estimation ofG,G beam,𝑻 rcv
and𝑻 loss such that the observed PSD can be calibrated
to a temperature.
2.Flaggingreferstoidentificationofeitherspecificchan-
nelsorintegrationsthatareafflictedbysourcesnotde-
scribed by any other component of the model, which
wehaveheregroupedintothecatch-allterm𝑇 RFI13. In-
stead of attempting to determine the magnitude of the
undesirablesourcesofpower,weopttosimplyidentify
its presence and excise such channels and integrations
from the data entirely.
3.Averagingrefers to combining either channels or in-
tegrations with the aim of reducing the variance of𝑁
12 Technically,allanalysisstepspresentedinthispapershouldalsoproperly
be considered as part of inference, which is a long-term goal of this
project, however the strong correlations between foreground and 21-cm
models makes it all the more necessary when separating them
13 Note that terrestrial radio-frequency interference (RFI) is not the only
source of aberrant power that causes the observed data to deviate from
our model, however since it is the most common we let it stand in for all
sources of such extra power.

4
without significnatly reducing information in (or bias-
ing) the global 21-cm signal,𝑻21.
Givenadataset𝑷 obs(whichisavectoroflength𝑁 raw
𝜈 𝑁raw
intg),
the analysis process can be written as a series of linear oper-
ations, each of which corresponds to one of these these three
aspects (each can be applied multiple times). Letting the in-
termediate result at any point𝑘in this process be𝑿𝑘, with
𝑿0 =𝑷 obs, each step of the process can be written14:
𝑿 𝑘+1 =D 𝑘S𝑘 (1−𝚵 𝑘) ˆG−1
𝑘 𝑿 𝑘 − ˆ𝑻cal,𝑘 .(6)
In this equation, theG𝑘 are square, diagonal matrices rep-
resenting estimatedcalibrationgains (potentially including
receiver gains, cable losses, beam chromaticity corrections
and any other multiplicative correction), andˆ𝑻cal,𝑘 are esti-
matedcalibrationtemperatures(i.e. anyadditivecorrection).
In practice, for most analysis steps no calibration will be
applied, in which caseG𝑘 =Iand ˆ𝑻 𝑘 =0.Flaggingis ap-
pliedthrough𝚵 𝑘,whicharesquarediagonalmatricesofzeros
(good data) and ones (flags).Averagingis achieved through
the application ofD𝑘S𝑘, whereS𝑘 are square smoothing ker-
nelmatriceswhoserowssumtounity,andD 𝑘 arerectangular
down-samplingmatrices,inwhicheachrowcontainsasingle
non-zero entry of unity (in a step in which no averaging is
performed, their product is simply set to the identity matrix).
Eq. 6representsanextremelyhigh-levelformulationofthe
general data processing pipeline, resulting in𝑿𝑛 = ˆ𝑻BWsky.
The aim of this paper is to present methods for determining
D𝑘,S 𝑘,𝚵 𝑘,G 𝑘,𝑻 loss and𝑻 rcv based on characteristics of
theEDGESdata,butalsobroadlyapplicableto21cmglobal-
signal experiments.
3.SOFTWARE FOR DATA INTERFACES AND
ANALYSIS
Given the extreme requirements on calibration precision
for an unambiguous detection of the global 21cm signal, it
is paramount that any uncertainties stemming from analysis
choices are well-characterized. Analysis pipelines required
for global signal data are full of impact-laden choices—
especially as regards to how and at what stage the data are
flaggedforparticulareffects,andtheprocessofmodeling(or
‘inpainting’) to achieve unbiased averaging. It is therefore
crucial that the analysis pipeline software lends itself to easy
exploration of different parameter and algorithm choices, at
the same time as ensuring that these choices are traced for
reproducibility. This design approach is made all the more
necessarybytheloomingthreatofmethodologicalconfirma-
tion bias—i.e. the tendency to choose parameters/methods
that yield the result that is either expected or desired, rather
14 Notethatwhile thisform(Eq. 6)seemslinearinthedata𝑷 obs, itisoften
not linear in detail because the dataset itself can be used to determine𝚵.
than purely due to their intrinsic merit—, especially given
the high-profile results from EDGES-2. Furthermore, it is
important that the analysis software is well-documented and
transparent,sothatthecommunitycanvalidatetheprocedure.
The software used to generate the results presented in
B18 was neither modular, open-source, nor easily trace-
able. It was originally developed for internal use rather
than for broader accessibility or reproducibility. Here, we
present a new suite of Python packages, developed under
theedges-collabGithuborganization 15 thatmeetthechal-
lenges of modularity, reproducibility, and accessibility we
have just described. The packages of most interest to the
broader community arepygsdata16, which provides a con-
sistent unified interface to low-frequency single-antenna ra-
diodata,andedges-analysis,whichprovidesanumberof
analysistoolsbuiltonthatcoredata-interface. Thehigh-level
goalsofthesepackagesaretobebroadlyapplicable(i.e.,able
to be used for experiments outside EDGES), modular (i.e.,
easy to switch between different methodological choices in
a plug-and-play fashion), accessible (open-source and exten-
sively documented using modern software design principles
to enable the code to be easily understood), reliable (unit-
tested with over 90% code coverage as well as end-to-end
tested against the legacy software), and performant.
The reasonpygsdatastands separate from
edges-analysisis that it is entirely experiment-agnostic.
Thepygsdatapackage defines a single data interface that
captures the range of data shapes across global experiments
(e.g., multiple antenna inputs and polarizations) and unifies
common tasks like data selection, concatenation and read-
ing/writing. This interface is intended to ease the sharing of
data between experiments, and potentially also the sharing
of methodologies. It adopts a similar motivation and design
philosophy as thepyuvdata17 project does for interferomet-
ric data (B. J. Hazelton et al. 2017; G. Keating et al. 2025).
Whileedges-analysisisbynecessityslightlymoregeared
towards EDGES data (for example, focusing on calibration
using the noise-wave formalism of A. E. E. Rogers & J. D.
Bowman 2012 and R. A. Monsalve et al. 2017a), its intrinsic
modularity means that many components are much more
widely applicable and may easily be incorporated into the
analysis pipelines of other experiments. In particular, it
fundamentally rests on the corepygsdatainterface, which
means that many of the functions will be easily applied to
data from other experiments.
15 https://github.com/edges-collab/
16 https://github.com/edges-collab/pygsdata
17 https://github.com/RadioAstronomySoftwareGroup/pyuvdata

5
3.1.The Data Interface
Thepygsdatapackage is a best-principles software pack-
age that defines Python data-types for interfacing with low-
frequencyradiosingle-antennaspectraldata. Thefundamen-
tal data-type inpygsdatais aGSDataobject. At its core,
the spectrum data is encoded with theGSDataobject as a
four-dimensional array of shape(𝑁loads, 𝑁pols, 𝑁times, 𝑁freqs).
Along with the spectrum data, two other arrays of the same
shapearepermitted,specificallyanarrayholdingthenumber
of samples comprising each datum, and an array of residuals
ofthedatatoamodel. Besidesthesedataarrays,theGSData
object holds several important pieces of metadata. These in-
clude the metadata associated with the axes of the data: an
array of times, an array of frequencies, the list of polariza-
tions and the list of load-names. Other metadata include the
telescope name and location, as well as a table of ‘auxiliary
measurements’ which can be arbitrary quantities measured
at each observed time (these can be used to track important
corollary measurements such as ambient temperature).
Unlikepyuvdata, which formed a large inspiration for
pygsdata,GSDataobjects areimmutable: they are initial-
ized and validated at a single point and then remain forever
valid afterwards. This is a significant advantage for analysts
using the data, as it makes keeping track of the state of the
object much more simple.
Instead of updating parts of the data object in-place via
a plethora of attached methods, theGSDatainterface is ex-
tremely simple, having only a few essential methods, gener-
ally provided for easily accessing slices of the data (or other
data-like attributes), and selecting out parts of the data (fre-
quency range, Local Sidereal Time (LST) range, etc) into a
new validGSDataobject. Instead, new transformed objects
(down-selected, combined, calibrated, flagged and averaged,
c.f. §2) are created from input objects via simple external
functions. As part of this architecture,pygsdataprovides
a decorator-based mechanism for registering new functions
whoseprimarypurposeistoingestGSDataobjectsandreturn
new modified ones. While any function can do this, regis-
tering aGSData-analysis function provides benefits such as
automatically tracking the history of the data.
TheGSDataobjectcontainsa.historyattributewhichis
essentially a list of analysis-stamps, each of which contains
metadata about a function that has been applied to the data
(the time of application, the name of the function, versions
of key packages involved, and the parameters passed to the
function). TheGSDataobject has methods for inspecting
and printing this history. This means that the final processed
spectrum from a given analysis has a full traceable history of
all the processes applied to it, essential for reproducibility.
pygsdatamakes full use of modern packages such as
astropy( Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013, 2018). For
instance, all applicable attributes of theGSDataobject are
Quantities with units, which reduces ambiguity and en-
ables dimensional analysis. Furthermore, functionality from
astropyisusedtodeterminetheLSTscorrespondingtoob-
servationtimes, andtoidentifytheskythatthe telescopecan
view at any particular time.
GSDataalsohasanadvancedsystemforstoringandapply-
ingflags. Itiscommontostoreflagsasasinglebooleanarray
ofthesameshapeasthedata. However, thismeansthatflags
arising from different quality checks cannot be distinguished
after they are combined into the single array, forfeiting the
abilitytolatercomparetheimpactofmultiplequalitychecks.
Inpygsdataflagsfromasinglequalitycheckarestoredina
bespokeformat—aGSFlagobject—whichisabooleanarray
withuptofourdimensions,wherethequantitycorresponding
to each axis (e.g. polarization, time, frequency) is explicitly
specified. It is common in the analysis of EDGES data to
flag entire spectra at once (i.e. every channel for a partic-
ular time). The format ofGSFlagmeans that this can be
storedasasmallarrayofsize𝑁 times insteadofafull4Darray.
WithintheGSDataobject,theflagsarestoredasamappingof
quality-checknamestoGSFlagobjects. Thefullresultingset
offlags,combinedviaboolean‘OR’(consistentlycombining
flagswithdifferentdimensionalities),ismadeavailableasthe
.complete_flagsattribute.
GSDatais intended to be a unified interface for all single-
antenna radio data. To that end,pygsdatadefines a HDF5-
basedself-describingdataformatforstoringthedataondisk.
Whilethisformatisfeature-completeandfastbothtoreadas
aGSDataobject and to write from such an object, almost all
experiments have developed bespoke formats for their spec-
trometer data. Indeed, even EDGES natively writes data in a
bespoke format usinguuencoding(binary-to-text encoding)
internallyreferredtoas‘ACQ’files. Toenablevariousgroups
to easily adoptGSDatafor their data,pygsdataprovides
a decorator-based registration mechanism so that arbitrary
functionscanbedefinedthatreadaparticulardataformatand
return aGSDataobject. When registering a custom reader,
a set of file-suffices can be registered as associated with the
reader, so that simply importing the reader function makes it
possible to use the built-in constructorGSData.from_file
to read any file with that suffix. Theread-acqpackage uses
justthismechanismtoenablereadingof.acqfilesproduced
by the EDGES spectrometer.
3.2.The Analysis Package
Theedges-analysispackage comprises a number of
sub-packages that focus on different aspects of data pro-
cessing. Some of the more important sub-packages of
edges-analysis, most of which we will describe in more
detail in the following sections, include
•edges.modeling(c.f. §4), an interface for defining
and fitting linear models;

6
•edges.io, routines for reading and writing data for-
mats other than the spectra themselves;
•edges.filters(c.f. §6), a set of quality checks and
data filters (e.g. RFI) that apply toGSDataobjects;
•edges.averaging(c.f. §7), methods for unbiased
averaging and/or binning over different data axes;
•edges.cal(c.f. §5), methods to calibrate and model
reflection coefficients and determine receiver calibra-
tion solutions;
•edges.analysis,high-levelmethodsforapplyingthe
algorithms of other sub-packages toGSDataobjects;
and
•edges.inference, containing non-linear models of
both foregrounds and 21cm signals, and a unified in-
terface for constraining their parameters via Bayesian
inference.
Whilesomeofthesesub-packagesaremore-or-lesstailored
for EDGES data (e.gedges.io), most provide standalone
methods that are broadly applicable, as they are based on the
unifiedGSDatainterface. Forexample, theedges.filters
sub-packageprovidesanumberoffiltersfordataquality(c.f.
§6),allofwhichacceptaGSDataobjectandreturnanewone,
duly flagged. Examples of general-purpose filters are those
that flag data dependent on the altitude of the sun/moon,
those that flag integrations with abnormally high power, and
anumberofRFIfiltersthatsearchforcompactoutliersusing
different algorithms. With this software, the construction of
full end-to-end analysis pipelines is generally quite simple,
predominantly consisting of a series of function calls that
sequentially evolve aGSDataobject. The resulting pipeline
is thus also highly transparent.
4.LINEAR MODELING
Many aspects of the analysis of single-antenna radio data
call for modeling the data as smooth functions (typically of
frequency). For instance, such models can be used to reduce
noise in VNA measurements while simultaneously interpo-
latingthemeasurementstothechannelsatwhichthespectral
data were taken. These models can also be used to in-paint
flagged data in order to mitigate biasing when averaging (c.f.
§7), help to identify outliers for flagging (c.f. §6.2) and form
physical models of foregrounds when interpreting the data.
Theedges.modelingsub-packageprovidesaconvenient,
flexible,composableandfastinterfacefordefining,evaluating
andfittinglinearmodelstodata. Whilelinearmodelingtools
arewidelyavailable(e.g. inrecentversionsofastropy 18,as
18 https://docs.astropy.org/en/latest/modeling/index.html
wellaslower-leveltoolssuchasthelinear-algebraroutinesand
polynomial fitting innumpy), theedges.modelingpackage
was written to enable the following features:
•The ability to define models with arbitrary numbers of
terms (e.g. polynomial or Fourier basis sets with𝑛
terms).
•Easy serialization/definition of the models to human-
readable formats like YAML.
•Ability to cache the basis functions to make repeated
fits faster.
•Ability to apply transformations to the coordinates at
whichthemodeltermsareevaluated,separatefromthe
definition of the model (e.g. normalising frequencies
bysomereferencefrequency,𝑥=𝜈/𝜈 ref andevaluating
polynomials in terms of𝑥).
•Unified support for multiple fitting methods, including
support for varying weights.
Inedges.modeling, a model is defined by specifying a
functional form for each term:
𝑀={𝑚 0 (𝑥), 𝑚 1 (𝑥), . . . , 𝑚 𝑛−1 (𝑥)},(7)
where𝑥=T (𝑥 ′)is a vector of coordinates at which the
term is evaluated (transformed from the natural coordinates
𝑥′ via the user-specified transformationT). Many models
are defined for an arbitrary number of terms, and the specific
number of terms required for any particular application is set
by the analyst when using the model. Other models are only
defined for a certain number of terms, or a certain range of
terms.
Models are evaluated for a particular set of coefficients,
𝒂={𝑎 0, 𝑎1, . . . , 𝑎𝑛−1 }, at a particular vector of coordinates
𝒙=T (𝒙 ′),bypackingthevectors𝒎 𝑖 intoan𝑁 𝑥 ×𝑛matrixM
and computingM𝒂. Conversely, the parameters are fit to the
datavector𝒚usinglinearleast-squares(potentiallywithnon-
uniformweights)viaoneofseveralmatrixinversionmethods
(e.g. QR-decomposition).
4.1.Common Models
There are a number of linear models that are commonly
used in analysis of global signal data, and these are built-in
toedges.modelingfor convenience. We do not present all
of them here, but specifically note those that will be used
throughout this work.
CommonusefulflexiblemodelsincludetheFouriermodel:
𝑀fourier,𝑘 =
 

sin (2𝜋𝑘𝑥 ) 𝑘≥0
cos (2𝜋𝑘𝑥 ) 𝑘 <0,
(8)

7
for(1−𝑛)/2≤𝑘≤ (𝑛−1)/2. Another flexible model is the
modified polynomial:
𝑀poly,𝑘 =𝑥 𝑝𝑘−𝑞 ,(9)
where𝑞is a parameter that can be set to more easily cap-
ture behaviour close to a negative power-law (common for
foreground spectra as a function of frequency), and𝑝is a
parametercontrollinghowmuchextrastructureisintroduced
in each new term.
We also include several models that are designed to cap-
ture foreground structure with a low number of terms. In
these models,𝛽is a parameter of the model that generally
sets the dominant spectral index of the foreground spectrum.
These include a linearized form of a physically-motivated
foreground model including ionospheric terms,LinPhys:
𝑀linphys ={𝑥 𝛽, 𝑥𝛽 log𝑥, 𝑥 𝛽 log2 𝑥, 𝑥 𝛽−2 , 𝑥−2 },(10)
a polynomial in log-frequency,LinLog:
𝑀linlog,𝑘 =𝑥 𝛽 log𝑘 (𝑥),(11)
and the so-calledEdgesPoly:
𝑀epoly,𝑘 =𝑀 poly,𝑘 (𝑝=1, 𝑞=𝛽).(12)
5.CALIBRATION
The calibration method for EDGES data was presented in
detailin(R.A.Monsalveetal.2017a)andhasbeenelaborated
in (S. G. Murray et al. 2022) in the context of a Bayesian for-
malism. Themethodisatwo-stepprocess,inwhichtimevari-
ability is removed with a Dicke-switching procedure, while
absolute temperature calibration is performed using thermal
references and the noise-wave formalism (R. Meys 1978).
Given the success of this approach, it has been adopted by
a number of other experiments, including REACH (I. L. V.
Roqueetal.2020;E.deLeraAcedoetal.2022),MIST(R.A.
Monsalve et al. 2024), LEDA (D. C. Price et al. 2018) and
RHINO (P. Bull et al. 2025, though they also use a signal-
tone injection calibration scheme on mid-range time-scales).
Thus,thebriefoutlineofthecalibrationformalismpresented
here is broadly applicable.
Both EDGES-2 and EDGES-3 follow the formalism out-
lined in this section, though some of the details are different
between the implementations. For instance, EDGES-3 uses
physically modified versions of the same kinds of calibra-
tion sources as EDGES-2, but they are connected through a
switchnetworkinternaltothereceiverbox,ratherthanexter-
nal sources used in a lab setting (R. C. Cappallo et al. 2025).
For brevity (and to support the demonstration in §8), in this
workwewillreferonlytothecalibrationofEDGES-2,though
edges-analysisis modular enough to support calibration
of both systems without much effort.
LNA
+
SIGNAL
CHAIN
ANTENNA / 
CAL. SRC.
VNA
S O L LOAD
NOISE 
SOURCESP2T1
SP4T
REF PLANE, r1
SMA1
SMA2 SMA3
SP2T2
RECEIVER
r2
r3
Figure 1.System diagram for the EDGES-2 receiver. We refer
to the entire enclosed box as the ‘receiver’. The pink components
define the internal subsystem for measuring and calibrating input
sourcereflectioncoefficients. Thebluecomponentsdefinethemain
signalpathforrecordingspectrafromtheantenna/calibrationsource.
The orange components comprise the internal system for relative
calibration using Dicke switching (c.f. §5.2).
There is much publicly accessible documentation describ-
ingdetailsofthisprocedure,especiallyintheseriesofmemos
hosted at both ASU19 and MIT20. Our purpose in this paper
is to provide a comprehensive overview regarding the math-
ematical framework and algorithms involved in calibration,
ratherthanathoroughdescriptionoftheproceduralaspectsof
taking the measurements. For the latter, see e.g. T. Mozdzen
(2018). At the same time, we aim here to frame some of
themoretechnicalaspectsthatinvolveelectrical-engineering
concepts in a more conceptual way for analysis practitioners
with less familiarity in this area.
19 https://loco.lab.asu.edu/memos/
20 https://www.haystack.mit.edu/haystack-memo-series/edges-memos/

8
5.1.The EDGES-2 System
Fig. 1 gives a high-level schematic overview of the
EDGES-2 system. In this diagram, several of the annotated
components are multi-component subsystems. For the pur-
poses of this description of the calibration algorithms, these
subsystems can be regarded as black boxes.
Thesystembeginswithaninputsource,whichisgenerally
theantennaitselforsomeotherelectricaldevicelikeapassive
calibration source. This source is connected to the receiver
box via an SMA connector21 (SMA1), and from here signals
can follow two main routes: either through a four-position
switchtoavectornetworkanalyzer(VNA)connectedviaan-
other SMA (SMA2) for injecting signals to measure internal
reflections (pink route); or through the low-noise amplifier
(LNA)andrestofthesignalchaintoanoutputSMA(SMA3)
for connection to the spectrometer (blue route). In the field,
the main two-position switch (SP2T1) is generally connected
tothebluerouteinordertorecordspectra,butisoccasionally
switched over to the pink VNA route for updated measure-
ments of the antenna reflection. A final subsystem is an
internal noise-generating resistive load implemented as an
attenuator, as well as an active noise source (orange route)
that boosts the noise exiting the load. The system intermit-
tently switches between these internal calibration loads and
the input source via another two-position switch (SP2T2, c.f.
§5.2). An important point is that thereference plane—the
locationonthediagramatwhichreflectionsarereferenced—
is at the input of SMA1 (or equivalently, the output of the
input source). That is, all relevant reflection coefficients are
defined as the ratio of the current returned to the reference
planefromtheconnectedsource(e.g. antenna)inresponseto
aninjectedcurrentatthisreferenceplanefromtheVNA(c.f.
Fig. 4). Much of the procedure for calibrating the system
is concerned with translating measurements of reflections at
other points in the system back to this reference plane.
5.2.Dicke Switching
Dicke-switchingworksbyswitchingtheinternalinputfrom
the antenna feed to two different calibration sources sequen-
tially on a cadence of approximately 13 seconds each22. In
the EDGES systems, these sources are a ‘load’ which is at
ambienttemperature,anda‘loadplusnoise-source’forwhich
the noise-source contributes an additional signal equivalent
to a noise-source well above ambient temperature (see Fig.
1). Foreachinput𝑋∈ {ant,L,L+NS}wemeasurethePSD,
i.e.𝑃 𝑋 =𝑔 𝑋 (𝑇𝑋 +𝑇 𝑋,off )(c.f. Eq. 1). For each 39-second
21 Subminiature version A (SMA) connectors are standard coaxial connec-
tors for radio-frequency signals, with a nominal impedance of 50Ω.
22 As pointed out in P. Bull et al. (2025), it can be advantageous to have the
integration time for each internal Dicke-switch source be different, but
this does not affect the formalism as presented here.
cycle, these three inputs are combined to form the following
quotient:
𝑄= 𝑃ant −𝑃 L
𝑃L+NS −𝑃 L
.(13)
Tofirstorder,sincethePSDmeasuredateachswitchposition
experiencesthesamegain𝑔 𝑋 ≈𝑔 rcvandadditivetemperature
𝑇𝑋,off ≈𝑇 rcv from the receiver subsystem, this quotient is
approximately23
𝑄≈ 𝑇ant −𝑇 L
𝑇NS
.(14)
The physical temperature of the receiver is controlled and
stabilized to high accuracy. This stabilization enables us to
assume that𝑇L and𝑇 NS are time-independent. Thus, all we
need is to measure𝑇L and𝑇 NS once, and we can invert Eq.
14 to obtain𝑇ant. In practice, there are a few complications
to this picture; these complications centre around the fact
that the signal path from the antenna to the receiver is dif-
ferent than that between the internal loads and the receiver,
as it includes an extra two-position switch (SP2T1). Further-
more, the impedance mismatch between the antenna and the
receiver causes internal reflections that need to be taken into
account. This impedance mismatch requires incorporating
thenoise-waveformalism,whichwewilldescribenext. Nev-
ertheless,evenwiththeaddedcomplexityofthenoise-waves,
theultimatecalibrationfrom𝑄to𝑇 ant remainslinearandcan
be expressed through two calibration temperatures: a scaling
and offset temperature24:
𝑇ant =𝑇 sca𝑄+𝑇 off
𝑇sca ≈𝑇 NS (15)
𝑇off ≈𝑇 L.
5.3.The Noise-Wave Formalism
For any source connected to the LNA, the output power
from the receiver can be written as
𝑃src =𝑔 src

(1− |Γ src|2)𝐹 2
src(1−𝐿 src)𝑇src
+𝐿 src𝑇amb
+ |Γ src|2|𝐹src|2𝑇unc
+ |Γ src||𝐹 src|cos𝛼 src𝑇cos
+ |Γ src||𝐹 src|sin𝛼 src𝑇sin
+𝑇 rcv

.(16)
23 Notethatthereisasmallbiasthatweneglectinthisequationwhicharises
due tothe statistical correlationof the numeratorand denominator inEq.
13—since both contain the same𝑃𝐿 observations. This however is very
small (∼10 −5 K) for the long integration times we adopt on each cycle
(e.g. A. E. E. Rogers 2015a).
24 Note that the models for these scaling and offset temperatures may not
be linear in the parameters chosen to represent them, especially if the
internal load is not well matched, but the relation between𝑇obs and𝑄
remains linear.

9
HereΓ src is the complex-valued reflection coefficient (i.e.
𝑆11) of the source andΓrcv is its counterpart for the receiver
input.𝐹and𝛼are functions of the reflections coefficients:
𝐹src =
√︁
1− |Γ rcv|2
1−Γ rcvΓsrc
,(17)
𝛼src =arg(Γ src𝐹src).(18)
In Eq. 16,𝐿 src quantifies thelossexperienced by the input
temperaturebeforeitreachestheSMA1inputconnector(e.g.
if the source device is connected via a cable). Its value is
zero for lossless systems and one for those with total loss.
Thesecondterm,𝐿 src𝑇amb, isanadditivetemperaturearising
from the ambient temperature of the lossy input device (c.f.
§5.6).
In Eq. 16, the receiver gain𝑔is independent of the input
source for a fixed calibration plane. However, since the path
fromtheinputsourcetotheLNAisdifferentfromtheinternal
loadstotheLNA,𝑔isingeneraldifferentbetweenthetwo(but
notbetweenthetwointernalloads). Fortheinternalloads,the
reflection coefficient|Γsrc|is negligibly small since they are
very close to 50Ωby construction. We can thus approximate
|ΓL|=|Γ LNS| ≈0(see C. J. Kirkham et al. 2025a, their
Section 2.2, for a discussion of impedance mismatch in the
internalreferences). Furthermore,asmodeled,intheinternal
loads there is negligible loss, so that the internal load powers
may be written:
𝑃L =𝑔(1+𝛿 𝑔 ) (1− |Γ src|2) [𝑇L +𝑇 rcv] ,(19)
𝑃L+NS =𝑔(1+𝛿 𝑔 ) (1− |Γ src|2) [𝑇L +𝑇 NS +𝑇 rcv] .(20)
Writing𝑇 ′
L =(1+𝛿 𝑔 )𝑇L and𝑇 ′
NS =(1+𝛿 𝑔 )𝑇NS, we can
then rewrite the quotient for some input source as
𝑄src =

𝜖src𝑇src +𝐾 0𝑇unc +𝐾 1𝑇cos +𝐾 2𝑇sin − (1− |Γ rcv|2)𝑇 ′
L

𝑇NS
(21)
where
𝜖src =(1− |Γ src|2)𝐹 2
src𝐿src,(22)
𝐾=

|Γsrc|2|𝐹src|2,|Γ src||𝐹 src|cos𝛼 src,|Γ src||𝐹 src|sin𝛼 src
	
.
(23)
Eq. 21 is the equivalent of Eq. 14 with the inclusion of the
complicating factors of the internal reflections and different
electricalpathwaysoftheinputsourcecomparedtotheinter-
nal loads. Indeed, following Eq. 15 we can write:
𝑇 src
sca =𝜖 −1
src 𝑇 ′
NS (24)
𝑇 src
off =𝜖 −1
src

(1− |Γ rcv|2)𝑇 ′
L −𝐾 0𝑇unc −𝐾 1𝑇cos −𝐾 2𝑇sin

.
(25)
5.4.Solving for the Calibration Temperatures
Assuming that we can precisely measureΓrcv andΓ src (c.f.
§5.5), we are left with five unknown temperatures that are
propertiesofthereceiversystemratherthantheinputsource:
{𝑇 ′
NS, 𝑇′
L, 𝑇unc, 𝑇cos, 𝑇sin}. We will call these the ‘receiver cal-
ibrationtemperatures’,andtheymustbeestimatedinorderto
calibrate any data. To estimate these temperatures, we con-
struct a number of well-characterized ‘calibration sources’
for which we can directly measure the true temperature𝑇src,
andsimultaneouslysolveforthefivetemperaturefunctionsby
consideringthemeasurementsfromallofthesesources. The
choice of the particular calibration sources to use is impor-
tant – typically robust solutions require a mixture of sources
with very low reflection coefficients (which are suitable for
determination of the internal load temperatures𝑇′
L and𝑇 ′
NS),
and sources with larger reflections whose complex reflection
coefficients oscillate through several periods over the rele-
vant range of frequencies. Optimal selection of calibration
sources can be aided by optimally sampling their reflection
coefficientsonaSmithChart(e.g.I.L.V.Roqueetal.2025),
and in principle it is possible to use arbitrarily many calibra-
tion sources (I. L. V. Roque et al. 2020; E. de Lera Acedo
et al. 2022).
EDGES uses four calibration sources: two with very low
reflection coefficients—one a load at ambient temperature
and the other a heated load connected via a short semi-rigid
cable—and two with larger reflection coefficients. The two
sources with larger𝑆11’s use the same long cable, which is
either short- or open-circuited to yield reflections that are
out-of-phase with each other.
Withenoughindependentinputcalibrationsourcesitwould
be possible to solve for the five unknown temperatures inde-
pendently for each frequency channel. However, it is com-
mon to assume that the temperatures evolve smoothly with
frequency, so that they can be modeled by low-order flexible
linear models, typically polynomials, and thus significantly
reduce the number of free parameters.
Naively, the problem sets itself up as a simple𝜒 2-
minimization. Given coefficients of each linear model,
®𝑎={ ®𝑎NS,®𝑎L,®𝑎unc,®𝑎cos,®𝑎sin}, we must simply minimize the
objective function
𝑓( ®𝑎)=
∑︁
𝜈,src

𝑇src,𝜈 −𝑇 src
sca ( ®𝑎NS)𝑄src,𝜈 −𝑇 src
off ( ®𝑎L,®𝑎unc,®𝑎cos,®𝑎sin)
2
𝜎2src,𝜈
.
(26)
However, there are many subtleties that must be taken into
account.
The first of these is that, as noted in S. G. Murray et al.
(2022), some of the sources may be more sensitive to errors
in the measurement ofΓsrc than others, so that their expected
systematic error is higher. This is true of the cable mea-
surements (open and short) for EDGES’ calibration. In this
case(andintheabsenceofatrustedmodeltoaccountforthe
systematics), to mitigate the systematic effects of these mea-
surements,itisadvantageoustouseaniterativescheme(R.A.

10
Monsalveetal.2017a)wherebytheinternalloadtemperatures
𝑇 ′
NS and𝑇 ′
L arefitonlytothenon-cablemeasurements(ambi-
ent and hot), which solutions are then used to determine the
noise-wave temperatures given the cable measurements, and
so on until convergence is reached.
Inedges-analysis, the particular method of solving for
the calibration temperatures is flexible: any method that ac-
cepts the input measurements and returns an estimated set
of calibration temperatures can be defined and used. Here,
we will describe some of the details of the iterative scheme,
since it is used in the production of the results of B18. The
generaliterativeschemeisoutlinedin§3.3ofR.A.Monsalve
et al. (2017a). Note that there, instead of the internal load
temperatures𝑇 ′
NS and𝑇 ′
L, the coefficients are represented as
𝐶1 and𝐶 2. These are simply a scale and offset, respectively,
of an initial guess of the internal load temperatures:
𝑇 ′
NS =𝐶 1𝑇 guess
NS (27)
𝑇 ′
L =𝑇 guess
L −𝐶 2.(28)
The guesses themselves, as well as the values of𝐶1 and𝐶 2,
are not physically important and only affect the convergence
rate of the algorithm. A key aspect of the algorithm missing
from the description in R. A. Monsalve et al. (2017a) is that
the fit of the noise-wave temperatures to the cable data may
also account for a single cable delay. That is, writing the
model of the noise-wave contribution to the temperature as
𝑇NW =𝐾 0𝑇unc +𝐾 1𝑇cos +𝐾 2𝑇sin,(29)
we instead fit the following model:
𝑇NW =𝐾0𝑇unc (30)
+ [𝐾1 cos(2𝜋𝜏𝜈) −𝐾 2 sin(2𝜋𝜏𝜈) ] 𝑇cos
+ [𝐾1 sin(2𝜋𝜏𝜈) +𝐾 2 cos(2𝜋𝜏𝜈) ] 𝑇sin.
This expression is fit to the residual of the true temperature
to the current estimate of the calibrated spectrum without
noise-wave terms. Since𝐾1 and𝐾 2 are typically sinusoidal
with a phase difference of∼90◦ (c.f. Fig. 2), incorporating
a small delay in the model can improve its quality. The
best-fit value of𝜏is computed by fitting Eq. 30 for the
calibrationtemperaturecoefficients,conditionalonagiven𝜏,
and minimizing the RMS of the fit residuals over a regular
grid of𝜏.
There are several choices that can be made in the context
of the iterative scheme:
1. The number of iterations to use and whether to exit
when convergence is detected, or to continue for the
maximum number of iterations.
2. Theformsofthelinearmodelsusedforeachofthecal-
ibration temperatures, as well as the number of terms
50 60 70 80 90 100
Frequency [MHz]
□1.0
□0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Open Cable Noise-Wave Coeﬃcients
K0 K1 K2
Figure 2.The𝐾coefficients for the open cable calibration source.
The sinusoidal period of each is inversely proportional to the cable
length (8m in the case of this figure, which shows calibration mea-
surements for EDGES-2).
each uses, and the transformation used on the coordi-
nates (c.f. §4.1). Currently we allow only thePoly
model (Eq. 9) with𝑞=0andT (𝜈)=𝜈/𝜈 center. For
𝐶1 and𝐶 2 the spacing𝑝can be set, and the number
of terms for both must be the same,𝑛=𝑐 terms. For
the noise-wave temperatures, the spacing𝑝=0, and
the number of terms for all three must be the same,
𝑛=𝑤 terms.
3. Whethertheinternalloadparameters𝐶 1 and𝐶 2 should
be computed asmodelsduring the iterations, or in-
steadsimplyestimatedonaper-channelbasisandonly
smoothed with a model after convergence.
4. Whether the hot load loss (c.f. §5.6.1) should be
forward-modeled onto the ‘true’ temperature𝑇src (as
is formulated in Eq. 16), or applied in reverse to
correct the estimated calibrated spectrum ˆ𝑇hot, 𝑗 =
𝑇 hot
sca, 𝑗𝑄hot +𝑇 hot, 𝑗
off on each iteration𝑗.
An aspect of this iterative algorithm that must be carefully
considered is that the amount of structure that can be fit in
the noise-wave temperature models is directly related to the
amount of structure present in the𝐾-coefficients. This is
because𝑇 unc,𝑇 cos,and𝑇 sin aremodeledwithsamebasisfunc-
tions,andcanonlybeseparatedbytheirproductswith𝐾 0,𝐾 1
and𝐾 2. Lackofstructureinthe𝐾factorsresultsindegenera-
cies between the parameters of different noise-wave temper-
ature models. Since the𝐾are sinusoidal, their structure can

11
be quantified by the number of turning points within the fre-
quency range considered (c.f. Fig. 2). This interplay can be
seen in Fig. 3, where we plot the correlation matrices for the
parameters of the noise-wave temperatures. In this plot, the
dataarethoseusedinthecalibrationofB18(c.f. §8),andthe
model for each noise-wave temperature is a polynomial (c.f.
§8.2.2)with5terms. Eachpanelshowsthecorrelationsafter
fitting a different range of frequencies centered on 75MHz,
from a width of 50MHz down to 30MHz. As the frequency
rangeisreduced(lefttorightpanels),thecorrelationbetween
𝑇cos and𝑇 sin parameters(off-diagonalblocks)increases(from
light to dark red/blue), as does the condition number25 of the
linear system. This result means that the residuals become
insensitive to changes in𝑇cos and𝑇 sin. However, when these
changes get applied to a different set of𝐾coefficients than
thoseusedinthefititself(e.g. theantennainsteadofthecali-
brator sources) they may cause a bias in the calibration. This
biascanbelargelyavoidedbykeepingthenumberofturning
points in𝐾 1 and𝐾 2 per model coefficient above unity. This
requirement, in turn, sets a limit on the spectral complexity
of the noise-wave temperatures that can be calibrated.
5.5.Reflection Coefficients
The model of the expected power at the output of the re-
ceiver given an input temperature𝑇src, as quantified in Eq.
21, requires knowledge of the complex-valued reflection co-
efficients of both the input source and the receiver itself. Im-
portantly,Eq. 21isformulatedassumingthatthesequantities
are defined such that the reference plane of measurement is
a 50-Ωimpedance standard at the output of the source, just
prior to the SMA1 connector (c.f. Fig. 1). Furthermore,
Γrcv is defined as the reflection of current coming from the
direction of the input source and reflecting back towards it.
Conversely,Γsrc isdefinedasthereflectionofcurrentcoming
fromthedirectionofthereceivertowardsthereferenceplane
andreflectingbacktowardsthereceiver. Whilethemagnitude
|Γ|is the same regardless of the direction of the reflections,
thephaseisoffsetby180 ◦ betweendefinitions. Inthissection
we describe how these quantities are measured and modeled.
5.5.1.Calibrating Reflection Coefficient Reference Planes
The reflection coefficient of a given electrical subsystem
can be measured by a VNA. The VNA injects a known cur-
rent into the system and measures the returned current at the
port (c.f. Fig. 4). VNA measurements are very accurate,
though even small inaccuracies can propagate to biased sig-
nalrecovery(S.Sunetal.2024). Itisoftendesirabletoknow
the reflection coefficient at a different point in the system,
for example at the other end of a ‘subsystem’, as illustrated
25 Defined to be the maximum ratio of the relative error in the best-fit
parameters to the relative error in the data.
in Fig. 4. Indeed, each VNA must be physically connected
to the network, and this connection itself is a subsystem for
which the reflection coefficient on the side furthest from the
VNA is different than that measured by the VNA at its port.
The process of accounting for this connection is sometimes
referred to as ‘calibrating’ the VNA. More generally, we will
refer to the process of determining the reflection coefficient
at a point beyond a subsytem given the measurements at the
VNA port as ‘de-embedding’ the subsystem.
An accurate formalism for achieving this calibration and
de-embedding is presented in G. Gonzalez (1997) and R. A.
Monsalveetal.(2016). Thisformalismutilizesarelationthat
de-embeds the reflection coefficient based on the scattering
parameters of the subsystem:
Γcal = Γmeas −𝑆 11
𝑆22 (Γmeas −𝑆 11) +𝑆 12𝑆21
.(31)
The scattering parameters,𝑆 11, 𝑆12, 𝑆21, 𝑆22, are deter-
minedbyattachingasetofthree‘standards’—anOpen,Short
andLoad(OSL)formingaVNA‘calibrationkit’—totheout-
putofthesubsystem. AkeyinnovationoftheEDGESsystem
was to integrate this calibration directly into the receiver as
closetothereferenceplaneaspossible. Thereflectioncoeffi-
cientismeasuredwitheachstandardattachedandanaccurate
modeloftheintrinsicreflectioncoefficientofeachstandardis
calculated. Thescatteringparametersarethendeterminedby
solving the following linear equation: (R. A. Monsalve et al.
2016, Eq. 3)

1Γ 𝑂 Γ𝑂Γ′
𝑂
1Γ 𝑆 Γ𝑆 Γ′
𝑆
1Γ 𝐿 Γ𝐿 Γ′
𝐿


𝑆11
𝑆12𝑆21 −𝑆 11𝑆22
𝑆22

=

Γ′
𝑂
Γ′
𝑆
Γ′
𝐿

.(32)
Here the un-primed quantities are the intrinsic reflection co-
efficientsofeachstandard,computedusingthemodeldefined
in the Appendix of R. A. Monsalve et al. (2016), while the
primed quantities are the measurements with each standard
attachedtothesubsystem. WesolveEq. 32foreachmeasured
frequency channel independently. As an implementation de-
tail,thesystemissolvedusingthelinearleast-squaresmethod
provided innumpy.linalg.
CalibrationofthefullEDGESreceiversystemisessentially
comprisedofrepeatedapplicationsofthis‘de-embedding’to
strategic VNA measurements that bring the reference plane
totheinputatSMA1(andthenapplicationofthenoise-wave
formalism of §5.4). We now define how this de-embedding
is applied in practice to measure the reflection coefficients of
the receiver and the input sources.
5.5.2.MeasuringΓ rcv
Γrcv is the reflection coefficient defined at the reference
plane looking into the receiver input when the receiver is
connected to the rest of the signal chain electronics beyond

12
Tunc
Tcos
Tsin
50-100 MHz
1.2 TPs/Param
Condition Num: 4.49e+04
55-95 MHz
0.9 TPs/Param
Condition Num: 1.23e+05
60-90 MHz
0.7 TPs/Param
Condition Num: 7.53e+05
□1.0
□0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Figure 3.Correlation matrices for 5-term polynomial coefficients of the noise-wave temperatures for EDGES-2 calibration data. From left to
right, each correlation matrix considers a smaller frequency range of data, and therefore a different number of turning-points in the reflections
per parameter (TPs/Param listed in the title). The𝑇cos and𝑇 sin models become highly correlated below 1 turning point per parameter, indicated
by the off-diagonal blocks evolving from lighter to darker red/blue..
VNA SUBSYSTEM
I o u t
I i n
Г  =  I / Im e a s o u t i n
Г  c a l
Figure 4.Schematic of the measurement of a VNA, and its cali-
bration. A VNA measures the ratio of current that it injects to the
returned current. To calibrate the measurement to a different refer-
enceplane(beyondsomearbitrary‘subsystem’)requiresapplication
of Eq. 31 following Eq. 32.
the output SMA3. We measureΓrcv in the lab by externally
connectingaVNAtothereceiverinput(SMA1)andswitching
theSP2T 1 andSP2T 2 ontotheblueroute(Fig. 1). TheVNA
measurementiscalibratedatthereceiverinputusingexternal,
accurately modeled OSL standards. Specifically, we use the
Agilent 85033E calibration kit, which has known values for
theimpedance,delay,andlossofthe‘offset’withineachstan-
dard, as well as reactance of the termination elements. Im-
portantly,while‘load’calibrationstandardsnominallyhavea
resistance of 50Ω, our receiver calibration is highly sensitive
tothisvalue,andwemeasureitindependentlyforeachnewset
ofcalibrationmeasurementsusingthefour-wiremethodanda
high-accuracy (0.01Ω), high-resolution multimeter (such as
theFluke8845A)(R.A.Monsalveetal.2016). Inedges.cal
we define aCalkittype and several instances of calibration
kits(andtheirphysicalproperties)usedforEDGESreceivers.
5.5.3.MeasuringΓ src
The reflection coefficient of all input sources (including
both calibration sources and the antenna itself) must also be
measured and calibrated. Recall thatΓ src is defined at the
reference plane of theinput to the receiver(Fig. 1), and
that it refers to the ratio of current flowing towards the input
source from a 50 ohm generator, and reflected back towards
the generator.
ObtainingΓ src calibrated to the correct reference plane in-
volves measuring the reflection coefficient with a VNA at
SMA2 (c.f. Fig. 1), and then a two-step process of mov-
ing the reference plane back to correct location: firstly the
‘SMA2 + SP4T’ subsystem𝑟2𝑟326 is de-embedded, and then
the ‘SP2T2 + SMA1’ subsystem,𝑟1𝑟2. These two steps re-
quire different configurations of the hardware that must be
setup manually.
The steps are as follows:
1.Setup1:ConnectcalibratorsourcetoSMA1andVNA
to SMA2, ensuring SP2T1 is switched to the ‘calibra-
tion’ route (pink network in Fig. 1).
(a) SwitchSP4TtotheinputsourceandmeasureΓ 𝑟3
src
(i.e the reflection coefficient of the input source
at reference plane𝑟3).
(b) Switch SP4T to each internal OSL standard in
turn, measuringΓ𝑟3
OSL,int.
(c) Use Eq. 32 withΓ′
OSL →Γ 𝑟3
OSL,int andΓ OSL →
{1,−1,0}to solve for the𝑆-parameters of the
subsystem 𝑟3𝑟2:𝑆 𝑟2𝑟3
27.
(d) Use Eq. 31 to computeΓcal = Γ 𝑟2
src, given𝑆 𝑟2𝑟3
andΓ meas →Γ 𝑟3
src.
26 ThisdescriptionassumesthattheVNAporthasbeenpreviouslycalibrated
to50ohms,butifthisisnotthecase,anydeparturesfrom50ohmswould
implicitly be absorbed by the ‘SMA2 + SP4T’ subsystem.
27 Using ideal/generic values of{1,−1,0}for the ‘intrinsic’ΓOSL is per-
mitted since we will calibrate this inaccuracy away in Step 2.

13
2.Setup2:ReplacecalibratorsourceatSMA1withthree
external calibration standards (OSL) in turn.
(a) Re-measureΓ 𝑟3
OSL,int. Thisshouldbedoneonce–it
does not depend on the termination at SMA1.
(b) ConnecttheexternalOSLcalibratorseachinturn
to SMA1, and for each measureΓ𝑟3
OSL,ext.
(c) Compute𝑆 𝑟2𝑟3 usingthesamemethodasinSetup
1 but with the re-measuredΓ𝑟3
OSL,int from Setup 2
(a).
(d) Use Eq. 31 to de-embed𝑟2𝑟3 from each external
calkit standard in turn, i.e. to computeΓ𝑟2
OSL,ext
using𝑆 𝑟2𝑟3 andΓ meas →Γ 𝑟3
OSL,ext.
(e) Use Eq. 32 with the modelΓOSL derived from
physical properties of the external calkit28 and
Γ′
OSL →Γ 𝑟2
OSL,ext to compute𝑆𝑟1𝑟2.
Havingobtainedboth𝑆 𝑟2𝑟3 and𝑆 𝑟1𝑟2,therawmeasurement
ofΓ 𝑟3
src may be brought to the reference plane𝑟1 via repeated
applications of Eq. 31, de-embedding both subsystems in
turn. In practice, Setup 2 can only be run in the lab, since it
requires manually replacing the input source with calibration
standards,whichcannotbedoneinthefield(atleast,notwith
the EDGES-2 system), while Setup 1 can be performed any
time since it relies only on an automated mechanical switch
(SP4T). We thus compute𝑆𝑟1𝑟2 in the lab, and assume it is
stable over time so that it can be applied to calibrate the
antennainthefield,givenperiodicmeasurementsofΓ 𝑟3
ant and
𝑆𝑟2𝑟3. Similarly to our calibration ofΓrcv (Sec. 5.5.2), for
Setup 2 of the calibration ofΓsrc we use the Agilent 85033E
calibrationkitastheexternalOSL.Inordertokeepthesystem
asstableaspossible,weuseactivethermalcontrolinthefield.
5.6.Source Losses
Sources connected indirectly to the receiver port, for in-
stance via a cable, in general experience some loss. For
passivedevices,thislossmeansthattheireffectivenoisetem-
peratureisnotequaltotheirphysicaltemperature. Thiseffect
needs to be taken into account. The loss of noise power
coming from an input source over a particular two-port net-
work (e.g. a cable, balun or connection component) can be
computed as (A. E. E. Rogers 2014; R. A. Monsalve et al.
2017a):
1−𝐿 src = |𝑆12𝑆21|(1− |Γ in|2)
(1− |Γ out|2)|1−𝑆 22Γout|2 ,(33)
where the𝑆-parameters are those of the two-port network
itself,Γ in is the reflection coefficient at the reference plane
28 At this point the inaccuracy from Setup 1, in which ideal/generic values
wereusedfortheintrinsicreflectioncoefficientsoftheinternalstandards,
is calibrated out.
of the interface between the input source and the two-port
network, andΓout is the reflection coefficent at the reference
plane of the output of the two-port network.
Since the reference plane for calibration reflection coeffi-
cientsisattheinputtothereceiver,thisisequivalenttoΓ outfor
inputsources(whethertheyarecalibrationsourcesorthean-
tenna itself). Conversely,Γin can be computed fromΓout and
the𝑆-parameters of the two-port network by de-embedding
with Eq. 31.
The loss𝐿 src has both a multiplicative and additive effect
on the temperature passing through a component, according
to R. A. Monsalve et al. (2017a):
𝑇out =(1−𝐿 src)𝑇in +𝑇 amb𝐿src.(34)
That is, in the high-level framework of §2 (Eq. 6), we have
Gantloss =I(1−𝐿 src)and𝑇 loss =𝑇 amb𝐿src, where𝑇amb is the
physical temperature of the two-port network over which the
loss is experienced (often this is the ambient temperature of
the observation).
5.6.1.Hot Load Loss
In the EDGES-2 calibration setup, only the hot load is
indirectly connected to the receiver input, via a short semi-
rigid cable. Its loss,𝐿 hot, is computed with Eq. 33 using
Γout ≡Γ hot (asmeasuredandcalibratedtothereferenceplane
usingtheformalismof§5.5.3)and𝑆-parametersthataremea-
sured directly with a VNA in the lab (using the formalism of
§5.5.1 and R. A. Monsalve et al. (2016)). The𝑆-parameters
of this semi-rigid cable are generallynotmeasured for each
calibration, and we instead use a single measurement for all
re-calibrations.
5.6.2.Antenna Loss
The EDGES-2 antenna is connected to the receiver input
via both a Roberts balun and a short connector. Similarly
to the hot-load loss, we use Eq. 33 withΓout ≡Γ ant. Here,
however, instead of directly measuring the𝑆-parameters we
use an analytical model based on transmission line theory
(W. K. Roberts 1957). In this model, each component (e.g.
thebalunandtheconnector)istreatedasacoaxialcablecon-
sisting of inner and outer conductors as well as a dielectric,
where their physical dimensions and electrical constitutive
parametersareknown. Thisinformationcanbeusedtocom-
pute electrical properties of the cable, which can be used in
standard transmission line theory (S. Ramo & J. Whinnery
1953) to compute scattering parameters(e.g. G. V. C. Allen
et al. 2026), and the components are cascaded to produce the
full scattering matrix (c.f App. A). For more details on this
approachseetheEDGESmemoseries(A.E.E.Rogers2012,
2015b)
Presenting the full equations relating physical dimensions
and electrical constitutive parameters of coaxial cables to

14
their electrical properties, and these electrical properties to
the scattering parameters, is beyond the scope of this work,
andwereferthereadertoworkssuchasS.Ramo&J.Whin-
nery(1953);J.Dunsmore(2020)forthesewell-knownresults.
However, we note that theedges.cal.eemodule contains
convenientclassesfordefiningcoaxialcablesandtheirprop-
erties, representing them as transmission lines, and comput-
ing scattering matrices. The module also contains methods
for converting the representation of scattering matrices (e.g.
betweenTandS, c.f. App. A) and combining multiple
components that are connected either in parallel, series or
cascaded.
5.7.Beam-Factor Chromaticity Correction
The antennas sensitivity pattern, or beam, changes with
frequency,andthischromaticitytranslatesintospectralstruc-
ture in the antenna temperature since this beam weights the
foregrounds. This effect has been extensively studied in the
literature (G. Bernardi et al. 2015; T. J. Mozdzen et al. 2017;
K. Tauscher et al. 2018; D. Anstey et al. 2020; J. J. Hibbard
et al. 2020, 2024; T. J. Mozdzen et al. 2019; P. H. Sims et al.
2023,2025)andisdifficulttoaccountfor. Acommonstrategy
tomitigatethechromaticeffectsofthebeamistodividebya
‘beamfactorchromaticitycorrection’factor(R.A.Monsalve
etal.2017b;T.J.Mozdzenetal.2019;P.H.Simsetal.2023).
This strategy can only provide a perfect correction of the
datawhenemployingperfectbeamandskyforegroundmod-
els. Nonetheless, it tends toreducethe chromaticity of the
observations so long as the beam model is sufficiently accu-
rate.
The beam factor as a function of frequency at some local
sidereal time (LST)𝛼can be defined as (T. J. Mozdzen et al.
2019)
𝐺beam (𝜈, 𝛼)=
∫
2𝜋 𝑑2Ω𝑇 sky(Ω, 𝜈ref, 𝛼)𝐵(Ω, 𝜈)∫
2𝜋 𝑑2Ω𝑇 sky(Ω, 𝜈ref, 𝛼)𝐵(Ω, 𝜈 ref)
,(35)
or alternatively with the same form but with𝜈ref →𝜈for the
factor𝑇 sky (e.g. Eq. 4 from R. A. Monsalve et al. 2017b and
Eq. A1 from P. H. Sims et al. 2023). Under either definition,
𝐺beam is by construction unity at𝜈ref.
In practice, computing Eq. 35 requires making a num-
ber of choices. The first choice is the sky model,𝑇sky. In
edges-analysis, we provide a unified interface to several
publicly available all-sky models, including that of C. G. T.
Haslam et al. (1982) and de-striped versions of it M. Re-
mazeilles et al. (2015) at 408MHz, as well as maps at lower
frequencies,suchasthoseofT.L.Landecker&R.Wielebin-
ski (1970) at 150MHz and A. E. Guzmán et al. (2011) at
45MHz. Maps at higher frequencies are also provided that
enable studies of Radio Recombination Lines (RRLs A. K.
Vydula et al. 2024), e.g. the WHAM (L. M. Haffner et al.
2003; D. Paradis et al. 2012), Planck CO maps (P. a. R. Ade
etal.2014)at115GHzandHI4PI(N.B.Bekhtietal.2016)at
1.4GHz. All of these maps are defined at a single frequency.
To determine the sky model over the range of frequencies
measured by EDGES, we provide a number of spectral index
models. These models specify the spatial evolution of the
spectral index, and include simple models such as a uniform
spectral index and others that evolve smoothly as a function
of galactic latitude.
A second choice is the beam model,𝐵. In
edges-analysis, we provide a unified interface to simu-
lated beam data (e.g. from Feko and CST) similar to that
provided bypyuvdata, but without features unnecessary for
thepurposesofglobal-signaldata. Toperformtheproductof
beamwithsky,thebeammustbeinterpolatedtothepositions
of the pixels of the sky model. While there are many sub-
tletiesofbeaminterpolationforcomplex-valuedantennavolt-
age beams (P. Kittiwisit et al. 2025), the real-valued antenna
powerbeamneededhereposesfewerchallenges. Weallowei-
ther spherical bivariate spline interpolation29 or regular-grid
interpolationinwhichthezenithisrepresentedmultipletimes
in the grid. Differences in the interpolated values between
these methods are insignificant.
A third choice concerns how to compute the beam factor
overarangeofLSTscorrespondingtotheobservations,rather
thanatasingleLST.Todothis,edges-analysiscomputes
the numerator and denominator separately for a regular grid
of LSTs covering the observed range. The resolution of this
gridcanbesetbytheanalyst. Followingthischoice,boththe
numeratoranddenominatorcanbeinterpolatedtoadifferent
set of LSTs (potentially at a higher resolution). Then, two
basicoptionsareavailable: either(i)average𝐺 beam (𝑡)overall
LSTs within the observed range or (ii) average the numerator
and denominator separately within the observed LST range,
and then form their ratio. In addition, to ensure the beam
factor is spectrally smooth in case of numerical artifacts, it
may be fit with a smooth linear model and the model can be
used instead of the directly simulated values. Ideally, this
should be avoided by ensuring that the simulation itself is
accurate.
6.FLAGGING
All spectral data are contaminated to some level by vari-
ous instrumental or foreground artifacts. While effects that
broadly affect many channels and times (e.g. beam chro-
maticity, receiver gains, galactic foregrounds) must be well-
modelled and calibrated, effects that are compact in time
and/orfrequency(e.g. terrestrialRFI,lightning,solarevents,
hardware malfunction) may simply be flagged. This flagging
has the bonus that these effects need not be well-modeled in
29 Using theRectSphereBivariateSplinemethod fromscipy

15
principle30; flags can be set on a relative basis (i.e. flagging
outliers),orthroughinspectionofancillarydata(e.g. ambient
humidity or environmental temperature fluctuations).
In general, given the extreme precision requirements on
global21cmmeasurements,anydatasuspectedofbeingcon-
taminatedbeyondtheabilitytoaccuratelycalibrate(towithin
a few mK on scales of tens of MHz) should be removed.
There are two negative consequences of flagging that must
be kept in mind. The first is a loss of sensitivity. However,
given that the requisite sensitivity can be reached in a matter
of a few days of observations with most experiments, this is
not a strong argument for foregoing suspect data. The sec-
ond is that it is possible to bias the measurements depending
on the location of the flags in frequency and time (see §7
for a discussion of this effect). The severity of this problem
is reduced when there is no correlation between the metric
definingtheflagsandtheamplitude/shapeoftheforegrounds
and cosmic signal. Nevertheless, to achieve unbiased results
afterflaggingdoesrequireaccuratein-paintingoftheflagged
regions, and large contiguous flagged regions can be difficult
to model, potentially resulting in spurious structure.
To minimize over-flagging, a common strategy is to flag in
stages,flaggingthesmallamountofworst-offendingrawdata,
thenaveragingtohighersignal-to-noiseandfindingnewout-
liers,andcontinuinginthisfashionuntilthedataaresuspected
to be clean. For EDGES data, which are single-polarization,
we will always talk about data being two-dimensional, re-
ferring to time and frequency. At any stage of averaging,
either one or both of these axes may have been smoothed
and down-sampled. Furthermore, the ‘time’ axis may really
representdifferentchunksoftime,oritmayrepresentbinsof
LSTintowhichmultiplerawintegrationshavebeenaveraged
(potentially from multiple days of observation).
For EDGES data, there are two main kinds of flagging
strategies: the first is to flag entire spectra—either an entire
integration,anentireLSTbin,oranentirenight,butalwaysall
channelsfor that particular time selection. This strategy can
befurtherbrokendownintoflagsbasedonexternalmeasure-
ments (e.g. weather) and absolute or relative characteristics
of the spectral data themselves. The second kind of strategy
flags individual integration-channels (i.e. arbitrary pixels on
a 2D time-frequency ‘waterfall’). This strategy can be done
by considering each integration (or LST-bin) independently
orbyconsideringtheentire2Dwaterfallsimultaneously. We
refer to this frequency-dependent flagging as ‘RFI flagging’,
though the integration-channels flagged may have contribu-
30 There is a caveat to this picture; while channels and integrations can be
flagged wholesale, in order to achieve unbiased averages requires ‘in-
painting’ the flagged gaps (c.f. §7), which can be viewed as a kind of
crude modeling-and-subtraction of the systematic.
tions from effects other than terrestrial RFI. All flagging in
edges-analysisisdefinedintheedges.filtersmodule.
6.1.Integration-Based Flagging Strategies
6.1.1.Ancillary/Metadata Flags
The following filters based on external data are available
withinedges.filters:
•Time-Dependent Auxiliary Data(aux_filter):
SinceGSDataobjects contain a time-length table at-
tributeauxiliary_measurementswhich may con-
tain arbitrary quantities, the data can be flagged based
onthresholdrangesonanyparticularauxiliaryquantity
contained here. For EDGES-2, parallel measurements
ofambienthumidity,ambienttemperature,thereceiver
physical temperature and the uncalibrated power spec-
tral density (PSD) measured by the Analog-to-Digital
Converter (ADC) are recorded and can be associated
with each dataset. While any of these may be used to
filterparticularintegrations,onlytheADCPSDisused
in the specific analysis demonstrated in §8.
•SunAltitude(sun_filter): flagdatawhenthesunis
withinacertainsetofaltitudes(e.g. abovethehorizon).
The sun is a bright (>105K; P. Zhang et al. 2022)
and variable radio source with bursts that complicate
spectral model fitting (V. Vasanth et al. 2025).
•Moon Altitude(moon_filter): flag data when the
mooniswithinacertainsetofaltitudes(e.g. abovethe
horizon). Themoonisreflectiveandcanbeasourceof
reflected terrestrial RFI (J. H. N. Pattison et al. 2026).
•AstronomicalSourceAltitude(sky_coord_filter):
flag data when a particular fixed coordinate (in
RA/Dec) is within a certain set of altitudes. For
simplicity, we use Astropy’sfrom_namefunctionality
so that particular named objects can be excluded from
the data.
•Galactic Centre Altitude(galaxy_filter): as a
special case of the sky-coordinate filter, we provide
a convenience function that flags data when the galac-
tic centre is at given elevations (default: above the
horizon).
6.1.2.Flags based on Spectral Properties
Sometimes a particular single spectrum (whether raw in-
tegration or LST bin) has properties which indicate that the
entire spectrum should be ignored. Inedges-analysisthe
following strategies are defined for removing entire spectra
basedontheirinternalproperties(notethatherewegivegen-
eral filters, while in §8.2.1 we will give specific examples of
these filters in practice):

16
1.Negative Power(negative_power_filter): Power
measurements𝑃 srcshouldbestrictlypositive. Anyneg-
ativevaluesindicateamalfunctionofthespectrometer
and therefore these integrations should be flagged.
2.Peak Power(peak_power_filter): When RFI
spikes are too large there is a danger of the system
being saturated, resulting in non-linearities that af-
fect the entire spectrum. A strategy to detect this
case is to compute the ratio of the highest single-
channel power within some frequency range to the
mean within some (potentially different) frequency
range:𝑅=𝑃 max/⟨𝑃⟩ {𝜈 min,𝜈 max } and flag the integra-
tion if it is beyond some large threshold. To make the
strategy more robust, the mean ignores any channels
whose power is>10%of𝑃 max. This is a crude filter,
butifthethresholdislarge,itfindstheworstoffenders.
3.StrongRFISpike(single_channel_spike_filter):
this filter again focuses on spikes that may cause non-
linearity,butusesadifferentstrategythattargetssingle
channels. Here, if any channel in a given band is
more than some threshold greater than the average
of its immediately neighbouring channels, the entire
integration is flagged. This is applied to the FM band
specifically in the analysis of §8.
4.ModelResidualRMS(rms_filter): somesystemat-
icsarenotcompactspikeslikeRFI,butrathermanifest
in broader spectral structures. When these are beyond
theexpectationofanyofthecalibrationmodels,itmay
be best to remove the data. This removal can be done
by fitting a smooth model within some band and com-
puting the RMS of the residuals to this model, finally
flagging if this RMS is beyond a given threshold. This
strategy can be applied early in the pipeline with very
simple rigid models, targeted frequency ranges, and
largethresholds. Laterinthepipelineitcanbeapplied
with more flexible models, on larger frequency ranges,
and lower thresholds.
5.FractionalPowerinBand(power_percent_filter):
this test computes the ratio of the sum of all power in
a particular frequency range to the sum of all power
within the entire spectrum, and flags the integration if
this ratio is outside a certain threshold range (either
too small or large). Such a filter can be used in highly
bespoke ways by tuning the threshold empirically; for
example in the EDGES-2 pipeline it is used to identify
rare cases of hardware failure.
6.2.RFI Flagging
AllmethodsofRFIflaggingcentrearoundidentifyingpar-
ticular integration-channels (or contiguous groups of such)
as being statistically significant outliers. Many algorithms
forRFIidentificationhavebeendevelopedforlow-frequency
radio astronomy, typically in the context of interferometric
observations (e.g. SSINS (M. J. Wilensky et al. 2019),
AOFlagger (A. R. Offringa et al. 2012), and the HERA xRFI
algorithms (Z. Abdurashidova et al. 2022)). Common ele-
ments of all algorithms are to recognize that RFI is generally
compact in both time and frequency, that there are partic-
ular frequency bands where it is more likely to be present
(e.g. FM and Orbcomm). Since the pattern of RFI in a 2D
time-frequency waterfall is difficult to model, and its ampli-
tude is all but impossible to predict, most strategies utilize
some form of outlier detection, rather than an absolute crite-
rion. This approach requires establishing a baseline both for
the expected underlying signal without RFI, and its level of
channel-to-channel variation (from e.g. thermal noise). Dif-
ferences between approaches are typically centered on how
they determine these two baselines.
The primary challenge is that to establish the baseline
model of non-RFI-contaminated data (and its variance) re-
quiresusingthedatathemselves. LargeRFIexcursionsinthe
data can significantly bias these baseline estimates, resulting
inpoorflaggingaccuracy. Theedges.filters.xrfimod-
uleprovidesseveralRFI-detectionalgorithmsthatutilizedif-
ferent strategies for mitigating this bias. Having multiple al-
gorithmsavailableasplug-and-playreplacementsmeansthat
the ramifications of the choice of algorithm can more easily
be explored. At this time,edges.filters.xrfionly pro-
vides algorithms that treat each time-sample independently,
though in the future this implementation will be expanded to
consider full 2D waterfalls simultaneously.
6.2.1.A Generalized Iterative RFI Algorithm
OnewaytomitigatetheeffectoflargeRFIexcursionsisto
flagiteratively. Inthisway,theworstoffenderscanbeflagged
first,sothattheydonotcontributetothedeterminationofthe
baselines in future integrations. In this section, we outline a
general iterative algorithm that we will fill out later.
Wehaveasinput ®𝑑representingthesingle-integrationspec-
trum data,®𝑤representing the weights of each datum (zero
when it is already flagged from some other filter) and®𝜉init
representing a set of a priori flags that will be re-considered
after the first iteration, but which are useful for ignoring data
thatarelikelytobiastheestablishmentoftheinitialbaselines.
Wealsogiveaminimumnumberofiterationsrequiredbefore
returning,𝑛 min. Alg. 1 outlines the algorithm.
In Alg. 1, there are many generic methods that must be
specified. Featuresofthealgorithmarethatoneachiteration,
the method used for determining the model of the true data
(i.e. without RFI) and the model of the true standard devi-
ation can be (optionally) updated, by changing the method
parameters (indicated bySetModelParamsandSetSTD-

17
Algorithm1General iterative algorithm for flagging RFI.
®𝜉out ← ®𝜉init
𝑖←0
𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒←false
while¬𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒and𝑖 < 𝑛 max do
®𝑤𝑖 ← ®𝑤· ®𝜉out
threshold←SetThreshold(𝑖)
®𝑝𝑖 ←SetModelParams(𝑖)
®𝑚←ComputeDataModel( ®𝑑,®𝑤𝑖,®𝑝𝑖)
®𝑝′𝑖 ←SetSTDModelParams(𝑖)
®𝜎←ComputeSTDModel( ®𝑑,®𝑚,®𝑤𝑖,®𝑝′
𝑖)
®𝑧← ( ®𝑑− ®𝑚)/®𝜎
𝜉𝑖 ←𝑧 >threshold
𝜉i =W atershed(𝜉𝑖)
if𝜉 𝑖 =𝜉 out and®𝑝𝑖 =®𝑝𝑖−1 and ®𝑝′𝑖 =®𝑝′
𝑖−1 then
𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒←true
end if
𝜉out ←𝜉 𝑖
𝑖←𝑖+1
end while
ModelParams). Once these are determined, flags are com-
puted simply by comparing the𝑍-score of the residuals to a
threshold, which may also be adapted on each iteration, and
then applying theW atershedalgorithm, which we define
below. The flags are fully reconsidered on each iteration;
flags from the previous iteration are used only to inform the
baseline models, and may be un-flagged depending on these
updatedbaselines. Thealgorithmstopswhennonewflagsare
found and the model parameters have not changed between
iterations, or when𝑛max iterations have occurred.
Beforedescribingvariouspossiblechoicesforthemethods
to compute the data and variance models, we describe the
W atershedalgorithm. This algorithm simply recognizes
that when RFI is detected in a particular channel, it is more
likely that the surrounding channels might also be contami-
nated, even if they were not beyond the set threshold. To this
end,theW atershedalgorithmacceptsalistofpairs(𝜅 ′
𝑗 , 𝑛 𝑗 )
where𝜅 𝑗 ∈R≥1and𝑛 𝑗 ∈Nand flags the𝑛 𝑗 channels to
the left and𝑛𝑗 channels to the right of each channel in which
𝑧/thresh> 𝜅 𝑗.
Computing the baseline models of the data and their vari-
ance can be done in numerous ways. In general, the data
model can be computed by applying a low-pass filter to the
spectrum. For simplicity and ease of propagating errors, in
edges.filters.xrfiwe only support linear filters, such
that the filter may be expressed as an𝑁𝜈 ×𝑁 𝜈 matrixW,
and the model of some data®𝑦expressed asW®𝑦. In practice,
edges.filters.xrfisupports buildingWin three ways:
(i) as a circulant matrix defined by any compact convolution
kernel that is normalized to unity (e.g. Gaussian, BoxCar;
(ii) as a general linear model (utilisingedges.modeling,
c.f. §4),W=M(M TM) −1MT; and (iii) as a median filter31.
For smooth parametric models (e.g. polynomial or Fourier-
basedmodels),acriticalchoiceisthenumberoftermstofit 32.
Analogously, for low-pass filters, the size of the kernel deter-
minesthespectralcomplexityoftheresultingsmootheddata.
Ineithercase,thehyper-parametersofW(i.e. thekernelsize
or number of linear coefficients) may be updated between
iterations via theSetModelParamsprocedure. Ultimately,
we may write the smoothed data as
𝒎=W𝒅.(36)
The model for®𝜎can be generically computed in much the
samemanneras®𝑚,butconsideringthe‘data’tobethesquared
residuals,𝑟 𝑖 =(𝑑 𝑖 −𝑚 𝑖)2. Since the variance is positive
definite,itisadvantageoustoapply𝑊onthelogarithmofthe
squaredresiduals,𝜌 𝑖 =ln𝑟 𝑖,restoringthefinalresulttolinear
scaling, and adjusting for the Jacobian of the transformation:
𝝈=1.888×
√︁
exp(W𝝆).(37)
For the median-filter, these transformations are not optimal,
and instead we use the median absolute deviation (MAD):
𝝈MAD =
√︁
0.456×W med 𝒓.(38)
Inedges.filter.xrfi,Wcan be specified differently
for computing𝒅versus𝝈. In practice, convolutional kernels
(which estimate the running mean of the spectrum) tend to
performpoorlywhenmodeling𝒅sinceitisoftenintrinsically
asteeppower-law. Centredsymmetrickernelsproducebiased
estimates of the mean in such scenarios.
6.2.2.Sliding Window Flagging
Here we describe a small alteration to the general iterative
RFIalgorithmthatisimportantbecauseitisthemethodused
to produce the results in B18. In this algorithm, instead
of computing the full®𝜎for all channels, and then using it
to determine the flags based on𝑧, we compute𝜎𝜈 and its
corresponding𝑧 𝜈 andflagsforthecentralchannelofasliding
window. Importantly, if the channel is flagged, its weight is
zero for the next sliding of the window.
This approach is fundamentally different from Alg. 1, and
has some undesirable properties. For example, the resulting
flags depend on which direction the window slides across
the channels. The difference between the algorithms can be
summarized by requiring that all lines of Alg. 1 between
the computation of𝜎and the application of theW atershed
algorithmbeinsidealoopoverfrequencychannels,whereon
31 While the median filter can be written as a matrixWcontaining only
zeros and ones, it is technically not a linear operation since the matrix
itself depends on the data vector.
32 For simplicity, we consider only linear models inedges-analysis.

18
eachiterationofthisinnerloop,onlyasinglecentralchannel
can be flagged, plus any that are flagged by the watershed
algorithm.
7.AVERAGING
Once contaminated data have been flagged, it is often de-
sirabletoaveragethedatatoincreasetheSNR,whichaidsin
identifying lower-level contamination and reducing the ulti-
mate data volume.
EDGES data have two axes over which they can be av-
eraged: times and frequencies. However, it is conceptually
useful to differentiate between different observing days at
the same (or a similar) LST vs the same night and different
LSTs. Informationispreservedwhenaveragingisperformed
over identically distributed data (or close thereto). The only
axis over which this is generally the case isdays. Neverthe-
less, since EDGES does not observe on a regular LST grid,
each night will observe slightly different LSTs. Thus, aver-
aging within frequency bins or LST bins is not information-
preserving—thesignalandforegroundsevolvewithinthebin.
Whiletheeffectofthisconvolutionkernelonthecosmicsig-
nal is very minor (as it evolves slowly over both frequency
and LST), a more important problem arises when there are
frequency-dependent flags.
As is well-studied in the interferometry literature,
frequency-dependent flagging patterns can cause spectral
structure when spectra with varying amplitudes are averaged
together (M. J. Wilensky et al. 2022; K.-F. Chen et al. 2025).
The cause is very simple: two different spectra averaged to-
gether will generally result in the mean of the two, but if
one is flagged for a particular channel, the average will jump
suddenly to the value of the unflagged spectrum. If the ex-
pectationofthetwospectraisthesame,thisisnotaproblem.
However, in practice, these two spectra may be drawn from
different days in the same LST bin. However, one may be
towards the start of the bin, and the other towards the end
(perhaps they are separated by an hour). Over an hour, the
beam-weightedamplitudeoftheskycanchangesignificantly,
which would result in large spurious spectral structure. In-
deed, D. Lewis (2021) showed that for flagging fractions
of∼10%, the RMS error on the naively-averaged spectrum
withinLSTbinsatthenativeEDGESresolutionofjust39sec
is expected to be more than 50mK unless the Galaxy is be-
low the horizon. This effect is not only a problem when data
are flagged. The same arguments apply when the data are
non-uniformly weighted (S. G. Murray 2020). A common
solution to this problem is to ‘in-paint’ flagged data with an
estimateofitstruevalue. Wecanextendthisstrategytoarbi-
trary non-uniformly weighted data. Let𝑚be a model of the
data𝑑,andassumethatthedataweightsareinversevariances
(i.e. the weighted-average is minimum-variance), then the
standard weighted average is:
¯𝑑=W −1
∑︁
𝑖
𝑤 𝑖 𝑑𝑖,(39)
which has the variance
Var( ¯𝑑)=W −1 ≡
 ∑︁
𝑖
𝑤 𝑖
! −1
.(40)
Nevertheless,asdiscussedabove,if𝑑 𝑖 isdrawnfromadiffer-
entdistributionthan𝑑 𝑗,and𝑤 𝑖 ≠𝑤 𝑗 thiscanleadtospectral
structure being introduced. Instead, we use the model:
ˆ¯𝑑=𝑁 −1
𝑁∑︁
𝑖
𝑚𝑖 + W −1
𝑁∑︁
𝑖
𝑤 𝑖 (𝑑 𝑖 −𝑚 𝑖).(41)
That is, we use the un-weighted sum of the models plus the
weighted sum of residuals. In the case that all data have the
same mean and the models are good representations of the
data, the expectation of ˆ¯𝑑is the true mean. Furthermore,
under these same assumptions, the variance of this average
is stillW −1. Indeed, if all weights are the same, then this
reduces to a standard mean. If the weights are binary – i.e.
all zeros or ones – then this is equivalent to in-painting the
‘missing’ data and taking a standard average.
Inedges-analysisevery function that averages
spectra—whetheroverfrequencychannels,LSTsordays—is
able to use this formula. This is achieved byGSDataobjects
being able to hold both.dataand.residualsarrays (the
latter can be added by particular functions that model the
data).
A choice must also be made about how to propagate the
expected thermal noise of the data. Inpygsdata(as in
pyuvdata),the‘variance’ofthedataispropagatedsimplyby
tracking the number of raw samples that have contributed to
each particular datum. Under the assumption of Gaussianity
of the spectra, this number of samples can be translated into
a variance via the radiometric equation for thermal noise. In
detail, this can yield biased estimates of the variance for data
averagedfromheterogeneoussources,sincethetrueresulting
variance is the sum of the variances of each source, which
may vary not only due to their number of samples, but also
due to the temperature of the sky for each particular datum.
Ontheotherhand,ingeneralrawdataarenotcalibrated,and
therefore knowing the true temperature of the sky before av-
eraging is often difficult or impossible. Simply propagating
the number of samples is a reasonable compromise.
While rigorous propagation of the number of samples is
the preferred strategy, for legacy reasonsedges-analysis
provides a flexible set of strategies for choosing the weights
touseinbothaveragingandmodeling. Inbrief,thecodesup-
portssettingtheweightstobe(i)theflagged-samples𝜉 𝑖𝑛𝑖,(ii)
binary flags,𝜉𝑖, (iii) binary flagged-samples𝑤𝑖 =1 if𝜉 𝑖𝑛𝑖 >

19
0 else 0, (iv) un-flagged samples𝑛𝑖 and (v) uniformly unity.
These choices are consistently applied across all averaging
and modeling functions. In all averaging functions, the av-
eraged number of samples (which can be used to compute
the variance of the average) is computed as the sum of the
flagged-samplesÍ
𝑖 𝜉𝑖𝑛𝑖 regardless of the weighting strategy.
With these general concepts introduced, we now describe
some particulars concerning averaging over frequencies and
LSTs (averaging over days is a simple matter of applying Eq.
41 where the dataset includes each night). Frequencies and
LSTs are different because typically these arebinnedrather
thancompletelyaveraged. Binningissimplydown-sampling,
whichisawell-studiedconceptofsignal-processing. Toavoid
aliasing effects when down-sampling a signal requires first
smoothing with a convolutional kernel and then decimating
bykeepingevery𝑘 𝑡 ℎsamplesuchthatthesamplesarespaced
by the desired bin size (F. J. Harris 2004). The choice of
kernel should be driven by considerations of the factor by
which the signal is to be downsampled.
Inedges-analysis, down-sampling frequencies can use
either the box-car or Gaussian kernels for smoothing before
decimation. In the former case, the size of the box-car is set
equal to the decimation factor, in order to avoid correlations
between neighbouring points in the resulting signal. This
choice is equivalent to performing a direct weighted-average
(using Eq. 41) over all channels in each bin. The Gaussian
kernelisdefinedtohaveaFWHMof1.2Δ,whereΔisthedec-
imation factor. This kernel introduces correlations between
resultingaveragedchannels,whicharecurrentlyunaccounted
inedges-analysis’s propagation of uncertainties. Never-
theless, when the decimation factor is≥8this correlation is
less than 0.1%. After smoothing, some channels that were
originallyflagged(orhadzerosamples)becomeun-flaggedas
they average in surrounding channels. We provide an option
to re-flag these channels based on the criteria of either how
manyimmediatelyadjacentchannelswereoriginallyflagged,
or the number of samples in the pixel after convolution with
the same Gaussian kernel.
Down-sampling in LST is somewhat complicated by the
periodic nature of LSTs, as well as the potential for entire
LSTs to be missing from the data (and therefore the signal
be sampled irregularly). To overcome this complication, we
choose a specific LST at which the phase wraps (the lower
edge of the first bin), and we only use direct application of
Eq. 41 within each LST bin (equivalent to a box-car kernel,
if the data are regular).
8.APPLICATION: REPRODUCING RESULTS OF B18
As a demonstration of the data interface and analysis algo-
rithmspresentedinthiswork,wereproducetheresultsofB18.
This application of the software achieves a few purposes; (i)
a demonstration of how these algorithms can be used; (ii) a
more comprehensive and explicit description of the precise
analysis choices that formed this important result compared
to the original publication; and (iii) a reproducible and pub-
licly accessible workflow that can be used by the community
to more thoroughly examine the result.
Fig. 5 outlines the analysis pipeline designed for this
dataset. Starting with 138 days of raw spectrum data (from
September2016throughtoApril2017),afullsetoflab-based
calibration data, and a set of measurements of the reflection
coefficients of the antenna taken in the field, the data first
undergoes quality checks that flag entire integrations, then is
averaged over full days before a first round of RFI excision is
performed. Following this, the data is calibrated both for the
receiver gain and also other losses such as beam chromatic-
ity. Oncecalibrated,theaveragedspectrafromeachnightare
averagedtogether,aftersomefinaldeeperqualitychecks,and
a final round of RFI excision is performed.
Inthispaper,ourgoalissimplytodetailtheanalysischoices
thatwere made, with some brief description of their motiva-
tion. Inparticular,wewillnotinvestigatetheimpactofmod-
ifying these choices, except in some specific cases. Neither
is it the purpose of this work to defend these choices. These
important goals will be pursued in Maheshet al., (in prep.),
using the flexible pipeline we demonstrate here.
Note that there are many other possible pipeline pathways
that could have been chosen, beyond the choice of analysis
parameters at each step. For instance, the data could be first
binned in narrow LST bins, and quality checks could be per-
formed by comparing data in the same LST bin over days.
Alternatively, instead of a two-step averaging (over integra-
tionsinanight,thenoverdays),amulti-stepprocesscouldbe
envisaged (narrow LST bins, then days, then gradually grow
thesizeoftheLSTbins)inwhichbetweeneachaveragingfur-
therqualitychecksareapplied. Sincetheanalysismethodsin
edges-analysisare loosely coupled, resting on the unified
data interface ofpygsdata, it makes no strong assumptions
abouttheflowofanalysis,andsuchdiversepipelinesareeasy
to implement.
8.1.Pipeline Framework
Whileedges-analysisdoes not place any strong con-
straints on how an analysis of data may be implemented
(e.g. whether the data is interactively explored in a Jupyter
notebook, more rigidly processed through a python script,
or through any other data-processing pipeline framework),
we have found that for reproducible analysis, using a dedi-
cated data-pipeline framework is highly advantageous. Such
pipelines, which are becoming very popular due to the rise
of machine-learning applications, enable simple and robust
parallelization of the compute, reproducible and transparent
runs over different parameter choices, the ability to resume
processing after a failure, and many other benefits.

20
Raw Spectra
Night 1
Raw Spectra
Night 2
Raw Spectra
Night 3
...
Galactic Centre Filter
Auxiliary data filter
Power Percent filter
Dicke Calibration
Scale to approxi-
mate temperature
Orbcomm filter
MaxFM filter
RMS filter
Average Integrations
Select Frequencies
40−100MHz
RFI Excision (I)
Frequency Down-
sample (x8)
Lab-Based
Calibration Data Compute®𝑇cal
Antenna VNA
Measurements CalibrateΓant
ModelΓant
Compute𝐺BFCC
FEKO Beam
HASLAM Sky
Receiver Cal.
Select Freq. 51-99MHz
Balun+Connector
Loss Correction
Beam Chromatic-
ity Correction
Frequency Down-
sample (x8)
Per-night RMS filter
RFI Excision (II)
Average over nights
Averaged
Spectrum
CAL SETUP
CALIBRATION
AVERAGING
FILTER
INPUT DATA
LEGEND
Figure 5.The full analysis pipeline used to produce case ‘H2’ of Fig. 1 of B18. Each colored box is a specific analysis step, while the
black rectangles that contain multiple steps are major components of the pipeline, each implemented as a single Jupyter notebook. The flow is
generally from left to right, and from top to bottom within each major component. Different colors represent different kinds of analysis steps
(see figure legend).
In this work, we use the popularnextflowframework (P.
Di Tommaso et al. 2017)33, which has been developed pri-
marilyforscienceapplications(ratherthanmachine-learning
or data science applications) and is used by several 21cm
experiments (e.g. NenuFAR; S. Munshi et al. 2024). In
conjunction with nextflow as a workflow orchestration tool,
we implement each major component of the pipeline as an
executable Jupyter notebook using thepapermilllibrary to
enable parameterization of each notebook. This approach,
which follows the lead of recent work by the HERA experi-
ment(Z.Abdurashidovaetal.2025),ishelpfulforinteractive
debugging and data exploration (e.g. when a notebook fails
for a particular piece of data, the partially-executed failed
notebook can be loaded interactively and the data leading to
thefailurecanbedirectlyexplored,acceleratingdevelopment
time). Itisalsohelpfulforincludinginlinedatavisualization
and well-formatted in-context documentation explaining the
choicesmadeintheformatofadynamically-producedreport.
We make thenextflowpipeline definition and associated
executable notebooks (as well as resulting executed note-
books/reports) for this work publicly available on Github34
(S. Murray et al. 2025). This pipeline is fully able to be run
on any system—the required datasets will be automatically
33 https://nextflow.io
34 https://github.com/edges-collab/edges-bowman2018-pipeline
downloadedandcacheduponfirstrun. Wealsomakethedata
directly available via Zenodo; both the data required to solve
for the receiver calibration (S. G. Murray et al. 2025)35 and
the spectra from the field36.
8.2.Workflow
Wenowdescribethefullanalysispipeline,specifyingeach
methodological choice and each parameter. Each subsection
willdescribeasinglemajorstepofthepipelinethatisimple-
mented as a single executable notebook (represented by an
outerblackrectanglesurroundingindividualanalysiscompo-
nents in Fig. 5). For a concise summary of the pipeline and
choices at each step, see Appendix B.
8.2.1.Single-Day Flagging and Averaging
The raw spectrum data (observed in the field) are first read
asGSDataobjects. These data consist of𝑁intg, 𝑗 integrations
onday𝑗,eachofwhichconsistsofthreespectra—theinternal
load, internal load + noise source and antenna input—with
𝑁𝜈 =32768channels covering0−200 MHz. There are
138 days recorded in this dataset, with a total of 297,168
integrations (about 1000 hours on-sky). The primary aim of
thefirstmajorprocessingstepistoremoveallintegrationsthat
35 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18091240
36 https://loco.lab.asu.edu/edges/edges-data-release/

21
areconsideredofquestionablequality,averagetheremaining
integrations together, and then flag channels containing RFI
before down-sampling over frequency.
The first three filters are applied to the raw power spec-
tral densities. The first filter removes integrations where
the galactic centre is above the horizon, ultimately retaining
LSTs23.76−11.76hr: about half of the data (c.f. §6.1.1).
The Galactic centre is very bright in the low-frequency radio
band, which intensifies the requirements on calibration pre-
cision. Removing these integrations with this filter lowers
these requirements. There is a small subtlety here in that
inpygsdatathe calculation that determines the LST from
theobservationtimebydefaultusestheprecisemethodspro-
vided byastropy. However, the LST-setting method can be
changed by the user, and for this analysis we use a more ap-
proximateformulathatwasusedinthelegacypipeline. Using
the more accurate formula fromastropymakes only a very
smalldifferencetotheLSTs, andtheseLSTsareonlyusedin
twoplacesinthepipeline: onceheretodeterminewhetherthe
galaxy is above the horizon, and then again when computing
the beam factor correction. While the differences in LST are
small,usingthemoreaccuratemethodwouldmeanthatafew
entire integrations would be either removed or kept at odds
with the original pipeline, which changes the absolute value
of the final averaged spectrum non-negligibly. The impact of
these small changes will be discussed in Maheshet al., (in
prep.).
The second filter is anaux_filter(c.f. §6.1.1) that flags
integrations for which the analog-to-digital converter (ADC)
recorded power is greater than 0.35 V2Hz−1. The partic-
ular ADC used in EDGES-2 quotes a saturation level of
0.5 V2Hz−1, however tone injection tests indicate that values
above0.35V 2Hz−1 leaknarrow-bandspikesacrossthespec-
trum to unacceptable levels (A. E. E. Rogers 2019). Such
strong spikes can occur due to lightning (A. E. E. Rogers
2020).
The third filter uses thepower_percent_filter(c.f.
filter (v) in §6.1.2) to flag integrations where the frac-
tional power (from the antenna input) contained in the range
100−200MHz(i.e. theupperhalfofthespectrum)compared
to the entire spectrum is outside the range0.7−3%. This
rangewassetempirically,tocoarselyfilteroutdataforwhich
the spectrum does not exhibit the broadly correct shape (for
instance,assumingGalacticforegroundsthatscaleasapprox-
imately𝜈 −2.6, and a passband that strongly declines below
10MHz but is otherwise constant, yields an expected ratio
of about 1.6%—close to the middle of the0.7−3% range).
In practice we find that the 0.16% of integrations that are
uniquelyflagged by this filter are flagged due to a few chan-
nelsofextremelybrightRFI—typicallyinthesub-Orbcomm
band (120−135MHz). Less than 0.5% of integrations fall
afoulofthisfilter(Fig. 6,‘PPF’),anditislikelythatinfuture
analyses it will be replaced by something more targeted.
The remaining filters require data to be at least approx-
imately calibrated, and so the next step is to perform the
Dicke-switch calibration (Eq. 13), which removes the time-
variation from the gains, and then to apply anapproximate
scalingoftheresultingdata𝑄totemperatureunits,usingana
prioriguess for the calibration temperatures𝑇guess
sca =1000K
and𝑇 guess
off =300K (cf. Eq. 15).
Followingthisapproximatetemperaturecalibration,weap-
ply three more filters that remove entire integrations. The
first applies thepeak_power_filter(filter (ii) of §6.1.2)
to filter integrations excessively affected by Orbcomm RFI.
In particular the peak temperature in the Orbcomm range,
137−138MHz, is compared to the mean temperature be-
tween80−200MHz, and the integration is flagged if this
ratiois>40. Thisfilterdoesnotfindanyflagsinthisdataset,
and is therefore omitted from Fig. 6.
Thesecondappliesthesingle_channel_spike_filter
(filter (iii) of §6.1.2) exclusively in the FM range,88−
120MHz with a threshold of 200K. This filter removes inte-
grations where strong RFI in the FM range may cause non-
linearities over the entire spectrum. The threshold is essen-
tially arbitrary, but catches any strong single-channel spikes.
This is the most impactful filter, flagging more than 15% of
data (c.f. ‘FM’ in Fig. 6).
Finally, integrations are flagged based on anrms_filter
(filter (iv) of §6.1.2). In this case, the data is first restricted
to therange60−80MHzwhich is expectedto be reasonably
freefromRFI.Themodelusedasaprioronthespectralshape
within this band is a simple power-law,𝑇75 (𝜈/75 MHz) −2.5,
where the amplitude𝑇75 is fit independently to each integra-
tion. IntegrationswithanRMSgreaterthan200Kwithinthis
range are flagged.
Fig. 6indicatesthefractionofdataflaggedforeachofthese
per-integration filters, as well as the total fraction flagged
(which is less than the sum of the individual filters due to
overlap). The dominant cause of flagging is very high am-
plitude single-channel RFI spikes in the FM band. Overall
about 18% of the integrations are flagged, with more than
16% coming from extreme FM spikes.
Note that in this analysis we do not remove either daytime
data, nor data for which the moon is up, though these cases
have been investigated (e.g. Extended Data Table 1 of B18).
The fraction of integrations for which the Galactic centre is
down and the sun is up in this dataset is about 53%, making
it a significant aspect to consider.
After removing these integrations, we average together all
remainingspectra(intheformofapproximatetemperatures).
Since thus far we have only flagged entire integrations, the
weights are spectrally-uniform, and thus averaging with the
unbiasedformEq. 41isequivalenttoastandard(unweighted)

22
ADC FM PPF RMS Total
0
5
10
15
20% Flagged
1.61
16.82
0.43 0.24
18.13
Integrations ﬂagged by ﬁlter
Figure 6.Breakdown of the fraction of data flagged by specific
filters that flag entire integrations. Each bar represents a percentage
ofthedataafteralreadybeingdown-selectedforthegalacticcentre.
The Orbcomm filter is omitted for clarity as it caused no flags. The
total flagged fraction is less than the sum of the individual filters,
because some of the flags overlap.
average. We are left with a single spectrum for each day
of observation, at raw frequency resolution. From this, we
select channels between40−100MHz for further process-
ing and calibration (this band was chosen primarily due to
a combination of our bandpass filter, which declines sharply
below 40MHz and above 120MHz, as well as RFI beyond
100MHz).
We now perform the first channel-dependent filter for RFI.
For this, we use the iterative filter presented in §6.2.1, with
the flags determined for a sliding window, as described in
§6.2.2. In particular, to compute the data model, we use a
Fouriermodel (Eq. 8) with𝑛=37terms, with a coordinate
transformT (𝜈)=(𝜈−40 MHz)/90 MHz. To compute the
modelofthestandarddeviation,weuseabox-carfilterofsize
614 channels (1/16𝑡 ℎ of the size of the remaining spectrum
between40−100MHz). Weflagatathresholdof𝑍 >2.5𝜎,
anduseawatershedfiltersuchthatchannelsadjacentaflagged
channel are always flagged, the 8 channels on either side are
flagged if𝑍 >25𝜎, and the 16 channels on either side are
flagged if𝑍 >250𝜎. We do not change either the threshold
orthemodelsonanyoftheiterations,andtheflaggingalways
converges within 100 iterations. The fraction of data in each
channelacrossthefulldatasetthatisnotflaggedinthisround
of RFI excision is shown in Fig. 7. For most of the band,
channels are flagged about 10% of the time, while in the FM
band, flagging rates can approach 100%. The total flagging
fraction for all channels is 13.5%.
Notethatthisisoneofthefewstepswhereextremelysmall
numericaldifferencescanhavealargeimpactontheabsolute
temperature of the final averaged spectrum. In particular,
due to the high condition number of the 37-termFourier
basis over this range of frequencies (∼1.4×108), very small
numerical differences in the basis functions or the numerical
40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Frequency [MHz]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fraction Unﬂagged for RFI
Figure 7.Fraction of data in each channel across the full dataset
that is unflagged by the first round of RFI excision.
algorithm used for solving the linear system can result in
noticeable differences in the best-fit model. As an example,
differencesbetweenevaluatingcosandsininCversusnumpy
resultinanRMSdeviationinthebasisfunctionscomputedby
eachoftheorderof10 −15. Nevertheless,usingthesamecode
(i.e. thelegacyC-code),basedonsimpleQR-decomposition,
to compute the best-fit parameters based on these numerical
basisfunctionsresultsinbest-fitmodelswhoseresidualRMS
is 13mK. Increasing the precision of𝜋from 10 decimals
(used in the C-code) to full double-precision results in an
increased residual RMS of 28mK. In fact, even using the
same algorithm but using the dot-product fromnumpy(wich
uses pairwise-summation) rather than a direct summation as
doneinthelegacyC-codewiththeexactsamebasisfunctions
results in an even larger RMS difference of over 400mK.
Whilethesedifferencesaremodest,theyareexacerbatedby
the fact that the model of𝜎is multiplicative in the𝑍-scores,
and the fractional differences are rather large. Indeed, the
aboveabsolutedifferencescorrespondto0.5%,3.5%and27%
in𝜎respectively. Furthermore, since the algorithm makes
a sharp cut based on𝑍thresh, and identified flags propagate
to further modeling, the differences can become increasingly
impactful as the algorithm progresses. The three cases men-
tionedhereeachresultinapproximately100channelsflagged
differently, in a spectrum for which about 1300 channels are
ultimately flagged—a 7.5% differential.
We found that the primary culprit here is the QR-
decomposition method implemented in the legacy C-code.
This method does not re-normalize the basis functions to
reduce the condition number of the system, as most mod-
ern methods do (e.g.numpy.linalg.lstsq). While using
lstsqon the same data instead of the QR-decomposition as
implemented in the C-code results in an even larger impact
of over 200 channels flagged differently, it is far more stable
to slightly changing the basis functions (e.g. changing the

23
precisionof𝜋),resultinginnoflagdifferences. Additionally,
comparingthebest-fitmodelsbetweentheQR-decomposition
andlstsqshowsthattheRMSresidualsareslightlyreduced
for the latter.
While it is possible to exactly reproduce the RFI flags
of B18 by directly wrapping the relevant original functions
for computing the basis functions and performing the QR-
decomposition, this discussion reveals that using the more
stable and precise methods fromnumpyis better, and so we
accept the differences that arise from this choice. These dif-
ferences can be surprisingly large; flagging some different
channels on a per-night basis (usually channels that are close
tothethreshold)mostlyaddssomeextranoise-likestructureto
the absolute differences. However, later stages of processing
eliminateentiredayswhentheirRMSresidualtoalow-order
model exceeds a certain threshold, and this threshold can
be exceeded due to the new ‘noise’ from different per-night
flags. Sinceeachnighthasadifferenteffectiveweightingasa
function of LST, eliminating an entire night can significantly
change the LST distribution for the final averaged spectrum,
changingitsabsoluteamplitudebyafewK.Regardless,since
none of these changes are expected to be correlated with the
21cm signal, we don’t expect the ultimate interpretation to
besignificantlyaffected. Putanotherway,whiletheresulting
absolute spectrum may differ by a few Kelvin, its residual to
a smooth foreground model should not be expected to differ
by more than a mK. This is borne out by Fig. 15, in which
we show both the case in which the RFI flags are manually
taken directly from the legacy pipeline and injected into the
edges-analysispipeline, and the case in which we use
themorerobustlstsqmodel-fittingalgorithmwithallother
choices set to match the legacy pipeline.
FinallyafterexcisingtheRFI,wedown-samplethespectra
by a factor of eight channels, using the Gaussian kernel (c.f.
7). Here we re-flag each channel that was originally flagged,
and also any channel where the number of samples after
convolution is less than a quarter of the full complement.
8.2.2.Receiver Calibration
The next major data-processing step is calibration. How-
ever, to perform the calibration we require the calibration
solutions, determined from data taken in the lab.
The data used to determine the calibration solutions for
this work were recorded in September 2015. Many of the
measurements are VNA recordings of reflection coefficients,
particularly of OSL standards. For this dataset, our external
calkitisaKeysight 3785033Ekit. ModelsoftheintrinsicΓ OSL
(required to solve Eq. 32) require physical properties of the
calkit standards, which we take from the relevant specsheet,
with two exceptions: (i) the delay incurred by the ‘offset’ in
37 Formerly Agilent
theLoadstandardissetas30ps 38,and(ii)theresistanceofthe
Load standard is accurately measured with a high-resolution
multimeter independently for each OSL measurement (c.f.
§5.5.3). The dependence of the reflection coefficients on
other physical properties (e.g. capacitance) are significantly
weaker than the dependence on the resistance of the Load
(R. A. Monsalve et al. 2017a).
In brief, the dataset consists of:
•Six sets of four VNA readings to measureΓrcv (c.f.
§5.5.2). Each set contains one measurement of the
VNA connected to the receiver input, and three direct
measurementsoftheexternalOSLstandards. TheLoad
resistance is measured at 49.98Ωfor each set. We
averagethesixcalibratedΓ rcv. Thesesixdisplay∼1%
systematic (spectrally smooth) variations around the
mean value.
•ThreesetsofsixVNAreadingsofOSLstandards—one
OSLinternaltothereceiver,oneexternal—tocompute
the𝑆-parameters of the ‘internal switch’ (i.e.𝑟1𝑟2;
c.f. §5.5.3). Each set is measured at a different con-
trolled ambient temperature (18.67◦ C, 27.16◦ C, and
35.31◦ C),andtheresistanceoftheexternalLoadstan-
dard is measured at 50.13Ω, 50.12Ωand 50.11Ωre-
spectively. The final𝑆-parameters are linearly inter-
polated between these measurements to the ambient
temperature at which the calibration procedure is per-
formed, measured at 27◦ C.
•For each calibration source (ambient, hot load, open
cable, shorted cable):
–Spectra (2250 integrations for the ambient, 2126
for the hot load, 3295 for the open, 5420 for the
shorted cable).
–Thermistor readings of the temperature of the in-
put, recorded on a cadence of one second for the
duration of the spectrum readings.
–FourVNAreadingsofreflectioncoefficients: one
recorded with the internal four-position switch
pointed to the input source, and the other three
pointingtotheinternalOSLstandards. Theseare
usedtoproduceacalibratedreflectioncoefficient
at the reference plane of the input to the receiver
for the input source, following §5.5.3.
•ThreeVNAmeasurementsoftheexternalOSLattached
totheendofthesemi-rigidcablethatisusedtoconnect
38 Equations relating these properties to the model reflection coefficients
can be found in the Appendix of R. A. Monsalve et al. (2016), and the
properties themselves are encoded inedges-analysis.

24
1.000
1.001
1.002
1.003
Q [Arb. Linear Units]
0 2 4 6 8 10
Hours
0
1∆ Thermistor Temp [K]
Ambient
HotLoad
Open
Shorted
Figure8.Warmupofthecalibrationloadsovertime. Weremovethe
first two hours of data so that the source temperature has stabilized.
The top panel shows the PSD ratio,𝑄, normalized so that the first
measurementisone. Thebottompanelshowsthethermistorreading
ofthetemperatureofthesource,asadifferencetotheassumedvalue
(399 K for the hot load, and 296 K for the others).
the hot load to the receiver input. These are used to
compute the𝑆-parameters of the cable, which are then
used to calculate the loss of the hot load (c.f. §5.6.1).
The resistance of the Load standard is measured at
50.11Ω.
This full dataset is publicly available39 (S. G. Murray et al.
2025). Asubtletyisthatinthepublicdatasetweprovidether-
mistorreadingsasdescribed,butwedonotusethesedirectly
to determine the calibration solutions in this work, instead
using approximate assumed temperatures for each source,
namely 296K for the ambient and long-cable sources, and
399K for the hot load. Fig. 8 shows that the thermistor mea-
surementsarewithin1Koftheseassumedvaluesthroughout
thecalibrationmeasurements. Thesechoicesproduceamini-
malchangetothefinalcalibration,whichwillbeinvestigated
in Maheshet al., (in prep.).
We first average all Dicke-calibrated spectrum readings
from each input source. When averaging the spectra, we
ignore the first two hours of recordings from each source as
the spectrometer warms up (c.f. Fig. 8). We restrict the
spectra to the frequency range40−110MHz, and after aver-
aging, we down-sample the spectra with the Gaussian kernel
39 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18091240
by a factor of eight, before further restricting the range to
50−100MHz.
All of the reflection coefficients and𝑆-parameters are
recorded at a resolution of 250kHz by the VNA, which is
a different resolution than the spectra. To simultaneously re-
grid the reflections and to remove measurement noise, we fit
smooth linear models to them, evaluating the models at the
frequencies of the (down-sampled) spectra40. Since the dif-
ferent sources/components have different spectral character-
istics,differentmodelcomplexitiesarerequiredforeach. For
all reflection coefficients, we use theFouriermodel (Eq. 8)
with a coordinate transformT (𝜈)=(𝜈−50 MHz)/75 MHz,
and fit this model to both real and imaginary components
separately. However, the number of terms differs for each;
forΓ src and the hot load short cable𝑆-parameters we use
27 terms, whereas forΓ rcv we use 11 terms41. When fit-
ting these models, we first remove a pure tone with a best-
fit delay𝜏, i.e. we fit the linear model toΓexp(2𝜋𝜏𝜈),
and then re-apply the delay to the model when evaluating,
Γmdl =exp(−2𝜋𝜏𝜈)M fourier[ ®𝑎real +𝑖®𝑎imag]. This single tone
is removed directly as there is no a priori guarantee that
its wavelength corresponds to a harmonic of the frequency
range being modeled, which would otherwise complicate the
Fourier model fit. The delay𝜏is fit by maximizing the ob-
jective function
max𝜏

∑︁
𝜈
Γ𝜈 exp(2𝜋𝑖𝜈𝜏)
 (42)
on a regular grid between𝜏∈ {−1,100}ns in steps of 0.1ns.
This inherently optimises for a delay that keeps the data as
coherent as possible. This is not done for the hot load𝑆-
parameters.
To solve for the calibration temperatures, we use the itera-
tivemethoddescribedin§5.4. Specifically,weuse𝑐 terms =6
and a spacing𝑝=0.5(c.f. Eq. 9) for the internal loadPoly
temperature models, while for the noise-wave temperatures
weuse𝑤 terms =5. Withintheiterativeloopwedonotsmooth
the current estimate of𝑇′
NS and𝑇 ′
L, and only smooth them at
the end of the procedure. We apply the hot load loss to the
observedhot load spectra rather than to the known ‘true’ hot
load temperature. We run for eight iterations (although the
procedure converges in four in this case).
40 Note that while this reduces measurement noise in the reflection coeffi-
cients used in downstream analysis, it introduces a non-trivial correlated
modeling uncertainty that should in principle be propagated through the
pipeline,quiteapartfromanysystematicuncertaintyinthemeasurements.
This is left for future work.
41 The sensitivity of the analysis to these choices will be investigated in
Maheshet al., (in prep.).

25
8.2.3.CalibratingΓ ant
Theantennareflectioncoefficientsarecalibratedinasimi-
lar manner toΓsrc as described in the previous section. Mea-
surementsofΓ 𝑟3
antaretakeninthefieldbyswitchingSPT2T 1to
the in-field VNA connected to SMA2 (c.f. pink route in Fig.
1). Thesearecalibratedaccordingtotheprocedurein§5.5.3,
using𝑆 𝑟1𝑟2 previously measured in the lab (as described in
§8.2.2).
The VNA used to measureΓ𝑟3
ant in the field is not identical
to that used in the lab to measure the calibration sources.
However, since we calibrate the measurements of each VNA
back to a common reference plane (c.f. §5.5.1) this is not
in principle a problem (or, it would only be a problem if the
VNA itself was mis-calibrated, in which case it would be a
problem even if the VNA was the same in the lab and in the
field!).
In order to reduce the amplitude of noise fluctuations on
Γant, we take measurements over more than 25 hours at a
cadence of 34 seconds. Since the correction for the internal
switchistemperature-dependent,wesimultaneouslymeasure
theinternaltemperatureofthereceiverviaathermistor 42,and
independently correct each measurement by an𝑆𝑟1𝑟2 that is
a weighted average of the two internal switch measurements
closest in temperature (recall that we measured the internal
switch at 18.76, 27.16 and 35.31◦C). Ultimately, we average
together only the measurements taken during the night when
the temperature is more stable: a total of 750 integrations
over7hoursonthe8 𝑡 ℎand9 𝑡 ℎofDecember,2015. Overthis
period the temperature changes by 0.25K. Further details of
this procedure are described in R. A. Monsalve (2015).
To smoothly interpolate the measurements over frequency,
weuseaPolynomialmodel,withatransformationofT (𝜈)=
log(𝜈/75 MHz), parameters𝑝=1and𝑞=0, and𝑛=
10terms. As with the other reflection coefficients, we first
removeadelaybeforefittingthelinearmodel,andrestorethe
delay to the modeled solution.
The stability of theΓ ant measurements are illustrated in
Fig. 9. In this figure, the quantity shown is the ratio of the
difference between the real part of each calibrated measure-
ment and the smoothed average to the absolute value of the
smoothed average. Measurements remain within 0.2% devi-
ation for most of the observation window of 7 hours, with
only a few outliers of∼0.5%. While this measurement is
also used to calibrate day-time data, after adjustment for the
internal switch temperature the impact of using night-time
vs. day-time measurements ofΓ ant is<5mK in the final
calibrated average spectrum.
42 An Omega ON 930 44006.
50 60 70 80 90 100
Frequency [MHz]
0
5
10
15
20
25Time Elapsed [hr]
□0.75
□0.50
□0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
Fractional Diﬀerence (%)
Figure9.StabilityofΓ antmeasurementsovertheobservationtimeof
25 hours. Measurements used in the final averagedΓant (night-time
measurements) are between the black dashed lines. The heatmap
represents the fractional difference in therealpart of the calibrated
reflection coefficient, where the difference is taken with respect to
the real part of the smoothed average (over the night-time observa-
tions),andthenormalizationistotheabsolutevalueofthesmoothed
average. Stability is better than 0.5% within the night-time mea-
surements, with the bulk of observations staying within 0.2% of the
average.
8.2.4.Beam Chromaticity
Tocomputethebeamfactorchromaticitycorrection,weuse
the formalism described in §5.7, with the following choices.
For the sky model, we use the observations of C. G. T.
Haslametal.(1982),representedonaregulargridofRA/dec,
coupledwithaspatiallyuniformspectralindexof-2.5. Forthe
beammodel,weuseaFekosimulationoftheEDGES-2low-
bandantennadescribedinN.Maheshetal.(2021)(thisbeam
simulationisalsomadeavailablewiththedataprovidedatthe
link in the Data Availability section). We use the alternative
form of Eq. 35, i.e. with a frequency-dependent𝑇sky, rather
than defined at the reference frequency. We use a reference
frequency of 75MHz for the beam.
One subtlety is that the computation of the azimuth and
elevation coordinates of the sky model pixels at a particular
LST can be performed either with high-precision methods
fromastropyor instead with faster approximations based
on rigid-body rotations (i.e. ignoring precession, nutation
etc.). To make a close comparison with the legacy pipeline,
we here use the faster approximation. However, this does not
make a large impact on the spectral structure of the beam
factor; its full effects will be explored in Maheshet al., (in
prep.).
Anothersmalldifferencebetweenthispipelineandtheorig-
inalisthatinsteadofevaluatingthe‘snapshot’beamfactoron
adifferentgridofLSTsforeachobservedday,weperformthe
calculationonceonafineLSTgridcoveringthefull24hours
at a resolution of 6 minutes. We then interpolate the beam
factor onto a daily-varying coarser grid of LSTs depending

26
Component Balun Connector
Part Spec - SC3792
Outer Diameter [inch] 0.75 0.161
Inner Diameter [inch] 5 / 16 0.05
Outer Material Brass Stainless Steel
Inner Material Copper Copper
Outer Conductivity [5.96×107S/m] 0.29 0.024
Inner Conductivity [5.96×107S/m] 1 0.24*
Relative Permittivity of Dielectric 1.07 2.05
Relative Interior Conductance 0
Length [inch] 43.6 1.1811
Table 1.Properties of the balun and connector that determine their
combined scattering parameters based on a physical model. While
the inner material for the connector is copper, its conductivity is
based on its plating, which is not copper, hence the lower conduc-
tivity of 24% of the copper value.
on the coverage of each day included with cubic splines. We
discuss this further in §8.2.5.
8.2.5.Data Calibration
Having obtained a single averaged spectrum on each night
ofdataaswellasthequantitiesrequiredtocalibratethedata,
weproceednowtoapplythosecalibrationsolutions. First,we
down-selectthespectrumchannelstobetween50−100MHz
(matching the calibration solutions). We also flag channels
outsidetherange51−99MHzsothatthesedonotcontribute
to any of the following model fits43. We then simply𝑇sca and
𝑇off from the calibration temperatures determined in §8.2.2
andapplythemtothespectraaccordingtoEq. 15 44. Wealso
apply corrections for losses experienced through the balun
and connector,𝐿 bnc, that connect the antenna to the receiver
input, following §5.6.2. In particular, the relevant properties
ofthebalunandtheconnectoraresummarizedinTable1. We
settheambienttemperature𝑇 amb =296Kforallobservations,
neglecting the ambient temperature recordings measured on
site. The effect of using the recordings themselves will be
investigated in Maheshet al., (in prep.).
We then apply the beam factor correction that was calcu-
lated in §8.2.4. Here, we must average the beam factor over
theLSTsobservedineachparticularday’sobservation. Since
the beam factor is relatively expensive to compute at a given
LST, in B18 an approximation was made in which the beam
factor was averaged over a regular grid of approximately 30
minute intervals, reducing the total required number of eval-
uations on any given observation day. If the beam factor
43 Thereasonthesearenotjustdown-selectedratherthanflaggedisthatthe
calibration solutions are defined on the full50−100MHz range and so
it is more convenient to apply them to the full range.
44 Note that to do this we first need to invert the calibration ‘guess’ applied
in §8.2.1.
evolves slowly with LST, this should be reasonably accurate.
In B18, the precise extent of this grid was chosen such that
therangeofthegridwasequaltotherangeofunflaggeddata
on any particular day, and the center of the grid was equal
to the mean unflagged LST observed on that day. The grid
resolution was set to be as close to 30 minutes as possible
while dividing the extent evenly.
Inedges-analysis, we utilise an additional accelerator;
we calculate the beam factor as a function of LST only once,
on a finer grid over the full 24 hours of LST, and interpo-
late this result to the particular observations on each day. In
principle, this enables us to interpolate directly to the ob-
served, unflagged LSTs on each day with minimal computa-
tional overhead. Nevertheless, in this analysis, to remain as
consistentaspossiblewithB18,weinterpolatefromthisfine
resolution (6 minutes) grid to a per-day grid similar to B18
(i.e.∼30,minute resolution). We note that there are some
smalldifferencesbetweenour30-minutegridandtheoriginal
fromB18,whchariseduetothelegacycodeperformingextra
unnecessary conversions between time and LST, as well as
using the timestamps of internal load+noise source spectra,
rather than the antenna spectra.
To compute the final integrated beam factor, we use the
method in which the numerator and denominator are aver-
aged before taking their ratio. Finally the beam factor is
modeled with a 31-term Fourier series (c.f. Eq. 8) with
T=(𝜈−75 MHz)/60 MHz, and re-normalized to ensure
that𝐺 beam (75 MHz)=1.
In§8.3weshowtheeffectofourslightlydifferentapproach
tocomputingthebeamfactorontheultimateaveragedspectra,
finding that interpolation from the universal 6-minute grid to
an LST grid of 30min resolution approximating the legacy
pipelineshowsacceptableconformancetotheoriginalresults.
In summary, the full calibration applied is:
ˆ𝑇obs =𝐺 −1
beam (1−𝐿 bnc) −1   ˆ𝑇sca𝑄+ ˆ𝑇off −𝑇 amb𝐿bnc
 ,(43)
with𝑇 amb =296K.
Afterapplyingthiscalibration,wefurtherdown-samplethe
frequency axis. We again use a Gaussian kernel, and down-
samplebyafactorofeight,resultinginafrequencyresolution
of≈390kHz. However,inthiscaseamorecarefultreatment
of non-uniform weights is required. We use Eq. 41, where
the model used isLinLogwith𝑛=3terms,𝛽=−2.5and
T (𝜈)=𝜈/75MHz. The weights used in the fit are uniform
except that flagged channels are respected. The residuals
to the model are convolved with the kernel, and channels
surroundedbyatleastfourflaggedchannelstoeithersideare
re-flagged.
8.2.6.Average Over days
The last major analysis step brings the spectra from each
night together, performing a few final quality checks before

27
50 60 70 80 90 100
Frequency [MHz]
□2
□1
0
1
Residuals [K]
Daily Residuals to 5-term Linlog
Figure10.Residualsofeachday’saveragedandcalibratedspectrum
to a 5-termLinLogmodel. Black curves indicate the days retained
after the RMS filter (c.f. §8.2.6), while red are their complement.
The general shape of the final foreground-residuals of the fully-av-
erageddataisalreadyclearlyvisibleoneachday. Theretaineddays
are consistent to well within the noise level.
averaging over all days. Before averaging, we require a new
model of the data so that Eq. 41 can be applied correctly.
Here, we fit a 5-termLinPhysmodel, with𝛽=−2.55and
T (𝜈)=𝜈/75MHz. Weusethefullaccumulatedper-channel
numberofsamplesofeachnight’sspectrumastheweightsin
this fit.
Our first filter is to remove all days for which the weighted
RMS of residuals to this physical model over the full fre-
quency range is greater than 170mK. This is an extremely
conservative filter, and may be problematic in some ways. In
particular,iftheforegroundandsignalmodelswereuncorre-
lated (which is not true), this filter would flag all days if the
signal itself had an amplitude greater than 170mK. Further-
more,settingthethresholdto170mKisclearlydependenton
the noise-level we expect from each day, given the number
of integrations included. We will explore the ramifications
of this filter further in Maheshet al., (in prep.). Ultimately,
thisconservativefilterremoves76ofthe138days(morethan
50%).
Figure Fig. 10 illustrates the consistency of the spectra
from each day at this stage of analysis. In the plot the black
curvesarethedaysretainedaftertheRMSfilter,whilethered
are those thrown out. Already the general form of the final
foreground residual to the fully-averaged data is apparent on
each day, and the retained days are consistent to well within
the noise level.
The second filter is a second deeper check for RFI. Here,
weflaganychannelwhoseresidualtothephysicalforeground
model is greater than1.9𝜎, where𝜎is the RMS of residuals
□4 □2 0 2 4
Z Score
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
PDF
1.9σ
2.9%
data cut
Mean σ = 152 mK
Figure 11.Histogram of𝑍-scores for all channels and days after
removing inconsistent days (i.e. red data in Fig. 10).𝑍-scores are
defined as residuals to aLinPhysmodel divided by the RMS of
these residuals over the full spectrum. The average RMS over all
daysis152mK.Theverticaldashedlinemarksthethresholdforthe
second round of RFI flagging.
to theLinPhysmodel of the full spectrum for that night45.
Again, a threshold of 1.9 is conservative, and may distort
the gaussianity of the thermal noise in the final averaged
spectrum by clipping truly in-distribution channels. Indeed,
Fig. 11 indicates that the data are well-characterized by a
normal distribution with a constant standard deviation given
bytheRMSoverthefullspectrum,andthatthiscutismerely
excising in-distribution noise fluctuations. This filter flags
about 3% of the remaining data.
Followingthesequalitychecks,weaveragethespectrafrom
all days together, using Eq. 41. Here, note that we donot
re-fit a model spectrum to each night (using the new flags),
howeverwedousetheseupdatedflagstoweighttheaverage.
The number of samples in each fully-averaged channel is
shown in Fig. 12. Here, each ‘sample’ corresponds to one
rawintegration(𝑡 intg ≈13 s)atrawfrequencyresolutionΔ𝜈=
6.1 kHz). Theright-handaxisofFig. 12scales𝑁 samplestothe
total number of possible samples (discounting fully-flagged
integrations) to yield an ‘unflagged fraction’. There are two
obvious regions that are preferentially flagged: the FM band
above 90MHz and a region from 60-70MHz. This latter
region does not correspond to RFI flagged in the initial per-
night quality checks (c.f. §8.2.1), as demonstrated by Fig. 7.
The only other per-channel flagging performed is the second
RFI flagging step that occur after calibration (c.f. §8.2.6),
whichusesamuchlesssophisticatedalgorithm(noiteration,
andlower-orderdatamodel),withamuchstricterthresholdof
45 This can be cast in the framework of the general iterative RFI filter as
usingLinPhysmodel to generate the data model, and a top-hat kernel
withsizetwicethatofthespectrumtomodelthestandarddeviation,along
with a maximum of one iteration, and no watershed flagging.

28
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fraction Unﬂagged
50 60 70 80 90 100
Frequency [MHz]
0
1
2
3
4Nsamples/106
RFI Flag Fraction Per Channel
Default
No Final RFI
Figure 12.Number of samples in each fully-averaged chan-
nel, where each sample corresponds to one raw integration
(𝑡intg ≈13𝑠𝑒𝑐) at raw frequency resolutionΔ𝜈=6.1 kHz). The
right-hand axis scales these to the total number of possible samples
(discounting fully-flagged integrations) to yield an ‘unflagged frac-
tion’. Note that due to the gaussian kernel applied when down-sam-
plingchannels,neighbouringchannelsarenotquiteindependent(so
the number of samples is a slight over-estimate for estimating joint
data uncertainty).
1.9𝜎. Given that the data model used for this flagging does
not include a 21cm component, it might be expected that
themodelwouldbesystematicallybiasedbymorethan1.9𝜎
at certain frequency ranges, resulting in potentially spurious
flags. Indeed,removingthisfinalRFIflaggingstep,weobtain
the red line in Fig. 12, for which the sampling is reasonably
uniform at∼90%except for within the FM band.
8.3.Results
Within the pipeline discussed throughout this section, two
components were identified for whichedges-analysisin-
tentionally does not match the legacy pipeline. In both cases
the choice was made because the legacy pipeline had a less
robust solution, and implementing that solution within the
new pipeline (as a non-default option) was either impossible
orsointricateastomaketheeffortnotworthwhile. Thesetwo
components are the first round of RFI flagging on a nightly
basis (§8.2.1) and the computation of the integrated beam
factor (§8.2.5).
In both cases, in order to check that the rest of the pipeline
isaccurate,atemporarymeasureistoinjecttheoutputofthe
legacy pipeline for these particular components (the per-day
RFIflagsandtheper-daybeamfactor),andruntherestofthe
pipelineasnormal. TheresultofthisexerciseisshowninFig.
13. Note that here and elsewhere in this section, we compare
tothefinalaveragedspectrumofthe‘legacy’pipeline,which
we have re-processed for the purpose of this work. This is
notexactlythe same as the H2 case from B18 (which was
made publicly available at the time) because a single very
minorbugwasfoundinthatcodewhichhassincebeenfixed.
□5
0
5
∆ Legacy [mK] B18
edges-analysis: Gbeam & RFI ﬂags injected
□200
0
200
Residual to LinLog [mK]
50 60 70 80 90 100
Frequency [MHz]
□5
0
5
∆ Residual to Legacy [mK]
Figure 13.Comparison of averaged spectrum to legacy code. Blue
linesshowspectraproducedwithedges-analysisandblacklines
the published spectrum of B18 (which uses the legacy code with
one small bug, see text). The top panel shows the absolute differ-
ence between the spectra, the middle panel the residual to a 5-term
LinLogforeground model, and the lower panel the difference be-
tweentheforeground-residuals(e.g. residualsofedges-analysis
minus residuals of legacy). These results indicate that the numeri-
cal differences betweenedges-analysisand the legacy pipeline
(neglecting𝐺 beam and RFI flags) are smaller than the differences
produced by the small fixed bug.
This bug was simply that the first channel was being ignored
when fitting models to the reflection coefficients (§8.2.2).
For the sake of completeness, we also compare the original
publicspectrumtothatre-processedwiththebug-fixedlegacy
pipeline in Fig. 13 (black lines). When injecting𝐺beam and
RFI flags,edges-analysisproduces a final spectrum in
excellent agreement with legacy pipeline—in fact, it is in
better agreement than the public results from B18, at much
better than 1mK over the band.
Havingestablishedanaccuratereproductionwiththeinjec-
tion of the two analysis components that were intentionally
modified, we now examine the impact of using the more
robust implementation of each of these components within
edges-analysis. Fig. 14 compares the new implementa-
tion of the beam factor, using the same quantities as Fig. 13.
Recallthattheprimarydifferenceinthenewimplementation
is that we evaluate the beam factor on a fine LST grid and
interpolateittotheLSTsrepresentedoneachday(c.f§8.2.4).

29
□6
□4
□2
0
2
∆ Legacy [K]
Inject legacy beam-factor
Interp to ∼ 30 min grid
Interp to every observed LST
Interp to every unﬂagged LST
□0.2
0.0
0.2
Residual to LinLog [K]
50 60 70 80 90 100
Frequency [MHz]
□20
0
20
∆ Residual to Legacy [mK]
Figure 14.Comparison of the effect of beam-factor choices on the
final averaged spectrum. Panels are the same as Fig. 13, but each
colour (other than blue) represents a different method of assigning
the LSTs over which the beam factor is averaged.
In blue we show the averaged spectrum with the beam factor
fromthelegacypipelineinjected(i.e. thesameastheblueline
in Fig. 13). In orange, we show our fiducial case, in which
we interpolate from our fine LST grid to a∼30-minute grid
similartothatusedinB18. Heretheresidualsaresmoothand
at a level of a couple of mK. Green and red show cases that
may be better motivated than the legacy pipeline, in which
theLSTstowhichthebeamfactorisinterpolatedoneachday
match either all the observed LSTs (green) or allunflagged
LSTs(red)onanygivenday. Thesetworesultinoneormore
fulldaysbeingflaggeddifferentlylaterinthepipeline,result-
ing in an absolute difference of a few K (top panel), but the
differencesaremostlyabsorbedbytheforegrounds,suchthat
the difference between foreground residuals is below 20 mK
(bottom panel).
Now we consider the effect of usingedges-analysisto
determine nightly RFI flags. Fig. 15 compares three cases
to the legacy pipeline: (i) injecting legacy RFI flags directly
(i.e. the same as in Fig. 13), (ii) usingedges-analysisto
identifyflags,asper§8.2.1,and(iii)usingedges-analysis
again, but ensuring that the final list of days included in
the average matches the legacy pipeline. We find that using
edges-analysisresults in a large (>4K) absolute discrep-
ancy, though after fitting and subtracting a foreground model
10□5
10□3
10□1
101
|∆ Legacy | [K]
□0.2
0.0
0.2
Residual to LinLog [K]
Inject legacy RFI ﬂags
Use edges-analysis RFI
edges-analysis w/ legacy per-day ﬂags
50 60 70 80 90 100
Frequency [MHz]
□20
0
20
∆ Residual to Legacy [mK]
Figure 15.Comparison of the effect of RFI algorithm on the final
averaged spectrum. Panels are the same as Fig. 13. Blue line uses
injectedflagsfromthelegacypipeline(identicaltoFig. 13). Orange
lineusesedges-analysiswithsettingsdescribedin§8.2.1. Green
line also usesedges-analysisbut ensures that the days used in
the final spectrum match the legacy pipeline.
the discrepancy is very small (<10mK) and noise-like. The
absolute discrepancy is almost entirely due to the fact that
finding different per-channel flags on each night results in a
few days being omitted/included differently than the legacy
pipeline due to the RMS threshold (c.f. §8.2.6). Accounting
for this effect using case (iii; green line) brings the abso-
lute difference down to≲10mK. Notably, there are no large
spikes in the bottom panel of Fig. 15, indicating that the
channels that are flagged differently do not have strong or
consistent RFI (the differences are noise-like).
Fig. 16 shows the results of running the full pipeline de-
tailed in the previous section, compared to the output of the
legacy pipeline. In this figure, we show the full progres-
sion of changes we have just outlined: (i, blue) injection of
both beam factor and RFI flags from the legacy pipeline, (ii,
orange) usingedges-analysisto compute the beam factor
(onthe30mingridapproximatingthelegacypipeline,i.e. the
greenlinefromFig. 14),(iii,green)usingedges-analysis
to identify RFI flags (i.e. the orange line from Fig. 15) and
finally(iv,red)usingedges-analysisforbothcomponents,
i.e. our fiducial reproduction of the results of B18 using the
newpipeline. Thelargestdifferenceismadebytheidentifica-

30
10□5
10□3
10□1
101
|∆ Legacy | [K]
□0.2
0.0
0.2
Residual to LinLog [K]
Legacy beam + RFI
New beam (LST grid)
New RFI
New beam + RFI
50 60 70 80 90 100
Frequency [MHz]
□20
0
20
∆ Residual to Legacy [mK]
Figure 16.Comparison of the final averaged spectrum between
the newedges-analysispipeline and the legacy pipeline. Panels
are the same as Fig. 13. We show the progression from injecting
both the legacy beam and RFI flags, to performing each of these
separately withedges-analysis(c.f Figs. 14 and 15), to our final
resultinwhichbothofthesecomponentsarecomputedwiththenew
pipeline (red lines).
tionofRFI,butasalreadydiscussed,thiseffectisdominantly
a smooth component that is fit out by the foreground model
plus a noise-like component.
8.4.Discussion and Future Considerations
Throughout the preceding demonstration, in which we ex-
plicitlyreproducedtheresultsofB18,severalspecificaspects
of the analysis were identified as likely suboptimal. Here we
summarize these aspects to facilitate future improvements.
Theonlythingconsideredatruebuginthelegacypipeline
was the erroneous omission of a single channel (the lowest
channel) when fitting reflection coefficients (noted in §8.3).
This bug has a very minor effect (c.f. Fig. 13) and has been
fixed in the legacy code (all results in this work compare
to the fixed version). Some other accuracy-related points
noted were (i) the usage of approximate astrometry, ignor-
ing second-order effects such as precession and nutation of
Earth’srotation;(ii)useofanolderversionoftheHaslamsky
model (C. G. T. Haslam et al. 1982) in regular RA/Dec coor-
dinatesforwhichthesolidangleelementintheskyintegralis
only computed approximately; (iii) use of nearest-grid-point
interpolation of the beam when evaluating the beam chro-
maticity; (iv) use of a simplistic foreground model with a
spatially-invariant spectral index when computing the beam
chromaticity. It is not expected that these approaches have a
marked effect on the spectral structure of the averaged spec-
trum, but it is easy to use more accurate versions of all of
these inedges-analysis.
A more serious point—which nevertheless seems not to
haveastrongimpact—isthatthelegacypipelinedoesnotre-
ducetheconditionnumberoflinearsystemswhenperforming
linear modeling (c.f. §8.2.1), which affects the modeling of
spectra and reflection coefficients and also the determination
ofRFIflags. Wehavedemonstratedthatlinearequationsolv-
ing inedges-analysisis more robust, and should be used
in future applications.
The remaining considerations have to do with analysis
choices, especially around data quality checks:
•Itisassumedthateachcalibrationsourceisatanambi-
enttemperatureof296Kexceptforthehotload,which
isat399K.Sincemeasurementsoftheambienttemper-
aturearetakenwhilerunningthecalibrationspectra,it
would be better to use this information directly.
•In a similar vein, the analysis uses an ambient temper-
ature of 296K to compute the antenna loss, instead of
utilizing the measurements from the field where they
are available.
•InthefilterforstrongRFIspikesintheFMrange(filter
(iii) in §6.1.2), the threshold must be somewhat arbi-
trary, and its effect will change in different conditions
(e.g. when the galaxy is overhead the temperature and
noise level are higher). Since the purpose of this filter
is to guard against non-linearities, it would be more
appropriateforthemetrictobemorecloselytiedtothe
conditions that cause non-linearities.
•The filter for fractional power in a specific frequency
range(filter(v)in§6.1.2)mustbecarefullytunedtothe
data and telescope under consideration. In its current
form, demanding that the power in the upper half of
theband(100-200MHz)bebetween0.7and3%ofthe
total power is not transparently based on any physical
requirements, and this should be replaced by a filter
that targets specific unique failure modes.
•Wenotedacoupleofpotentialissueswiththeper-night
filter which throws out days whose RMS residuals to a
LinPhysisgreaterthan170mK(c.f. §8.2.6),including
that it could throw out all days due to a cosmological
signalofrequisiteamplitude. Analternativemethodto
filter out discrepant days before final averaging would
be to considerrelativediscrepancy with other days.

31
•Fig. 12illustratesthatthesecondroundofRFIflagging
may be too aggressive (with a 1.9𝜎threshold), and
end up being dominated by the insufficiency of the
foreground model rather than true RFI. One way to
improve this flagging would be to use a more flexible
data model or a more careful iterative algorithm (c.f.
§6.2.1).
•Following the second round of RFI flagging (which
occurs on the calibrated averaged spectrum for each
night),itwouldmakesensetore-fitadatamodelbefore
averagingeachnighttogether,inordertohavetheleast
biased average possible (c.f. Eq. 41).
Many of these shortcomings will be examined in Mahesh
et al., (in prep.).
9.CONCLUSIONS
We have for the first time presented a comprehensive set
of analysis methods used in the EDGES-2 global 21cm ex-
periment, including quality assurance and data flagging, cal-
ibration, modeling and averaging. At the same time, we have
presented a new suite of open-source software that imple-
ments these methods in a clear and reproducible way. As
an application of these methods, we have given an explicit
account of the analysis that produced the result of B18, and
have made the data and pipeline required to reproduce this
result public. This software consists of a core data interface,
pygsdata,whichisapowerfulandreliableinterfacetoarbi-
trary single-antenna 21cm data, as well as an analysis pack-
age,edges-analysis, that provides a host of well-tested
analysismethodsthatmightbecross-appliedtodatasetsfrom
different experiments.
The detailed presentation of the specific analysis pipeline
leading to the results of B18 (§8) uncovered several choices
that were not comprehensively justified, including the LSTs
overwhichthebeamchromaticityfactorisintegrated,various
thresholds used for flagging integrations and channels, and
the precise set of VNA measurements and calibrations used
for lab-based calibration. Our software framework makes
it easy to investigate the effects of modifying these choices,
and in Maheshet al., (in prep.) we will present just such an
exploration. Nevertheless, we showed that the new pipeline
can be used to reproduce the results of B18 to within a few
mK, and that the differences are well understood.
Wehopethatthisworkhelpsthecommunitybothtounder-
standandexaminethisimportantresult,aswellastoconverge
on a common analysis framework across experiments, in or-
der to accelerate progress through easier sharing of data and
methodologies.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data required to reproduce thecalibrationof the
EDGES-2 receiver used here and in B18 is located at https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18091240. The raw field spectra
usedinB18andinthisworkarelocatedathttps://loco.lab.asu.
edu/edges/edges-data-release/. The precise pipeline used to
reproducetheresultsofB18withthesoftwaredescribedhere
can be found at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20215409
(which also contains evaluated Jupyter notebooks of all
pipeline stages).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
SGM has received funding from the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme under the
Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 101067043.
This research was funded by the following National Science
Foundation grants: AST-1609450, AST-1813850, and AST-
1908933. EDGES is located at the Inyarrimanha Ilgari Bun-
dara, the CSIRO Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory.
We acknowledge the Wajarri Yamatji people as the tradi-
tional owners of the Observatory site. We also thank CSIRO
for providing site infrastructure and on-going support.
Facility:EDGES
Software:numpy(C. R. Harris et al. 2020),scipy
(P. Virtanen et al. 2020),matplotlib(J. D. Hunter 2007),
astropy(AstropyCollaborationetal.2013,2018),jupyter
(T. Kluyver et al. 2016),HDF5( The HDF Group 2025)
nextflow(P. Di Tommaso et al. 2017)
APPENDIX
A.CASCADING TWO-PORT NETWORKS
If two or more two-port networks are joined together (‘cascaded’), the resulting𝑆-parameters of the full network can be
described by first transforming to the𝑇-parameters (‘transfer parameters’) (J. Dunsmore 2020)
T=
 
−|S|/S 21 S11/S21
−S22/S21 S−1
21 ,
!
(A1)

32
Table 2.Concise table of pipeline steps for the demonstration of §8.
Name Type Parameters Notes
Per-Night Filtering and Averaging. §8.2.1. Input: Raw Spectra from 24 hours of observation.
Galactic Centre Filter Keep LST=23.76-11.76 hr §6.1.1; §8.2.1
Auxiliary Data Filter ADC<0.35 V 2Hz−1 §6.1.1; §8.2.1. “ADC”.
Power Percent Filter0.7%<pp<3%§6.1.2 (v); §8.2.1, “PPF”.
Dicke Calibration Calibration Eq. 13
Scale to Approx. Temp. Calibration𝑇 sca =1000K;𝑇 off =300 KEq. 15
Peak Power Filter𝑃 137−138 MHz/𝑃80−200 MHz <40§6.1.2 (ii); §8.2.1. “OrbComm”. No flags.
Single Channel Spike Filter 88-120MHz; 200K §6.1.2 (iii); §8.2.1. “FM”
RMS Filter 60-80MHz;𝑚∝𝜈 −2.5; Threshold 200K. §6.1.2 (iv); §8.2.1. “RMS”.
Average Integrations Average Uniform Weights; All Unflagged times per day Eq. 41.
Select Freqs Filter40−100MHz
RFI Excision I Filter Model: 37-termFourier; §6.2.2
STD: 614-channel box-car;
Threshold 2.5𝜎
Frequency Down-Sample Average 8-channel; Gaussian Kernel §7
Per-Night Calibration. §8.2.5. Input: single uncalibrated averaged spec. from one day.
Select Freqs Filter 51-99 MHz
Receiver Calibration Calibration See §8.2.2 §5
Balun+Connector Correction Calibration Table 1 §5.6.2
Beam Chromaticity Correction Calibration See §8.2.4 §5.7
Frequency Down-Sample Average 8-channel; Gaussian Kernel §7
Night-to-night averaging. §8.2.6. Input: Single calibrated averaged spec. from all days.
Per-night RMS Filter 5-termLinPhys;𝛽=−2.55; Thresh. 170mK Eq. 10; §8.2.6
RFI Excision II Filter 5-termLinPhys;𝛽=−2.55; Thresh. 1.9𝜎10; §6.2; §8.2.6
Average over nights Average Flagged-Uniform Weighting Eq. 41; §8.2.6
Note—These are the pipeline steps for the analysis that reproduces J. D. Bowman et al. (2018), as discussed in §8. Only steps applied to field
data are shown, see Fig. 5 for a schematic showing ancillary steps (such as computing the receiver calibration). Major groupings of steps
marked by bold headers indicate different Jupyter notebooks in the implemented pipeline. Steps are applied in order from top to bottom.
then computing the matrix product of allT:
Tcascaded =T 1T2T3 · · ·,(A2)
and finally converting back to anS-matrix:
S=
 
T12/T22 |T|/T 22
T−1
22 −T21/T22
!
.(A3)
B.CONCISE SUMMARY OF PIPELINE
In Table 2 we present a concise overview of the pipeline steps involved in reproducing the results of B18, as discussed in §8.
REFERENCES
Abdurashidova, Z., Aguirre, J. E., Alexander, P., et al. 2022, The
AstrophysicalJournal,925,221,doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac1c78
Abdurashidova, Z., Adams, T., Aguirre, J. E., et al. 2025, First
Results from HERA Phase II, arXiv,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2511.21289

33
Ade, P. a. R., Aghanim, N., Alves, M. I. R., et al. 2014, Astronomy
& Astrophysics, 571, A13, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321553
Allen, G. V. C., Pegwal, S., de Villiers, D., et al. 2026, Circuit
Modeling for In Situ 21 Cm Radiometer Calibration, arXiv,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2603.15072
Anstey, D., de Lera Acedo, E., & Handley, W. 2020, arXiv e-prints,
2010, arXiv:2010.09644
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013,
Astronomy and Astrophysics, 558, A33,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M., et al.
2018, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 123,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Barkana, R. 2016, Physics Reports, 645, 1,
doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2016.06.006
Barkana,R.,Outmezguine,N.J.,Redigol,D.,&Volansky,T.2018,
Physical Review D, 98, 103005,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.98.103005
Bekhti, N. B., Flöer, L., Keller, R., et al. 2016, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 594, A116, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629178
Bernardi, G., McQuinn, M., & Greenhill, L. J. 2015, The
Astrophysical Journal, 799, 90,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/799/1/90
Bowman, J. D., Rogers, A. E. E., & Hewitt, J. N. 2008, The
Astrophysical Journal, 676, 1, doi: 10.1086/528675
Bowman, J. D., Rogers, A. E. E., Monsalve, R. A., Mozdzen, T. J.,
& Mahesh, N. 2018, Nature, 555, 67, doi: 10.1038/nature25792
Bradley, R. F., Tauscher, K., Rapetti, D., & Burns, J. O. 2019, The
Astrophysical Journal, 874, 153,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab0d8b
Bull, P., El-Makadema, A., Garsden, H., et al. 2025, RAS
Techniques and Instruments, 4, rzaf046,
doi: 10.1093/rasti/rzaf046
Bye, C. H. 2025, in 2025 United States National Committee of
URSI National Radio Science Meeting (USNC-URSI NRSM),
334–334,
doi: 10.23919/USNC-URSINRSM66067.2025.10907073
Cang, J., Mesinger, A., Murray, S. G., et al. 2025, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 698, A152, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202452982
Cappallo, R. C., Rogers, A. E. E., Lonsdale, C. J., et al. 2025,
EDGES-3: Instrument Design and Commissioning, arXiv,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2508.02577
Chen,K.-F.,Wilensky,M.J.,Liu,A.,etal.2025,TheAstrophysical
Journal, 979, 191, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad9b91
de Lera Acedo, E., de Villiers, D. I. L., Razavi-Ghods, N., et al.
2022, Nature Astronomy, 6, 984,
doi: 10.1038/s41550-022-01709-9
Di Tommaso, P., Chatzou, M., Floden, E. W., et al. 2017, Nature
Biotechnology, 35, 316, doi: 10.1038/nbt.3820
Dunsmore, J. 2020, Handbook of Microwave Component
Measurements: With Advanced VNA Techniques (Wiley)
Ewall-Wice, A., Chang, T.-C., Lazio, J., et al. 2018, The
Astrophysical Journal, 868, 63, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aae51d
Furlanetto, S. R., Peng Oh, S., & Briggs, F. H. 2006, Physics
Reports, 433, 181, doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2006.08.002
Girish, B. S., Srivani, K. S., Subrahmanyan, R., et al. 2020, Journal
of Astronomical Instrumentation, 09, 2050006,
doi: 10.1142/S2251171720500063
Gonzalez, G. 1997, in Microwave Transistor Amplifiers : Analysis
and Design, Second edition. edn. (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall)
Guzmán, A. E., May, J., Alvarez, H., & Maeda, K. 2011,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 525, A138,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913628
Haffner, L. M., Reynolds, R. J., Tufte, S. L., et al. 2003, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 149, 405,
doi: 10.1086/378850
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020,
Nature, 585, 357, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2
Harris, F. J. 2004, Multirate Signal Processing for Communication
Systems (Prentice Hall PTR)
Haslam, C. G. T., Salter, C. J., Stoffel, H., & Wilson, W. E. 1982,
Astronomy and Astrophysics, Suppl. Ser., Vol. 47, p. 1-143
(1982), 47, 1
Hazelton, B. J., Jacobs, D. C., Pober, J. C., & Beardsley, A. P.
2017, The Journal of Open Source Software, 2, 140,
doi: 10.21105/joss.00140
Hibbard, J. J., Nhan, B. D., Rapetti, D., & Burns, J. O. 2024,
Astrophys. J., 975, 36, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad74f9
Hibbard, J. J., Tauscher, K., Rapetti, D., & Burns, J. O. 2020, The
AstrophysicalJournal,905,113,doi:10.3847/1538-4357/abc3c5
Hills, R., Kulkarni, G., Meerburg, P. D., & Puchwein, E. 2018,
arXiv:1805.01421 [astro-ph, physics:hep-ph].
https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.01421
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 90,
doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Jordan, C. H., Murray, S., Trott, C. M., et al. 2017, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 471, 3974,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1797
Keating, G., Hazelton, B., Kolopanis, M., et al. 2025, The Journal
of Open Source Software, 10, 7482, doi: 10.21105/joss.07482
Kirkham, C. J., Anstey, D. J., & de Lera Acedo, E. 2025a,
Capturing System Drift with Time Series Calibration for Global
21-Cm Cosmology Experiments, arXiv,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.13010
Kirkham, C. J., Handley, W. J., Zhu, J., et al. 2025b, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1715

34
Kittiwisit, P., Murray, S. G., Garsden, H., et al. 2025, RAS
Techniques and Instruments, 4, rzaf001,
doi: 10.1093/rasti/rzaf001
Kluyver, T., Ragan-Kelley, B., Pérez, F., et al. 2016, in Positioning
and Power in Academic Publishing: Players, Agents and
Agendas, ed. F. Loizides & B. Schmidt (IOS Press), 87–90
Landecker, T. L., & Wielebinski, R. 1970, Australian Journal of
Physics Astrophysical Supplement, 16, 1
Lewis, D. 2021,
Mahesh, N., Bowman, J. D., Mozdzen, T. J., et al. 2021, The
Astronomical Journal, 162, 38, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abfdab
McKay, L., Subrahmanyan, R., Chippendale, A., et al. 2025,
Precise Measurement of the Absolute Sky Brightness at 60 to
350 MHz, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.11846
Mesinger, A., ed. 2019, The Cosmic 21-Cm Revolution, 2514-3433
(IOP Publishing), doi: 10.1088/2514-3433/ab4a73
Meys, R. 1978, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, 26, 34, doi: 10.1109/TMTT.1978.1129303
Monsalve, R. A. 2015,
Monsalve, R. A., Rogers, A. E. E., Bowman, J. D., & Mozdzen,
T. J. 2017a, The Astrophysical Journal, 835, 49,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/835/1/49
Monsalve, R. A., Rogers, A. E. E., Bowman, J. D., & Mozdzen,
T. J. 2017b, The Astrophysical Journal, 847, 64,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa88d1
Monsalve, R. A., Rogers, A. E. E., Mozdzen, T. J., & Bowman,
J. D. 2016, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory
Techniques, 64, 2631, doi: 10.1109/TMTT.2016.2580141
Monsalve, R. A., Altamirano, C., Bidula, V., et al. 2024, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 530, 4125,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae1138
Mozdzen, T. 2018,
Mozdzen, T. J., Bowman, J. D., Monsalve, R. A., & Rogers, A.
E. E. 2017, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
464, 4995, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2696
Mozdzen, T. J., Mahesh, N., Monsalve, R. A., Rogers, A. E. E., &
Bowman, J. D. 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 483, 4411, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty3410
Muñoz, J. B., Dvorkin, C., & Loeb, A. 2018, Physical Review
Letters, 121, 121301, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.121301
Munshi, S., Mertens, F. G., Koopmans, L. V. E., et al. 2024,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 681, A62,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202348329
Murray, S., Mahesh, N., & Vydula, A. K. 2025,
Edges-Collab/Edges-Bowman2018-Pipeline: Paper-
Submission„ Zenodo doi: 10.5281/zenodo.17526742
Murray, S. G. 2020,
Murray, S. G., Bowman, J., Mahesh, N., Rogers, A., & Monsalve,
R. 2025, EDGES-2 Calibration Data for Bowman+2018,
Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.16881868
Murray, S. G., Bowman, J. D., Sims, P. H., et al. 2022, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 517, 2264,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac2600
Nambissan, T. J., Subrahmanyan, R., Somashekar, R., et al. 2021,
SARAS 3 CD/EoR Radiometer: Design and Performance of the
Receiver,
Offringa, A. R., van de Gronde, J. J., & Roerdink, J. B. T. M. 2012,
Astronomy and Astrophysics, 539, A95,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201118497
Paradis, D., Dobashi, K., Shimoikura, T., et al. 2012, Astronomy
and Astrophysics, 543, A103,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201118740
Pattison, J. H. N., Anstey, D. J., & de Lera Acedo, E. 2026,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 546,
stag258, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag258
Price, D. C., Greenhill, L. J., Fialkov, A., et al. 2018, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 478, 4193,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1244
Pritchard, J. R., & Loeb, A. 2012, Reports on Progress in Physics,
75, 086901, doi: 10.1088/0034-4885/75/8/086901
Ramo, S., & Whinnery, J. 1953, Fields and Waves in Modern
Radio, General Electric Series (Wiley)
Remazeilles, M., Dickinson, C., Banday, A. J., Bigot-Sazy, M.-A.,
& Ghosh, T. 2015, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 451, 4311, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv1274
Roberts, W. K. 1957, Proceedings of the IRE, 45, 1628,
doi: 10.1109/JRPROC.1957.278293
Rogers, A. E. E. 2012,
Rogers, A. E. E. 2014, Haystack EDGES Memo Series, 132,
doi: 1721.1/154524
Rogers, A. E. E. 2015a,
Rogers, A. E. E. 2015b,
Rogers, A. E. E. 2019, Haystack EDGES Memo Series, 307,
doi: 1721.1/154699
Rogers, A. E. E. 2020,
Rogers, A. E. E., & Bowman, J. D. 2012, Radio Science, 47,
doi: 10.1029/2011RS004962
Rogers, A. E. E., Barrett, J. P., Bowman, J. D., et al. 2022, Radio
Science, 57, e2022RS007558, doi: 10.1029/2022RS007558
Roque, I. L. V., Handley, W. J., & Razavi-Ghods, N. 2020, arXiv
e-prints, 2011, arXiv:2011.14052
Roque, I. L. V., Razavi-Ghods, N., Carey, S. H., et al. 2025,
Experimental Astronomy, 59, 7,
doi: 10.1007/s10686-024-09975-3
Sims, P. H., & Pober, J. C. 2020, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 492, 22, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3388
Sims, P. H., Bowman, J. D., Mahesh, N., et al. 2023, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 521, 3273,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad610

35
Sims, P. H., Bowman, J. D., Murray, S. G., et al. 2025, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, staf1767,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1767
Singh, S., & Subrahmanyan, R. 2019, The Astrophysical Journal,
880, 26, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab2879
Sokolowski, M., Tremblay, S. E., Wayth, R. B., et al. 2015,
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia, 32, e004,
doi: 10.1017/pasa.2015.3
Spinelli, M., Bernardi, G., & Santos, M. G. 2018,
arXiv:1802.03060 [astro-ph]. https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03060
Sun, S., Acedo, E. d. L., Wu, F., et al. 2024, Universe, 10,
doi: 10.3390/universe10060236
Tauscher, K., Rapetti, D., & Burns, J. O. 2020, The Astrophysical
Journal, 897, 132, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab9a3f
Tauscher, K., Rapetti, D., Burns, J. O., & Switzer, E. 2018, The
Astrophysical Journal, 853, 187, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaa41f
The HDF Group. 2025, Hierarchical Data Format, Version 5„
Zenodo doi: 10.5281/zenodo.17808614
Vasanth, V., Chen, Y., & Michalek, G. 2025, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 702, A15, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202554430
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020, Nature
Methods, 17, 261, doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2
Vydula, A. K., Bowman, J. D., Lewis, D., et al. 2024, The
Astronomical Journal, 167, 2, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad08ba
Wilensky, M. J., Hazelton, B. J., & Morales, M. F. 2022, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 510, 5023,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab3456
Wilensky, M. J., Morales, M. F., Hazelton, B. J., et al. 2019, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1906.01093
Zhang, P., Zucca, P., Kozarev, K., et al. 2022, The Astrophysical
Journal, 932, 17, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac6b37