Title: Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter on multiply-imaged galaxies in strong cluster lenses from JWST
Authors: Nino Ephremidze, Daniel Gilman, Cora Dvorkin
Published: 2026-05-28
Categories: astro-ph.CO, hep-ph

MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026) Preprint 1 June 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.3
Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter on multiply-imaged galaxies
in strong cluster lenses from JWST
Nino Ephremidze,1★ Daniel Gilman2†, and Cora Dvorkin1‡
1Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
1 June 2026
ABSTRACT
Wave-like dark matter (𝜓DM) is an elusive dark matter (DM) candidate. The model, often also called fuzzy or ultralight DM,
proposes that DM is an extremely light (𝑚∼10−22 eV) boson and thereby has a kpc-scale de Broglie wavelength. Hence,
interference of DM gives rise to sub-galactic density fluctuations that can be studied with strong gravitational lensing. In
this paper, we use the residual power spectrum,P𝛿 (𝑘), as a probe of𝜓DM, which quantifies deviations from smooth lensing
predictions,measuredfrommultiply-imagedgalaxiesinstrongclusterlenses.Thekeyideaisthatimprintedinthesedeviationsare
lensing distortions from DM substructure, which can be harnessed statistically to distinguish among DM theories. We simulate
JWST-quality mock observations of strong gravitational lensing in galaxy clusters, modeling line-of-sight DM substructure
within𝜓DM and the standard cold dark matter (CDM) paradigms. Using mock deep observations (∼20 hours), we find that
P 𝛿 (𝑘)is sensitive to both𝜓DM particle mass and fluctuation amplitude, and can distinguish𝜓DM fluctuations from CDM
subhalos. We demonstrate thatP𝛿 (𝑘)can be measured directly from data by modeling the smooth lensing with a local Curved
Arc Basis formalism. With realistic modeling systematics, we find a statistically significant separation between𝜓DM and CDM
across1≲𝑘≲11 kpc −1 – offering an independent probe of the wave-like nature of DM complementary to existing constraints.
Key words:gravitational lensing: strong – dark matter – galaxies: clusters
1 INTRODUCTION
The existence of dark matter (DM) is supported by overwhelming
evidencespanninggalactictocosmologicalscales,fromtherotation
curvesofgalaxiestothelarge-scalestructureoftheuniverseandthe
cosmic microwave background (CMB; Bennett et al. 2003; Planck
Collaborationetal.2020;Louisetal.2025).Thestandardcosmolog-
icalmodeltreatsDMasacollisionless,pressurelessfluid–colddark
matter (CDM) – and this paradigm successfully reproduces a vast
arrayofobservationsatlargescales(Springeletal.2005;Gil-Marín
et al. 2016; Abbott et al. 2018; Abolfathi et al. 2018; Adame et al.
2025).TheleadingCDMparticlecandidateistheweaklyinteracting
massiveparticle(WIMP).However,extensivedirect-detectionexper-
iments have returned null results and have excluded large fractions
of the simplest WIMP parameter space (Aalbers et al. 2025; Aprile
et al. 2025; Bo et al. 2025). At the same time, the CDM model faces
persistent challenges at sub-galactic scales, including the cusp–core
problem (Moore 1994; Moore et al. 1999a; Flores & Primack 1994;
Oh et al. 2015; Gentile et al. 2004), the missing-satellite problem
(Mooreetal.1999b;Klypinetal.1999),andthetoo-big-to-failprob-
lem(Boylan-Kolchinetal.2011,2012).Althoughbaryonicfeedback
processes, such as supernova-driven outflows, can alleviate some of
thesetensions,itremainsunclearwhethersuchmechanismscanfully
★ E-mail: nino_ephremidze@g.harvard.edu
†E-mail: gilmanda@uchicago.edu
‡E-mail: cdvorkin@g.harvard.edu
resolve all small-scale discrepancies (Weinberg et al. 2015; Schaller
et al. 2015).
Thesedifficulties,togetherwiththenon-detectionofWIMPcandi-
datesinthelaboratory,havemotivatedthedevelopmentofalternative
DM theories. To be compelling, such alternatives should be physi-
cally motivated, reproduce CDM predictions on large scales, yet
leavemeasurableastrophysicalsignaturesthatdistinguishthemfrom
CDM.Wave-likedarkmatter–alsocalledfuzzydarkmatter(FDM)
or ultralight dark matter (ULDM); we use these terms interchange-
ably and adopt the notation𝜓DM throughout – has emerged as one
ofthemostactivelystudiedCDMalternativessatisfyingallthreecri-
teria. In this framework, the DM particle is an extraordinarily light
(𝑚 𝜓 ∼10 −22 eV) boson, whose associated de Broglie wavelength
reaches kiloparsec scales inside galactic halos. As a consequence,
wave interference of the macroscopic DM wave function produces
order-unity density fluctuations on the de Broglie scale, suppresses
the formation of structure below the Jeans scale, and generates soli-
tonic cores at halo centers – all in a regime that is inaccessible to
standard CDM simulations (Hu et al. 2000; Schive et al. 2014; Hui
et al. 2017; Hui 2021). Particle-physics motivations for such ultra-
light bosons arise naturally in string-theory axiverse scenarios and
axion-like particle (ALP) models (Marsh 2016).
Observational constraints on the𝜓DM particle mass span a wide
range of independent probes. Cosmological observations constrain
𝜓DM through CMB anisotropies and large-scale structure (Hlozek
et al. 2015; Laguë et al. 2022), the Lyman-𝛼forest flux power spec-
trum (Iršič et al. 2017; Rogers & Peiris 2021), and high-redshift
galaxy UV luminosity functions from HST and JWST (Winch et al.
©2026 The Authors
arXiv:2605.30649v1  [astro-ph.CO]  28 May 2026

2Ephremidze et al.
2024). Galactic dynamics provides complementary constraints from
the sizes and stellar kinematics of dwarf galaxies (Dalal & Kravtsov
2022; Pozo et al. 2024), subhalo-induced gaps in Milky Way stellar
streams (Schutz 2020; Banik et al. 2021), pulsar timing arrays prob-
ing the oscillating gravitational potential of𝜓DM (Porayko et al.
2018;Smarraetal.2023),andblack-holesuperradiance(Arvanitaki
et al. 2015; Stott & Marsh 2018; Hoof et al. 2026).
Strong gravitational lensing has become a particularly power-
ful probe at the kpc scales relevant to the canonical𝜓DM mass.
Chan et al. (2020) demonstrated through simulations that wave-
interferencefluctuationsin𝜓DMhalosthemselvesproduceflux-ratio
anomalies similar to those attributed to CDM subhalos. Building on
this, Laroche et al. (2022) analyzed flux ratios in eleven quadruply
imaged quasars and showed that𝑚𝜓 <10 −21.5 eV is disfavored by
data, but not completely ruled out, as wave interference fluctuations
in the host halo masquerade as CDM subhalos. Powell et al. (2023)
usedasinglegalaxy-scalelensobservedatmilli-arcsecondresolution
with very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) to directly constrain
FDM granule structures in the main halo. More recently, Amruth
et al. (2023) showed that𝜓DM lens models correctly predict the
levelofbrightnessandpositionanomaliesinaquadruplylensedsys-
tem, whereas standard CDM lens models often fail, although Miller
& Williams (2025) have since argued that the observed anomalies
canbeexplainedbyCDMmassmodelswithaddedmasscomplexity
inmultipoles.Inacluster-lensingcontextmostrelevanttothiswork,
Broadhurst et al. (2025) used JWST observations of microlensing
eventsintheDragonArcbehindAbell370toarguethattheirskewed
spatialdistributionfavors𝜓DMwith𝑚 𝜓 ≃10 −22 eVoversmoothor
CDM-subhalo predictions.
Several other recent studies have explored FDM signatures in the
magnification properties near radial critical curves (Palencia et al.
2025), wave-optics phenomena in gravitational-wave lensing (Singh
et al. 2025), and time-varying gravitational potentials measurable
with lensed fast radio bursts (Gao et al. 2025).
Despitetheseadvances,withtheexceptionofLarocheetal.2022,
current constraints on𝑚𝜓 are derived from individual systems and
may therefore be vulnerable to poor modeling of baryonic physics
(Hui 2021) or to the absence of full wave-interference simulations
thatcapturehigher-ordernonlineareffects(Dalal&Kravtsov2022).
Accounting for these factors can potentially relax existing bounds
(Palencia et al. 2025). It is therefore important to develop novel,
independent probes of𝑚𝜓 that are immune to the systematic uncer-
taintiesofexistingmethods,sothatconstraintsfromcomplementary
approaches can be cross-checked.
A promising and largely unexplored avenue is to use galaxy clus-
ters – the most powerful gravitational lenses in the universe – as
probes of sub-galactic DM structure. Deep James Webb Space Tele-
scope(JWST)imagingofclusterlensesresolveshundredsofmultiply
imaged background galaxies (e.g., Bergamini et al. 2023; Rihtaršič
et al. 2025), each carrying a statistical imprint of the DM density
along the line of sight. Global parametric lens modeling of cluster-
scale mass distributions is notoriously complex, but a local lensing
formalism – Curved Arc Basis (CAB; Birrer 2021) – circumvents
this challenge by describing the gravitational distortions in the im-
mediate vicinity of each arc. Şengül et al. (2023) demonstrated with
JWST-quality simulations of the cluster lens SMACS 0723 that the
CABapproachcandetectline-of-sightperturberswithmassesdown
to∼10 8 M⊙.
Beyond the detection of individual massive subhalos, one can
study a statistical, population-level signature of𝜓DM substructure
in galaxy clusters. We use theresidual power spectrumP𝛿 (𝑘)(Cyr-
Racine et al. 2019), which quantifies the statistical deviations of the
observed lensed surface brightness from the prediction of a smooth
lensmodel.ThekeyinsightisthattheamplitudeandshapeofP 𝛿 (𝑘)
encodethepopulationstatisticsofallDMsubstructurealongtheline
of sight, allowing𝜓DM and CDM to be differentiated without re-
solving individual subhalos. A similar probe called the substructure
power spectrum (the power spectrum of the projected dark matter
substructure field), was first proposed as a lensing observable by
Hezaveh et al. (2016). It was subsequently developed analytically
and numerically for CDM, WDM, and self-interacting dark matter
(Diaz Rivero et al. 2018a; Díaz Rivero et al. 2018b; Brennan et al.
2019)andextendedtoincorporateline-of-sighthalosandanisotropic
subhalodistributions(Ça ˇganŞengületal.2020;Dhanasinghametal.
2023a,b, 2025).P 𝛿 (𝑘)is the observational counterpart of this theo-
retical quantity, which depends on lens configurations, source mor-
phology, and instrumental effects, but is directly measurable from
strong-lensing data.P 𝛿 (𝑘)has been used to constrain sub-galactic
mass structure with galaxy-galaxy lenses (Bayer et al. 2023b,a), but
has not been applied to strong cluster lenses.
Inthiswork,weusethestatisticalapproachofresidualpowerspec-
tratostudythecharacteristicwave-interferencesignaturesof𝜓DMin
multiply-imaged galaxies from JWST clusters. Strong cluster lenses
provide an especially well-suited avenue for this measurement for
several reasons. Firstly, highly magnified arcs stretch across many
JWST pixels, dramatically increasing both the flux and the spatial
area available for statistical analysis. Secondly, the large number of
multiple images in cluster lenses breaks degeneracies between sub-
structure signals and source modeling flexibility. Finally, the cluster
lensing geometry probes long lines of sight, accumulating stronger
substructure signal from line-of-sight halos.
We simulate JWST-quality mock observations of strong gravita-
tional lensing in galaxy clusters under both the𝜓DM and CDM
paradigms, modeling line-of-sight DM substructure withpyHalo1.
Usingmockdeepexposures(∼20hours),wedemonstratethatP 𝛿 (𝑘)
is sensitive to both the𝜓DM particle mass𝑚𝜓 and the fluctuation
amplitude, and can discriminate𝜓DM fluctuations from CDM sub-
halos. We further show thatP𝛿 (𝑘)can be measured directly from
data using the CAB local lens modeling formalism, and that – with
realistic modeling systematics – the 16th–84th percentile bands of
𝜓DM and CDM are non-overlapping across1≲𝑘≲11 kpc −1,
demonstrating a statistically significant separation between the two
models.
Thepaperisorganizedasfollows.Section2describesthesimula-
tion and analysis pipeline, including the source galaxy, lens cluster,
and substructure models used to produce JWST-quality mock obser-
vations,andthesourceandlensmodelingtechniquesusedtomeasure
𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)in realistic strong-lensing analysis. We present our results in
Section 3, discuss their interpretations in Section 4, and summarize
our conclusions in Section 5.
2 METHODS
We simulate JWST-quality mock observations of galaxy sources
strongly lensed by a cluster and perturbed by a line-of-sight pop-
ulation of substructure, generated under cold dark matter (CDM)
and wave dark matter (𝜓DM) paradigms. We propose that statistical
perturbationsfromthepopulationoflow-massdarkmatterstructures
will be imprinted on the residuals between the observed images and
1 https://github.com/dangilman/pyHalo
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter in JWST3
our best-fit image reconstructions with a smooth model. We intro-
ducetheresidualpowerspectrum,𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘),asasummarystatisticthat
captures this population-level lensing effect to distinguish the𝜓DM
modelfromthefiducialCDMscenario.Weperformarealisticstrong
lensing analysis, jointly fitting the source light and smooth compo-
nent of the lens mass distribution, with a local Curved Arc Basis
(Birrer 2021) formalism to measure𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)directly from the data.
To generate mock observations, we use real galaxy images from
the COSMOS catalog (Scoville et al. 2007, Koekemoer et al. 2007)
as light sources, and model the smooth component of the cluster
lens as an elliptical Navarro-Frenk-White profile (Navarro et al.
1997).WesimulateapopulationofCDMor𝜓DMperturberswithin
and along the line of sight of the galaxy cluster usingpyHalo
(Gilman et al. 2020). For all gravitational lensing computations,
we uselenstronomy(Birrer & Amara 2018, Birrer et al. 2021),
a strong-lensing analysis and simulation software, and we make a
new subpackage publicly available for rendering James Webb Space
Telescope (JWST) quality mock observations2.
2.1 Galaxy sources
The light distribution of galaxies can be approximated by analytic
light profiles (Sérsic 1963). However, real galaxies can have com-
plexmorphologies,rangingfromspiralarmstoirregularshapes.This
variability in source light distribution will imprint a broader range
of features in the lensed images. As modeling systematics prevent
us from perfectly fitting the source galaxy or the lens mass distri-
bution, some residuals of these morphological features may remain
after strong lensing analysis, contributing to a larger variance in the
summarystatisticP 𝛿 (𝑘)foragivendarkmattermodel.Hence,toget
realistic estimates of the error bars, we should fully account for the
variability in the source galaxies.
To this end, we use real galaxy images taken by the Hubble Space
Telescope(HST)intheCosmicEvolutionSurvey(COSMOS)(Scov-
ille et al. 2007, Koekemoer et al. 2007) as source light in our sim-
ulations. We select sources from the COSMOS catalog used in the
GREAT3 gravitational lensing challenge (Mandelbaum et al. 2012,
2014), accessed via thepaltaspackage 3. We filter the catalog to
include only galaxies at𝑧𝑠 ≤1.0(matching our simulation source
redshift), with a minimum cutout size of 120 pixels, a minimum
flux-radius of 40 pixels, and an apparent AB magnitude brighter
than20,retainingasampleofwell-resolved,brightgalaxiessuitable
for gravitational lensing simulations.
We note that the COSMOS images were taken in the F814W
bandoftheHSTAdvancedCameraforSurveys(ACS),whichdiffers
fromtheJWSTNIRCamF150Wobservationsweaimtosimulatein
two important respects: HST ACS has a coarser angular resolution
(0.05′′ pixel−1 nativeplatescale)andhigherpixelnoise.Tomitigate
thesediscrepancies,weupsampleeachHSTimagetothetargetJWST
pixel scale (0.031′′ pixel−1) and then convolve the resulting surface
brightnessmapwithaGaussiansmoothingkernelofwidth𝜎=0.1 ′′
tosuppressHSTpixelnoisebeforelensing.Thisensuresthatdetector
noise from HST is not propagated into the lensed images, where it
couldproducespurioussmall-scaleresidualsthatmimicthesignalof
dark matter substructure. The F814W band also samples bluer rest-
frameemissionthanF150W,sotypicalgalaxieswouldbesomewhat
2 https://github.com/ninoephremidze/statistically_probing_
subgalactic_dark_matter/JWST.py
3 https://github.com/swagnercarena/paltas
brighterinF150W.Hence,usingtheF814Wfluxesmakesoursignal-
to-noise estimates conservative.
To account for source-morphology variability, we draw𝑁src =20
independent, randomly-selected COSMOS sources from the filtered
catalog for each dark matter model realization, yielding𝑁maps =60
residual maps per model (20 sources×3 images). We find that the
16th–84thpercentilebandson𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)arestableunderresamplingof
source subsets, indicating that 20 realizations are sufficient to char-
acterizethesource-morphologyvarianceatthesignal-to-noiselevels
considered here; see Section 3 for the resulting statistical uncertain-
ties.
2.2 Cluster lens model
Galaxy clusters are the largest gravitationally bound objects in the
universe, acting as the most powerful gravitational lenses. Similarly
to other dark matter halos, their smooth mass distribution is well
described by a Navarro-Frenk-White (NFW) profile (Navarro et al.
1997), given by
𝜌NFW (𝑟)= 𝜌s
𝑟
𝑟s

1+ 𝑟
𝑟s
2 ,(1)
where𝑟 𝑠 is the scale radius and𝜌𝑠 is a characteristic density. The
NFW profile can be equivalently parametrized by the virial mass
𝑀200 andconcentration𝑐 200 ≡𝑅 200/𝑟𝑠,where𝑅 200 istheradiusen-
closing a mean density 200 times the critical density. Weak-lensing
observations show that cluster mass distributions are moderately el-
liptical (Shin et al. 2018). We therefore model the cluster as an
elliptical NFW profile by replacing𝑟in Eq. 1 with the elliptical
coordinate𝜉=
√︁
𝑞𝑥2 +𝑦 2/𝑞, where𝑞is the projected axis ra-
tio (Oguri 2021), implemented via the convergent-series expansion
(NFW_ELLIPSE_CSE) inlenstronomy.
We list all lens model parameters in Table 1. We adopt𝑀200 =
1015 𝑀⊙, placing our simulated cluster among the most massive
knownsystems.Thismaximizesrealisticlensingmagnificationsand
ensuresalargecausticareaoverwhichmultiple-imageconfigurations
can be sampled. The concentration𝑐200 =4is derived from the
CDMmass-concentrationrelationofZhaoetal.2009at𝑧=0.4and
is consistent with𝜓DM predictions on cluster scales (Kawai et al.
2024).Thelensandsourceredshiftsare𝑧 lens =0.4and𝑧 source =1.0,
respectively, chosen to place the system in a typical strong-lensing
geometry.
For the ellipticity, we adopt|𝑒|=0.271from the weak-lensing
measurement of Shin et al. 2018, where|𝑒|=(1−𝑞)/(1+𝑞)is
the reduced ellipticity magnitude, corresponding to an axis ratio
𝑞≈0.57. Inlenstronomy’s complex ellipticity parametrization,
this is set as(𝑒1, 𝑒2)=(0.27,0.0), orienting the cluster major axis
along the𝑥-direction.
To produce strongly lensed images, we randomly place a given
COSMOSsourcegalaxy(seeSection2.1)insidetheoutercaustic,at
adistance𝑑 min =0.2 ′′ fromanycausticcurve.Thislowerbounden-
suresthatthecritical-curveimagesarenottoocloselymerged,which
would violate the local-approximation assumption of the CAB for-
malism used in our lens modeling (Section 2). Sources anywhere
inside the caustic that satisfy the minimum separation are accepted,
yieldingthree-imageconfigurationsacrossarangeofmagnifications.
We visualize the lens magnification map and critical curves, along
with the corresponding caustic curves, for the accessible source re-
gion on the source plane in Figure 1.
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

4Ephremidze et al.
Figure 1.Right: Source plane. The position of a randomly placed source galaxy, resulting in three image locations on the lens plane, is shown as a star. The
black solid lines indicate caustic curves, and the shaded yellow region indicates the “safe" region 0.2 away from the caustic curves. Left: Magnification map on
the image plane. The black solid lines show the critical curves, and the three white dots show the positions of the multiply-lensed source galaxy.
Parameter Symbol Value Reference
Virial mass𝑀 200 1015 𝑀⊙ —
Concentration𝑐 200 4Zhao et al. 2009
Lens redshift𝑧 lens 0.4—
Source redshift𝑧 source 1.0—
Ellipticity (aligned)𝑒 1 0.27Shin et al. 2018
Ellipticity (cross)𝑒 2 0.0—
Lens centre(𝑥 0, 𝑦0 ) (0 ′′ ,0 ′′ )—
Density profile — Elliptical NFW Oguri 2021
Table 1.Fiducial elliptical NFW cluster lens model parameters. The ellip-
ticity components𝑒1, 𝑒2 follow the lenstronomy reduced complex ellipticity
convention, where|𝑒|=(1−𝑞)/(1+𝑞)with𝑞=𝑏/𝑎the projected axis
ratio;𝑒 2 =0aligns the major axis with the𝑥-axis. The scale radius𝑟 𝑠
and normalization𝛼 𝑅𝑠 are derived from𝑀200 and𝑐 200 vialenstronomy’s
LensCosmomoduleassumingPlanckcosmology(PlanckCollaborationetal.
2020).
2.3 Dark matter substructure
We simulate dark matter substructure usingpyHalo(Gilman et al.
2020), a Python package for generating self-consistent realiza-
tions of dark matter subhalo populations, line-of-sight (LOS) halos,
and associated sub-galactic structures under a specified dark mat-
ter model. We include subhalos up to a maximum infall mass of
𝑀max =10 9 𝑀⊙. More massive objects produce detectable individ-
ualperturbationsamenabletodirectdetectionmethods(Şengületal.
2023)andareexcludedfromourstatisticaltreatment.Topreservethe
mean surface mass density of the lens, we subtract a uniform neg-
ative convergence sheet whose amplitude equals the total projected
convergence of all rendered substructure.
2.3.1 Cold Dark Matter
For CDM, we use pyHalo’sCDMclass to draw a realization of the
subhalo and LOS halo populations. LOS halos are distributed ac-
cording to the Sheth–Tormen halo mass function (Sheth & Tormen
1999), rescaled by an environment-dependent factor𝜉(𝑀host, 𝑧)that
accounts for the elevated local overdensity in the vicinity of the
cluster host:
𝑑𝑁CDM
𝑑𝑀ℎ 𝑑𝑉 =𝛿 LOS 𝜉(𝑀 host, 𝑧) 𝑑𝑁
𝑑𝑀ℎ 𝑑𝑉

Sheth-Tormen
,(2)
where𝛿 LOS is a normalization factor for the projected LOS volume
element, and𝜉(𝑀 host, 𝑧)is the two-halo term, which captures the
enhancement of the line-of-sight halo abundance from large-scale
structure correlated with the massive cluster host (Gilman et al.
2020). We integrate over a double-cone geometry centered on the
cluster. Subhalos within the cluster are described by the projected
subhalo mass function (SHMF), which follows a power-law in infall
mass,
𝑑𝑁CDM
𝑑𝑀ℎ 𝑑𝐴 = Σsub
𝑀0
 𝑀ℎ
𝑀0
 −𝛼
F (𝑀 host, 𝑧),(3)
whereΣ sub is the projected subhalo surface mass density amplitude,
𝑀0isapivotmass,𝛼isthepower-lawslope,andF (𝑀 host, 𝑧)encodes
thedependenceonthehostmassandredshift.WecalibrateΣ subusing
the SHMF derived from strong lensing observations of Abell 2744
(Natarajanetal.2017,Figure4),andfollowGannonetal.(2025)for
calibrations of the scaling with host mass and redshift.
Cluster subhalos undergo significant tidal stripping as they orbit
within the cluster potential. We model this with a probabilistic ap-
proach in which the bound mass fraction𝑓bound ≡𝑚 bound/𝑚infall is
drawn independently for each subhalo from a log-normal distribu-
tion,
log10 𝑓bound ∼ N (𝜇=−1.0, 𝜎=0.5 ) ,(4)
sothatsubhalosretainonaverage∼10%oftheirinfallmassfollowing
tidaldisruption(Duetal.2025).Thedensityprofileofeachstripped
subhalo is then modeled as a tidally truncated NFW halo,𝜌(𝑟) =
𝜌NFW (𝑟) 𝑓𝑡 /(1+𝑟 2/𝑟2
𝑡 ),where𝑟 𝑡 isthetidaltruncationradiusand𝑓 𝑡
anormalizationfactor,bothfixedbythedrawnboundmassfraction,
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter in JWST5
following the prescription implemented in pyHalo that is based on
simulations presented by Du et al. 2024.
2.3.2 Wave Dark Matter (𝜓DM).
For𝜓DM, we use pyHalo’sULDMclass (Laroche et al. 2022), which
superimposes density fluctuations on the CDM subhalo population
described above, applying the same tidal-stripping prescription. In
𝜓DM, the ultra-light boson of mass𝑚𝜓 behaves as a coherent clas-
sical wave on astrophysical scales. Wave interference between wave
modesproducesstochasticdensityfluctuationsthatarespatiallycor-
related on the de Broglie wavelength,
𝜆dB =0.6
 𝑚 𝜓
10−22 eV
 −1 𝑣
200 km s−1
 −1
kpc,(5)
where𝑣is the virial velocity of the host cluster halo at the lens
redshift, computed from the cluster mass and the critical density at
𝑧lens. Equation 5 shows that more massive bosons produce shorter-
wavelength, finer-grained fluctuations in the convergence field.
Free-streaming of the𝜓DM boson also suppresses structure for-
mation on small scales. The half-mode mass,
𝑀1/2 =3.8×10 10
 𝑚 𝜓
10−22 eV
 −4/3
𝑀⊙,(6)
characterizes the halo mass below which the𝜓DM matter power
spectrum is suppressed by half relative to CDM (Schive et al. 2016;
Hui et al. 2017). The redshift-dependent minimum halo mass is
𝑀min (𝑧)=1.2×10 8
 𝑚 𝜓
10−22 eV
 −3/2
(1+𝑧) 3/4
 𝜁(𝑧)
𝜁(0)
1/4
𝑀⊙,(7)
where𝜁(𝑧)is a redshift-dependent function related to the linear
growth of structure, and is set by the balance between the Jeans
pressure and gravity (Schive et al. 2016). This mass scale sets the
lower integration limit of the halo mass function (Eq. 2).
The amplitude of the density fluctuations is parametrized by
log10 𝐴𝜓, a free parameter that sets the typical amplitude of a fluc-
tuation in the projected mass associated with the wave interference
effects of ULDM. Following the notation of Laroche et al. 2022,
log10 𝐴𝜓 =log 10 𝐴fluc/2, where𝐴 fluc is the fluctuation amplitude
that is calibrated against numerical simulations of wave interference
effects in a ULDM halo presented by Yavetz et al. 2022. Their phys-
icalpredictionforgalaxy-scalehalos,accountingforthedarkmatter
fractionattheEinsteinradius,giveslog 10 𝐴𝜓 =−0.8.Weadoptthis
as our reference physical amplitude throughout. Each fluctuation is
modeledasaGaussianwithzeromean,sothattherenderedfieldper-
turbstheconvergencearoundthesmoothhostdensityprofilewithout
altering its mean. The number of fluctuations per unit area scales as
𝜆−2
dB, since each has a characteristic size set by the de Broglie wave-
length. Individual fluctuations are rendered stochastically within the
lensingaperture,withthenumberofrenderedfluctuationschosento
belargeenoughthatthestatisticalpropertiesoftheresultingconver-
gence field are converged.
Figure 2 illustrates the projected convergence fields for CDM and
the two𝜓DM scenarios considered in this work (explained below).
The CDM field is dominated by the smooth NFW cluster profile
and shows only mild, small-scale perturbations from the subhalo
population.Incontrast,both𝜓DMcasesexhibitdensityfluctuations
superimposed on the smooth background. Case 1 (𝑚𝜓 =10 −22 eV,
log10 𝐴𝜓 =1.2,i.e.100×thephysicalprediction)producescompact,
high-amplitudeoscillationssetbytheshorterdeBrogliewavelength
of the heavier boson. Case 2 (𝑚𝜓 =10 −23 eV,log 10 𝐴𝜓 =−0.8, the
physicalprediction)displayslower-amplitudefluctuationsonalarger
Parameter Value Source
Filter NIRCam F150W —
Pixel scale0.0312 ′′ pixel−1 drizzled SW channel
Image size100×100pixels —
Field of view≈3.1 ′′ ×3.1 ′′ —
PSF modelWebbPSF(pixelised) Perrin et al. 2014
PSF FWHM0.050 ′′ NIRCam PSF docs
Exposure time72,000 s(20 hr) —
Sky background10.26 e − s−1 per362.49pix JWST ETC
AB zero-point28.0 magRigby et al. 2023
Read noise0.94 e − read−1 NIRCam detector specs
Detector gain2.05 e − ADU−1 NIRCam detector specs
Table 2.NIRCam F150W observational and detector settings used in the
JWST mock simulations.
spatial scale, consistent with the de Broglie wavelength growing as
𝜆dB ∝𝑚 −1
𝜓 (Eq. 5). At the cluster virial velocity, this corresponds
to𝜆 dB ≈0.78 kpc(∼5pixels), compared with the sub-pixel𝜆 dB ≈
0.08 kpcof Case 1.
2.4 JWST-quality simulations
We simulate JWST-quality mock observations usinglenstronomy
(Birrer et al. 2021) configured for the NIRCam F150W filter, which
provides the finest available pixel scale, a sharp point spread func-
tion (PSF), and a strong sensitivity to𝑧∼1background galaxies.
The instrumental and observational parameters are summarized in
Table 2.
Pixel scale and image geometry:We adopt the NIRCam short-
wavelength channel drizzled pixel scale of0.0312′′ pixel−1. Each
mock image is100×100pixels, corresponding to a field of view
of≈3.1 ′′ ×3.1 ′′ centered on the lensed arc system. Ray-tracing is
performed tile by tile usinglenstronomy’sSimAPI, after which a
singlePSFconvolutionisappliedtothefullimageforcomputational
efficiency.
Point spread function:The PSF is modeled usingWebbPSF 4,
the official STScI PSF simulation tool for JWST instruments. We
simulate the NIRCam F150W PSF at native pixel resolution and
adopt a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of0.05′′ from the
NIRCamPSFperformancedocumentation.TheresultingPSFkernel
is stored as a pixelized array and passed directly tolenstronomy
for convolution.
Noise model:The noise in each pixel combines three contribu-
tions: (i) Poisson photon noise from the lensed source flux, (ii) sky
background from zodiacal and thermal emission, and (iii) detector
read noise. The sky background rate of10.26 e− s−1 per362.49pix-
els is taken from the JWST Exposure Time Calculator (ETC)5, and
the AB magnitude zero-point of28.0follows the NIRCam F150W
flux calibration (Rigby et al. 2023). The read noise of0.94 e− per
readanddetectorgainof2.05 e − ADU−1 aretakenfromtheNIRCam
detector performance specifications.
Exposure time:Our fiducial mocks assume a total exposure time
of𝑡 exp =72,000 s(20 hours), representative of a deep JWST cluster
lensing program.
4 https://www.stsci.edu/jwst/science-planning/
proposal-planning-toolbox/psf-simulation-tool
5 https://jwst.etc.stsci.edu/
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

6Ephremidze et al.
Figure 2.Projected substructure convergence fieldsΔ𝜅for a representative mock realization under three dark matter models.Columns(left to right): CDM,
showing perturbations from subhalos with masses between106 −10 9 𝑀⊙;𝜓DM Case 1 (𝑚𝜓 =10 −22 eV,log 10 𝐴𝜓 =1.2), showing high-amplitude density
fluctuations on the𝜆dB scale; and𝜓DM Case 2 (𝑚𝜓 =10 −23 eV,log 10 𝐴𝜓 =−0.8), showing lower-amplitude fluctuations on a larger spatial scale, reflecting
the longer𝜆dB of the lighter boson.Top row: the continuous physicalΔ𝜅field, evaluated on a grid with a pixel scale8×finer than JWST.Bottom row: the same
field sampled on the JWST pixel grid (100×100pixels at0.031′′ pixel−1) used for the mock observations.
2.5 Measuring𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)
The residual power spectrum𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)is the two-dimensional power
spectrum of the normalized residual images obtained after subtract-
ing the best-fit smooth lens and source model from each observed
(mock) image. Dark matter substructure perturbs the lensing deflec-
tion field on scales set by the projected masses and positions of
subhalos, and perturbations that cannot be absorbed by the smooth
CABlensmodelmanifestasspatiallycoherentpatternsintheresidu-
als.Theamplitudeandscale-dependenceof𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)thereforeencode
the statistical properties of the underlying subhalo population.
Thediscriminatingpoweragainst𝜓DMarisesfromthecoherence
of the density fluctuations. The de Broglie interference pattern pro-
ducesdensityperturbationscorrelatedon𝜆 dB (Eq.5),whichimprint
excesspowerin𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)atwavenumbers𝑘≲2𝜋/𝜆 dBrelativetoCDM.
Inprojection,contributionsfromarangeofcoherencelengthsalong
the line of sight smear this excess into a broadband excess rather
than a narrow spectral peak. The de Broglie scale therefore sets the
characteristic wavenumberabovewhich the excess power falls off,
ratherthanproducingapeakatasingle𝑘.Lighterbosonshavelarger
𝜆dB and consequently shift the excess to smaller𝑘(larger scales),
while heavier bosons confine it to larger𝑘, providing a handle on
𝑚 𝜓.
We measure𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)from each mock observation through three
sequential steps: (i) model the source light with a shapelet basis
(Section 2.6), (ii) fit the local lens model jointly with the source
via Bayesian nested sampling (Sections 2.7–2.8), (iii) compute the
2D power spectrum of the normalized residual maps (Section 2.9).
Averaging𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)over many source realizations and substructure
drawssuppressesvariancefromindividualsourcemorphologiesand
stochastic halo realizations, making the population-level imprint of
the dark matter model visible.
2.6 Source modeling
We model the source light distribution using a shapelet basis (Re-
fregier2003,Birreretal.2015).Shapeletsareanorthonormalsetof
two-dimensionalbasisfunctionsconstructedfromweightedHermite
polynomials and form a complete basis for representing arbitrary
smooth surface brightness distributions. A shapelet model is char-
acterized by a maximum polynomial order𝑛max, a reference scale𝛽
thatsetsthephysicalsizeofthebasis,andacentroid(𝜃 𝑠, 𝑥, 𝜃𝑠, 𝑦).The
basis contains𝑚independent functions, whose coefficients are de-
termined analytically by a linear solve at each likelihood evaluation
(see Section 2.8), where𝑚is set by:
𝑚= (𝑛max +1) (𝑛 max +2)
2 .(8)
The smallest spatial scale resolved at order𝑛 max and scale𝛽
isℓ min =𝛽/ √𝑛max +1. We reparametrize the shapelet scale as
˜𝛽=𝛽 √𝑛max +1, where ˜𝛽is sampled as a nonlinear parameter,
ensuringℓ min remainsapproximatelyconstantwith𝑛 max.Thesource
centroid(𝜃 𝑠, 𝑥, 𝜃𝑠, 𝑦)isalsotreatedasanonlinearfreeparameterwith
a uniform prior of±0.2′′ around the image center. A single shapelet
model is shared across all three lensed images in the joint fit. We
adopt𝑛 max =20for the shapelet source, ensuring that the model is
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter in JWST7
flexible enough to capture realistic COSMOS sources, while being
computationally efficient. At the same time, a model that is overly
flexible may risk absorbing some lensing perturbations from sub-
structure, although a single source model constrained from three
distinct images has limited freedom to mimic spatially incoherent
image-plane residuals. We discuss this limitation in Section 4.
2.7 Lens modeling
We model the gravitational lens at each image position using the
Curved Arc Basis (CAB) formalism (Birrer 2021), which provides
a local approximation to the lensing deflection field in the neigh-
borhood of each image. Rather than fitting a global parametric mass
model for the full cluster, the CAB formalism describes the lensing
effect at a given position through four observables derived from the
local lensing Jacobian: the tangential stretch𝜆tan, the radial stretch
𝜆rad, the arc curvature𝑠tan, and the arc orientation𝜙.
We use theCURVED_ARC_SIS_MSTimplementation in
lenstronomy(Birrer et al. 2021), in which the local deflec-
tion angle at position®𝜃relative to a reference point®𝜃0 is
®𝛼(®𝜃)=𝜆 −1
rad
h
®𝛼SIS ( ®𝜃) − ®𝛼SIS

®𝜃0
i
+

1−𝜆 −1
rad

®𝜃− ®𝜃0

,(9)
where ®𝜃0 maps to the arc center by construction, and the SIS deflec-
tion centered at®𝜃𝑐 is
®𝛼SIS ( ®𝜃)=𝑠 −1
tan

1− 𝜆rad
𝜆tan
 ®𝜃− ®𝜃𝑐
| ®𝜃− ®𝜃𝑐 |
.(10)
The four CAB parameters(𝜆tan, 𝜆 rad, 𝑠 tan, 𝜙)are independent for
eachimageandcanbeestimatedfromthesmoothNFWmacro-model
(Section 2.3) by computing the local lensing Jacobian analytically
at each image position. We additionally include a two-component
positional shift(𝛼 𝑥, 𝛼𝑦)for each image to absorb rigid astrometric
offsets not captured by the local arc model.
We perform a joint fit to all three lensed images simultaneously.
For image 1, we fix𝜆rad =1(normalizing the overall magnification
scale),leavingthreefreeCABparameters.Images2and3eachhave
fourfreeCABparametersplustwoshiftcomponents.Combinedwith
thethreenonlinearsourceparameters( ˜𝛽,𝜃 𝑠, 𝑥,𝜃 𝑠, 𝑦),thetotalnumber
of nonlinear parameters is 18.
2.8 Bayesian nested sampling
We infer the joint posterior over all nonlinear model parametersq
using Bayesian nested sampling implemented indynesty(Speagle
2020). We adopt uniform priors on all nonlinear CAB parameters,
centeredonthesmooth-modelestimateswithwidthsmuchlargerthan
the lens parameter shifts expected from the addition of substructure:
𝜆rad ∈ ˆ𝜆rad ±1.5, 𝜆 tan ∈ ˆ𝜆tan ±2.25,
𝑠tan ∈ˆ𝑠tan ±0.75, 𝜙∈ ˆ𝜙± 3𝜋
16 ,
where hatted quantities denote the NFW macro-model estimates.
Positional shifts are constrained to|𝛼𝑥, 𝑦 | ≤0.2 ′′, and the source
scale parameter to˜𝛽∈ [0.0,2.5]arcsec.
At each likelihood evaluation, the𝑚=231linear shapelet coeffi-
cientsaresolvedforanalyticallyviaweightedleastsquares(WLS)by
constructing the joint linear response matrix across all three images
and inverting it against the pixel data (Birrer et al. 2015). This semi-
linearapproachreducestheeffectivenonlinearparameterspacefrom
18+231to 18 dimensions, dramatically accelerating convergence.
The pixel-level Gaussian likelihood is
𝑃(D|q)=
exp
h
− 1
2 (D−M(q)) 𝑇 𝚺−1
pixel(D−M(q))
i
√︃
(2𝜋) dim(D) det 𝚺pixel
 ,(11)
whereDisthevectorofobservedpixelfluxesacrossallthreeimages,
M(q)is the model prediction, and𝚺 pixel is the diagonal noise co-
variance matrix with per-pixel variances combining Poisson photon
noise and read noise in quadrature. The posterior is computed using
Bayes’ theorem:
𝑃(q|D) ∝𝑃(q)𝑃(D|q).(12)
WerunthenestedsamplerwithaconvergencecriterionofΔlnZ ≤
10−3, whereZ=
∫
𝑃(q)𝑃(D|q)𝑑qis the Bayesian evidence and
ΔlnZis the estimated remaining change inlnZfrom continued
iteration. Sampling is parallelized across 112 CPU cores, with each
core evaluating an independent likelihood call. For each dark matter
modelandsourcerealization,wesavethefullposteriorsample,from
which we subsequently compute the best-fit image reconstruction
and residual map.
2.9 Power spectrum computation
From each of the𝑁 src =20source realizations per dark matter
model, we obtain three residual images – one per lensed image –
giving𝑁 maps =60residual maps per model. Each residual map
is defined as the noise-normalized difference between the observed
image and the best-fit model at the posterior maximumˆq:
𝛿𝑖 ( ®𝜃)=
𝐷𝑖 ( ®𝜃) −𝑀 𝑖

ˆq, ®𝜃

𝜎𝑖 ( ®𝜃)
,(13)
where𝐷 𝑖 is the observed pixel flux,𝑀𝑖 ( ˆq)is the model-predicted
flux, and𝜎 𝑖 is the per-pixel noise standard deviation combining
Poisson and read noise in quadrature. Normalizing by𝜎𝑖 places
residuals in units of noise standard deviations, so that the power
spectrum of pure noise is a flat (white) spectrum. The excess power
abovethiswhite-noisefloorsignalscoherentstructureintheresiduals
fromanycombinationofunmodeledsubstructureandimperfections
inthesource+lensmodeling.WeisolatethelatterinAppendixA.In
whatfollows,werefertotheexcessfromsystematicsasthemodeling
residual floorand to genuine substructure-driven excess above this
floor as the substructure signal.
We compute𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)for each residual map using thepowerbox
Python package (Murray 2018). For each100×100pixel map,
powerboxperformsa2DdiscreteFouriertransformandazimuthally
averages| ˜𝛿(𝑘 𝑥, 𝑘 𝑦)| 2 into 20 linearly-spaced annular bins, return-
ing the isotropic power spectrum𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘). To convert the Fourier
wavenumber from pixel−1 to physical units, we project the image-
plane pixel scale to the lens plane. The physical field size is
𝐿=𝑁 pix 𝜃pix 𝑑lens
𝐴 ,(14)
where𝑁 pix =100,𝜃 pix =0.031 ′′ pixel−1, and𝑑 lens
𝐴 is the an-
gular diameter distance to the lens at𝑧lens =0.4, computed us-
inglenstronomy’sLensCosmomodule with Planck cosmology
(Planck Collaboration et al. 2020). The resulting𝑘-bins span𝑘∈
[0.85,25]kpc −1, corresponding to spatial scales of approximately
0.25–7 kpcin the lens plane.
For each dark matter model, we report the median𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)across
all60residualmaps,withthe16th–84thpercentilebandasameasure
ofvarianceduetosourcemorphologyandsubhalostochasticity.The
ensemblecomparisonof𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)betweenCDMand𝜓DMconstitutes
our primary observable for dark matter model discrimination.
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

8Ephremidze et al.
3 RESULTS
We present results for two complementary analyses. First, as a theo-
reticalupperbound,weestimatetheresidualpowerspectrum𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)
directly from the mock images without any lens modeling, to estab-
lish what signal is in principle available. Second, we apply the full
CAB+shapeletfittingpipelineto20-hourJWSTmockobservations,
computing𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)from the fitting residuals for three dark matter
models:CDM,andtwo𝜓DMscenariosthatbrackettherangeofob-
servationalinterest.Case 1uses𝑚 𝜓 =10 −22 eVwithlog 10 𝐴𝜓 =1.2,
i.e.100×the physical prediction of Laroche et al. 2022, probing a
strongly detectable𝜓DM signal.Case 2uses𝑚 𝜓 =10 −23 eVwith
log10 𝐴𝜓 =−0.8,thephysicalpredictionofLarocheetal.2022,rep-
resenting the most astrophysically motivated scenario. To map the
mass dependence at the physical amplitude, we additionally present
results forlog 10 (𝑚 𝜓/eV) ∈ {−22,−21}alongside Case 2 in the
power spectrum comparison. For each model we analyze𝑁src =20
source realizations×3 images=60residual maps.
3.1 Theoretical Residual Power Spectra
As a theoretical baseline, we compute the residual power spectrum
𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)directly from the raw lensing signal of DM substructure,
withoutanymodelingstep.Foreachmockrealization,wegeneratea
smooth image (no substructure) and a substructure image under the
same source and macro-lens, and form the deviation map
𝛿th
𝑖 = 𝐼subs
𝑖 −𝐼 smooth
𝑖
𝜎𝑖
,(15)
where𝐼 subs
𝑖 and𝐼 smooth
𝑖 arethesubstructureandsmoothmockimages
respectively,and𝜎 𝑖 isthepixelnoise.Thisquantityisolatesthepure
lensingimprintofDMsubstructureand,undertheassumptionofper-
fectknowledgeofthesmoothlensmodel,setsanupperboundonthe
discriminatingpowerachievablebyanyfitting-basedanalysis.While
weaddnegativeconvergencemasssheetstocompensatefortheextra
projected mass from substructure, the CDM subhalo population is
clumpyandnon-Gaussian,andcanproducecoherentlarge-scaleper-
turbations to the effective smooth lens model. This introduces some
inaccuracy into the theoretical residuals, which is reflected in the
systematic offset between the best-fit and CAB-estimate parameters
shown in Appendix B. In practice, this means the theoretical𝑃th
𝛿 (𝑘)
slightly overestimates the large-scale (low-𝑘) power relative to the
full fitting analysis: a realistic CAB fit absorbs part of this coherent
large-scale perturbation into the smooth macro-model, whereas the
theoretical residual, computed against the true input macro-model,
retainsit.Thetheoreticalspectrashouldthereforebereadasanupper
bound on the available signal rather than an exact prediction of the
fitted result.
A key parameter governing the𝜓DM signal is the fluctuation
amplitude𝐴 𝜓. Laroche et al. 2022 provide a physical prediction
log10 𝐴𝜓 =−0.8,calibratedagainstthenumerical𝜓DMsimulations
of Yavetz et al. (2022). However, this calibration was derived for
galaxy-scale halos, and its applicability to the dense environments
of galaxy clusters is uncertain. In clusters, the coherence of𝜓DM
on kpc scales may be altered by tidal forces, baryonic feedback, and
the substantially deeper gravitational potential, all of which could
suppress or enhance the amplitude of density fluctuations relative to
thefieldprediction.Wethereforetreat𝐴 𝜓 asafreeparameterinthis
work, and use the theoretical power spectra to understand how the
detectabilityof𝜓DMwith𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)dependsonboth𝐴 𝜓 andtheboson
mass𝑚 𝜓.
Figure 3 shows the deviation maps𝛿th
𝑖 for three boson masses at
Figure 3.Deviation maps𝛿 th
𝑖 =(𝐼 subs −𝐼 smooth )/𝜎for𝜓DM at three
bosonmasseslog 10 (𝑚 𝜓/eV) ∈ { −21,−22,−23}atthephysicalfluctuation
amplitudelog 10 (𝐴 𝜓 )=−0.8from Laroche et al. 2022, for a representative
sourcerealization.Toprow:smoothreferenceimages.Subsequentrowpairs:
each pair shows, for one boson mass, the𝜓DM mock image (top of the
pair) and deviation map (bottom of the pair, with±30𝜎,±3𝜎and±30𝜎
color scales, respectively). At𝑚 𝜓 =10 −21 eV,𝜆 dB ≈0.008 kpcis sub-
pixel at cluster virial velocities. Fluctuations are unresolved, and residuals
are dominated by the CDM-like subhalo population. At𝑚𝜓 =10 −22 eV,
subhalos are strongly suppressed, but𝜆dB ≈0.08 kpcremains sub-pixel and
the fluctuation amplitude is small, leaving only faint structure. At𝑚𝜓 =
10−23 eV,𝜆 dB ≈0.78 kpc(∼5pixels) is resolved, and the granules produce
the coherent, large-scale alternating residuals visible in the bottom row pair.
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter in JWST9
Figure 4.Deviation maps𝛿 th
𝑖 =(𝐼 subs −𝐼 smooth )/𝜎for𝜓DM with
fixed𝑚 𝜓 =10 −22 eVat three fluctuation amplitudeslog 10 (𝐴 𝜓 ) ∈
{0.2,0.7,1.2}, for a representative source realization.Top row: smooth
reference images.Subsequent row pairs: each pair shows, for one fluctuation
amplitude, the𝜓DM mock image (top of the pair) and its deviation map
(bottom of row pair) with±3𝜎,±5𝜎, and±7𝜎color scales, respectively
for increasing𝐴 𝜓. Atlog10 (𝐴 𝜓 )=0.2, the deviation maps are barely dis-
tinguishablefromnoise,suppressingresidualstructureevenrelativetoCDM
prediction. Atlog 10 (𝐴 𝜓 )=0.7, stronger structure begins to emerge in the
deviation maps. Atlog10 (𝐴 𝜓 )=1.2, the density fluctuations produce pro-
nounced, spatially extended patches of alternating positive and negative sig-
nal,demonstratingthatthedetectabilityof𝜓DMwith𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)growsstrongly
with the fluctuation amplitude.
the physical fluctuation amplitudelog10 (𝐴 𝜓)=−0.8from Laroche
et al. 2022, illustrating three distinct physical regimes set by the
interplaybetweenthesubhaloabundancevs.wave-interferencescale
and amplitude in the cluster environment.
At𝑚 𝜓 =10 −21 eV, the de Broglie wavelength at the cluster virial
velocity (𝑣200 ≈1535 km s −1 for𝑀 200 =10 15 𝑀⊙ at𝑧=0.4) is
𝜆dB ≈0.008 kpc(Equation5),farbelowthepixelscaleof≈0.17 kpc.
The density fluctuations are therefore unresolved, contributing neg-
ligibly to the deviation maps. At this mass, the halo mass function
suppression is moderate, so the subhalo population is similar to that
ofCDM.Consequently,thedeviationmapsaredominatedbyCDM-
like subhalo contributions.
At𝑚 𝜓 =10 −22 eV, the subhalo mass function begins to be sup-
pressed strongly, but the fluctuation scale grows only to𝜆dB ≈
0.08 kpc–stillsub-pixelatclustervirialvelocities–andthephysical
fluctuation amplitude at this mass is small. The combined effect is a
deviation map with only faint, barely discernible structure.
At𝑚 𝜓 =10 −23 eV,theinverse-massscaling𝜆 dB ∝𝑚 −1
𝜓 bringsthe
fluctuation scale to𝜆dB ≈0.78 kpc(∼5pixels) and the fluctuation
amplitudeissignificantlystronger.Thedensitygranulesarenowspa-
tially resolved, and their imprint on the deviation maps is dramatic:
coherentpatchesofalternatingpositiveandnegativesignal,spanning
many pixels, trace the underlying𝜓DM granule pattern across the
arc. This progression directly reflects the scaling of the de Broglie
wavelength𝜆 dB ∝𝑚 −1
𝜓 :lighterbosonsproducelarger-scalecoherent
densityfluctuationsthatleavestrongerimprintsonthelensedsurface
brightness.
Figure4showsthecomplementarydependenceonfluctuationam-
plitude for a fixed boson mass𝑚𝜓 =10 −22 eV. Atlog10 (𝐴 𝜓)=0.2,
the deviation maps look similar to noise and the mock images are
indistinguishable from the smooth reference by eye. Increasing the
amplitude tolog10 (𝐴 𝜓)=0.7produces faint but coherent speckled
structure in the deviation maps, while atlog10 (𝐴 𝜓)=1.2the resid-
uals show pronounced large-scale alternating positive and negative
patches, and the mock images themselves develop visible granular
texture. This illustrates that even though individual𝜓DM density
fluctuationsarehiddeninthenoise,theirstatisticalimprinton𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)
grows monotonically with𝐴𝜓.
Figure 5 quantifies the amplitude dependence. We show
𝑃th
𝛿 (𝑘)for CDM and𝜓DM at five values oflog 10 (𝐴 𝜓) ∈
{−0.8,−0.3,0.2,0.7,1.2}, spanning from∼1×to100×the phys-
ical prediction (log10 𝐴𝜓 =−0.8) of Laroche et al. 2022, computed
from 60 deviation maps per model. All spectra show a steeply de-
clining power law, reflecting the combined effect of stochastic sub-
structure perturbations, source morphology, local lens model, and
the PSF. Atlog10 (𝐴 𝜓) ∈ {−0.8,−0.3,0.2}, the density fluctuations
are weak, and because the CDM subhalo mass function is strongly
suppressed at𝑚 𝜓 =10 −22 eV, the𝜓DM signal fallsbelowthe CDM
prediction across the full𝑘range. Atlog 10 (𝐴 𝜓)=0.7, the grow-
ing fluctuations produce a𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)signal comparable in amplitude to
CDM, though the two spectra differ in slope, reflecting the distinct
spatial structure of𝜓DM granules relative to discrete subhalos. At
log10 (𝐴 𝜓)=1.2, the𝜓DM power dominates strongly over CDM,
particularlyatsmallscales,exceedingitbyalmostanorderofmagni-
tudeat𝑘∼10 kpc −1.Sincethebosonmassisfixed,theshapeofthe
excess (above the white noise floor) does not change with amplitude
– only the overall normalization rises with increasing𝐴𝜓.
In Figure 6, we show the dependence of𝑃th
𝛿 (𝑘)on boson mass at
the physical fluctuation amplitudelog10 (𝐴 𝜓)=−0.8from Laroche
et al. (2022), which we note is an extrapolation to cluster environ-
ments. We vary the boson mass over three valueslog10 (𝑚 𝜓/eV) ∈
{−23,−22,−21}, computed from 60 deviation maps per model. At
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

10Ephremidze et al.
Figure 5.Theoreticalresidualpowerspectra𝑃 th
𝛿 (𝑘)forCDMand𝜓DMwith
fixedbosonmass𝑚 𝜓 =10 −22 eVatfivefluctuationamplitudeslog 10 (𝐴 𝜓 ) ∈
{ −0.8,−0.3,0.2,0.7,1.2}, computed from 60 deviation maps (20 source
realizations×3 images) per model. Solid lines show the median; shaded
bandsthe16th–84thpercentileinterval.Allspectradeclinesteeplywith𝑘,and
CDM and𝜓DM differ in their slope of𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)at scales𝑘≲3 kpc −1. With
log10 (𝐴 𝜓 )=1.2,𝜓DM produces a broadband elevation above the CDM
baseline that is clearly distinguishable for𝑘≳3 kpc −1. Lower fluctuation
amplitudes lead to a drop in power below the prediction of CDM.
𝑚 𝜓 =10 −21 eV,the𝜓DMspectrumisindistinguishablefromCDM:
the subhalo mass function suppression is moderate, while the𝜆dB
is far below the pixel scale and the fluctuation amplitude is neg-
ligibly small, so the density fluctuations do not contribute to the
signal. At𝑚 𝜓 =10 −22 eV, the subhalo mass function is strongly
suppressed but the fluctuation scale and amplitude remain small, so
the net𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)signal dropsbelowthe CDM prediction. Distinguish-
ing this model from CDM would be possible with highly accurate
source and lens modeling methods that can fit JWST-quality images
with very low modeling systematics. The clearest separation occurs
at𝑚 𝜓 =10 −23 eV,wherethelarger𝜆 dB andstrongerfluctuationam-
plitude produce a𝜓DM spectrum that clearly exceeds CDM at most
scales, with non-overlapping uncertainty bands.
3.2 Joint Modeling: Reconstructions and Residuals
Having established the theoretical baseline from direct image differ-
encing, we now turn to the full fitting pipeline, in which the smooth
lens model is not known but is inferred jointly with the source from
eachmockobservation.Wefirstexaminethevisualappearanceofthe
mock images and the quality of the CAB+shapelet fit for each dark
matter model. Figures 7–9 each show, for a representative source
realization, the 20-hour JWST mock observation, the best-fit model
reconstruction, and the normalized residual map𝛿𝑖 =(𝐷 𝑖 −𝑀 𝑖)/𝜎𝑖
(Eq.13)foreachofthethreelensedimages,togetherwiththerecon-
structed source-plane model.
ForCDM(Figure7),theresidualmapsshowlow-amplitudecoher-
entstructure.Acontrollednulltestonsmooth,no-substructuremocks
(AppendixA)revealsthatthisstructureisdominatedbysource+lens
modelingsystematicsratherthanbylensingperturbationsfromCDM
subhalos: the per-pixel signal from individual106–109 𝑀⊙ subhalos
sits below the floor set by imperfect source and lens modeling at our
20-hour JWST depth. The post-fit CDM residuals therefore measure
the modeling-systematics floor – the small-scale stochastic structure
is the baseline against which the𝜓DM signal will be assessed using
the residual power spectrum.
Figure 6.Theoretical residual power spectra𝑃 th
𝛿 (𝑘)for CDM and𝜓DM
at three boson masseslog10 (𝑚 𝜓/eV) ∈ { −23,−22,−21}, with the fluc-
tuation amplitude set to the physical predictionlog10 (𝐴 𝜓 )=−0.8from
Laroche et al. 2022. Solid lines show the median over 60 deviation maps per
model; shaded bands show the 16th–84th percentile interval. At the phys-
ical amplitude,𝑚 𝜓 =10 −23 eVshows a clear excess above CDM at all
scales,𝑚 𝜓 =10 −22 eVshows less power than CDM at𝑘≲10kpc −1, and
𝑚𝜓 =10 −21 eVis indistinguishable from CDM.
For𝜓DMCase1(Figure8),theresidualsshowaqualitativechange
incharacterrelativetoCDM.Themockimagesexhibitafaintgranu-
lartexturealongthearcstructures,whicharisefromthestrong𝜓DM
density fluctuations at this high amplitude. The reconstructions are
smooth and do not capture these features, confirming that the𝜓DM
imprint is not absorbed into the macro-lens model but instead leaks
into the residuals.
For𝜓DM Case 2 (Figure 9), at𝑚𝜓 =10 −23 eVandlog 10 (𝐴 𝜓)=
−0.8, the effect on the mock images is striking. Unlike Case 1,
the mock images themselves are visibly irregular: each arc shows
a clumpy, non-smooth morphology that is visually distinguishable
from the smooth CDM images. The residual maps are dominated by
large-scalecoherentstructureswithalternatingpositiveandnegative
regions, tracing the𝜓DM density fluctuations on scales of several
kpc.Thesourcereconstructionalsolooksslightlymoreclumpythan
Case1,suggestingthatsomesubstructuresignalmaybeabsorbedby
the flexible source model. The marginalized posterior distributions
oftheCABparametersrecoveredbythenestedsamplerforeachdark
matter model are presented in Appendix B.
3.3 Residual Power Spectra
We now quantify the differences between the dark matter models
using the residual power spectrum𝑃𝛿 (𝑘), computed from residuals
obtained after strong-lensing analysis as described in Section 2.9.
3.3.1 Case 1:𝑚 𝜓 =10 −22 eV,100×physical amplitude.
Figure 10 shows𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)for CDM and𝜓DM Case 1. As shown in
Appendix A, the CDM curve here is dominated by the modeling-
systematics floor – the residual power that the CAB+shapelet
pipeline produces even on smooth, no-substructure mocks – rather
than by the bare lensing perturbations of individual CDM subha-
los. The𝜓DM Case 1 curve sits a factor of∼3–10above this floor
across𝑘∼2–11 kpc −1, with non-overlapping 16th–84th percentile
bandsoverthisrange,demonstratingcleardiscriminabilityofastrong
𝜓DMfluctuationamplitudefromtheCDM+systematicsbaselinein
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter in JWST11
Figure 7.Representative 20-hour JWST mock observations of cluster-scale
strong lensing withCDMsubstructure (top row), best-fit CAB+shapelet
(𝑛max =20) model reconstructions (second row), normalized residual maps
(𝐷−𝑀)/𝜎(third row), and reconstructed source model (bottom left), for
each of the three lensed images. Residuals are low-amplitude (color map
shows±3𝜎). As we show in Appendix A, using a null test on smooth (no-
substructure)mocks,thecoherentresidualstructurevisiblehereisdominated
by source+lens modeling systematics rather than by lensing perturbations
from CDM subhalos: at 20-hour JWST depth, with subhalos rendered in
106 ≤𝑀 sub/𝑀⊙ ≤10 9, the CDM signal sits at or below this modeling-
systematics floor.
a single 20-hour JWST observation. The shape of the𝜓DM Case 1
spectrum – a steep, featureless power law – closely matches the
corresponding theoretical prediction in Figure 5, with a modest re-
duction in amplitude as the flexible CAB model absorbs some of
the large-scale power. The CDM curve, by contrast, does not trace
its theoretical counterpart: the systematics floor exceeds the bare
CDM prediction at all scales shown, so the post-fit measurement is
insensitivetotheunderlyingsubhalosignalinthismassrangeatour
exposure depth.
3.3.2 Case 2: physical fluctuation amplitude (log10 𝐴𝜓 =−0.8),
varying boson mass.
Figure 11 shows𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)for CDM and𝜓DM at the physical fluctua-
tion amplitudelog10 (𝐴 𝜓)=−0.8from Laroche et al. 2022 for three
boson masses. The overall shapes mirror those of the corresponding
theoretical spectra in Figure 6, confirming that the fitting pipeline
preserves the qualitative structure of the signal. The𝑚𝜓 =10 −23 eV
resultshowsastrongsignal:the𝜓DMbandisclearlyseparatedfrom
CDM across all scales shown (1 kpc−1 ≲𝑘≲10 kpc −1), with non-
Figure 8.Same as Figure 7, but forCase 1𝜓DM substructure:𝑚 𝜓 =
10−22 eV,log 10 (𝐴 𝜓 )=1.2(100×the physical prediction of Laroche et al.
2022). The mock images show a subtle granular texture along the arcs com-
paredtothesmoothCDMcase.Theresidualmapsrevealcoherentelongated
patches of excess and deficit, preferentially aligned with the arc positions, at
amplitudes of several𝜎.
overlappinguncertaintybands,demonstratingthatthelightestboson
mass probed is detectable with a single 20-hour JWST observation
even at the physical fluctuation amplitude. In contrast to the theo-
retical spectra (Figure 6), where𝑚𝜓 =10 −22 eVshows a significant
suppression in power relative to CDM, both𝑚𝜓 =10 −22 eVand
𝑚 𝜓 =10 −21 eVare indistinguishable from CDM in the full fitting
results. This degradation reflects the impact of realistic modeling
systematics: the fitting pipeline cannot reduce residuals to the noise
floor, and the additional non-Gaussian residuals introduced by im-
perfect source and lens modeling erase the modest separations that
are theoretically available at these masses.
4 DISCUSSION
Our results establish that the residual power spectrum𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)is a
viable statistical probe of𝜓DM in cluster lenses. We begin with a
physical interpretation of the broadband𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)excess and its con-
nectiontothesubstructureconvergencepowerspectrum𝑃 𝜅 (𝑘)–the
power spectrum of the projected dark matter density field, first pro-
posedasalensingobservablebyHezavehetal.(2016)andcomputed
analyticallyforarangeofdarkmattermodels(e.g.DíazRiveroetal.
2018b). We then situate our approach within the landscape of ex-
isting𝜓DM constraints – including flux-ratio anomalies and VLBI
lensing – and highlight the complementary regime probed by the
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

12Ephremidze et al.
Figure 9.Same as Figure 7, but forCase 2𝜓DM substructure:𝑚 𝜓 =
10−23 eV,log 10 (𝐴 𝜓 )=−0.8(the physical prediction of Laroche et al.
2022).Themockimagesshowirregular,clumpymorphologycomparedtothe
smoothCDMcase.Theresidualmapsaredominatedbylarge-scalecoherent
structures, with alternating patches of strong positive and negative residuals
that trace the𝜓DM density fluctuations on scales of several kpc, exceeding
what is seen in the CDM case.
Figure 10.Residual power spectra𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)for CDM (blue),𝜓DM Case 1
(𝑚𝜓 =10 −22 eVandlog 10 𝐴𝜓 =1.2; pink), and smooth (see Appendix A;
black) mocks. Colored lines show the median, and shaded bands show
the 16th–84th percentile interval over 60 residual maps. The smooth and
CDM curves coincide, showing that the CDM result is set by the modeling-
systematics floor rather than by the lensing signal of subhalos. The𝜓DM
median exceeds this baseline by a factor of∼3–10across𝑘∼2–11 kpc−1,
with non-overlapping uncertainty bands over this range.
Figure 11.Residual power spectra𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)for CDM (blue),𝜓DM at three
boson masseslog 10 (𝑚 𝜓/eV) ∈ { −21,−22,−23}with the fluctuation am-
plitude set to the physical predictionlog10 𝐴𝜓 =−0.8from Laroche et al.
2022, and smooth mocks (see Appendix A; black). Colored lines show the
median over 60 residual maps, and shaded bands show the 16th–84th per-
centileinterval.Thesmooth,CDMandhigher𝜓DMmass(𝑚 𝜓 ≳10 −22 eV)
curvescoincide, showingthat theresultsare setby themodeling-systematics
floor rather than by the lensing signal of substructure. The𝑚𝜓 =10 −23 eV
(purple)isclearlyseparatedfromthisbaselineatallscalesshown(1 kpc −1 ≲
𝑘≲11 kpc −1).
cluster-scale power spectrum. We subsequently discuss the limita-
tions and modeling assumptions of the present work, and conclude
by outlining the most promising directions for future work.
4.1 Physical interpretation
𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)is the observational realization of the substructure conver-
gence power spectrum𝑃𝜅 (𝑘)– the power spectrum of the projected
dark matter density field – which Hezaveh et al. (2016) first pro-
posed as a lensing observable and Diaz Rivero et al. (2018a); Díaz
Riveroetal.(2018b)computedanalyticallyforgalaxy-scalesystems,
showing sensitivity to CDM, warm dark matter, and self-interacting
dark matter. The present work extends this framework to the cluster
regime and to the𝜓DM model. The mapping from𝑃𝜅 (𝑘)to𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘),
however, involves several non-trivial steps, with contributions from
the source galaxies, local lensing fields, and observational settings.
Akeycontributionofthispaperisthereforetoestablishthequantita-
tivetransferfromthetheoreticallywell-studied𝑃 𝜅 (𝑘)tothedirectly
observable𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)in the cluster lensing context.
The results presented in Section 3 establish two key points: the
𝜓DM signal survives the CAB+shapelet fitting step without being
absorbed by the smooth lens or the flexible source model, and the
resulting𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)is sensitive to both the boson mass and the fluctu-
ation amplitude, with statistically significant separation from CDM
achievable with a single 20-hour JWST observation.
The absence of a sharp spectral peak in𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)at𝑘∼2𝜋/𝜆 dB
is physically expected in the regime of our simulations. For𝑚𝜓 =
10−22 eVattheclustervirialvelocity𝑣 200 ≈1535 km s −1,Equation5
gives𝜆 dB ≈0.08 kpc, corresponding to𝑘∼80 kpc −1 – well above
the𝑘 max ≈25 kpc −1 of our analysis. For𝑚𝜓 =10 −23 eV,𝜆 dB ≈
0.78 kpc(𝑘∼8 kpc −1), which falls within our analysis range and
is consistent with the stronger separation seen for this mass. The
broadband character of the𝜓DM excess below the de Broglie scale
reflectsthetwo-dimensionalprojectionofthree-dimensionaldensity
fluctuations: the projected power spectrum receives contributions
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter in JWST13
from all modes with𝑘⊥ ≤𝑘, smearing the de Broglie peak into a
broad excess at lower wavenumbers.
4.2 Comparison to existing constraints
Our approach is complementary to existing𝜓DM constraints from
strong lensing. Flux-ratio anomalies in quadruply lensed quasars
(Laroche et al. 2022) constrain the halo mass function suppression
and host-halo fluctuations in field environments at𝑧≲1. VLBI
lensing (Powell et al. 2023) excludes𝑚𝜓 ≤4.4×10 −21 eVby re-
solving individual granule structures, but requires milli-arcsecond
radio imaging. In this work, we instead study thestatistical power
spectrumof optical surface brightness residuals in cluster lenses – a
statistical observable linking dark matter theories to their observa-
tional signatures.
Theclusterregimeoffersspecificadvantages.Firstly,clusterlenses
arethestrongestknowngravitationallenses,highlymagnifyingsmall
statistical signals from substructure. The large lensing cross-section
yields multiple, highly magnified arcs per system, and multiple in-
dependent source realizations in the cluster field of view, each con-
tribute residual maps to the ensemble – substantially reducing the
variance of𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)relative to any single quad-lens system. On the
other hand, the higher virial velocities of clusters (𝑣∼103 km s−1
vs.∼10 2 km s−1 for galaxy-scale halos) reduce𝜆dB by an order of
magnitude (Eq. 5), which shifts the signal toward smaller scales
for𝑚 𝜓 ≳10 −22 eVbut leaves it accessible on kpc scales for
𝑚 𝜓 ≲10 −23 eV.Itmaybepossibletoexploitcompoundlensconfig-
urations(e.g.,astronggalaxylensinaclusterlens)toovercomethis
issue and probe higher particle masses of𝜓DM (see Section 4.4).
4.3 Limitations
Severalmodelingassumptionsandsimplificationsinthepresentwork
merit discussion.
Fluctuationamplitudeinclusters.Themostsignificantuncertainty
inouranalysisistheextrapolationoftheLarocheetal.2022fluctua-
tionamplitudetoclusterenvironments.Equation19ofLarocheetal.
2022 was calibrated on cosmological𝜓DM simulations of field ha-
los. In clusters, the deeper gravitational potential may significantly
modify the amplitude of the density fluctuations. This uncertainty
motivates treating𝐴 𝜓 as a free parameter rather than fixing it to
the physical prediction, as we have done throughout. The detectabil-
ity thresholds derived here therefore bound the range of scenarios:
physical-amplitude results represent the most conservative (astro-
physically motivated) case, while the100×amplitude case repre-
sents a scenario in which cluster environments enhance the𝜓DM
fluctuation signal.
Single cluster configuration.All results are derived for a single
cluster configuration (𝑀200 =10 15 𝑀⊙,𝑐 200 =4,𝑧 lens =0.4). Clus-
ters spanning a range of masses, concentrations, ellipticities, and
redshifts would probe different de Broglie scales and subhalo popu-
lations.Thesensitivityof𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)toclusterparametersislefttofuture
work.
CDM subhalo mass range.We exclude subhalos with𝑀 sub >
109 𝑀⊙, which are individually detectable perturbers amenable to
direct detection methods. Including these objects would raise the
CDM power spectrum at the lowest𝑘-bins, potentially reducing the
contrast with𝜓DM. A careful treatment of the high-mass subhalo
contribution will be required in a real data application.
Modeling-systematics floor.At 20-hour JWST depth and over the
renderedsubhalomassrange,thepost-fitCDMresidualpowerspec-
trumisdominatedbysource+lensmodelingsystematicsratherthan
by the bare lensing perturbations of CDM subhalos (Appendix A).
The𝜓DM-vs-CDM separations reported in §3.3 are therefore sepa-
rationsbetweenthe𝜓DMsignalandaCDM+systematicsfloor.This
is the relevant baseline for distinguishing𝜓DM from a no-detection
scenarioinrealdata,butitalsomeansthatimprovingthesourceand
lens modeling would lower the floor and enable detection of weaker
substructure signals, including the bare CDM signal and𝜓DM (or
alternative DM model) signals that predict suppression of𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)
relative to CDM.
4.4 Future directions
Theresultspresentedhereopenseveralconcretedirectionsforfuture
work: extensions that probe new physical regimes, improvements to
thestatisticalandmodelingmethodology,andbroaderobservational
programs that would sharpen the constraints.
Aninterestingextensionofthisworkcouldexploitcompoundlens
configurationsinwhichaclustermembergalaxyprovidessecondary
strong lensing for a highly magnified background arc. The relevant
𝜓DMfluctuationsinsuchsystemsarisefromthegalaxyhalo,whose
lower virial velocity (𝑣200 ≈200 km s −1) yields a de Broglie wave-
length≈8×larger than in the cluster halo (𝑣200 ≈1535 km s −1) for
the same boson mass. At𝑚𝜓 =10 −22 eV, this gives𝜆dB ≈0.6 kpc
(≈3–4JWSTpixels)inthegalaxyhaloversusthesub-pixel0.08 kpc
in the cluster, extending the accessible mass range to𝑚𝜓 ∼10 −22–
10−21 eV.Althoughthegalaxy-halofluctuationamplitudeissmaller,
theextremeclustermagnification(𝜇≳40)booststhephotoncounts
and, thus, the signal-to-noise for small surface-brightness perturba-
tions. Such systems already exist in JWST data: for example, the
host galaxy of SNe Requiem and Encore in MACS J0138.0−2155 is
multiply imaged by the cluster with additional strong lensing from
a cluster-member galaxy (Pierel et al. 2024). Applying the residual
power spectrumframework to such compoundconfigurations would
yield complementary𝜓DM constraints at heavier boson masses.
While the power spectrum captures only Gaussian information,
futureworkshouldexplorehigher-orderstatisticssensitivetothenon-
Gaussian, discrete nature of𝜓DM granules. The two-dimensional
wavelet scattering transform (Bruna & Mallat 2013) is well suited
to this task: by building a hierarchy of modulus wavelet coefficients,
it retains phase information that𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)discards, and could yield
substantially tighter joint constraints on𝑚𝜓 and𝐴 𝜓.
Theaccuracyofthesourcereconstructionisanotherimportantdi-
rectionforimprovement.Theshapeletbasisimposesafixedangular-
scale hierarchy that may miss the complex, clumpy morphologies
common in high-redshift JWST sources. Adaptive methods, such as
Delaunay triangulation-based source reconstructions, can represent
arbitrarymorphologieswithhigherfidelityandexhibitlowersource-
modeling systematics (Ephremidze et al. 2025), thereby improving
the reliability of dark matter constraints inferred from the residuals.
The trade-off is a substantially higher computational cost that will
require careful balancing against inference efficiency.
The most pressing theoretical need is for wave-mechanics sim-
ulations of𝜓DM in cluster-mass halos. The fluctuation amplitude
calibration of Laroche et al. 2022 was derived for galaxy-scale ha-
los and is extrapolated here to cluster environments, introducing an
uncertainty that is hard to quantify without dedicated numerical in-
put. Cluster-scale𝜓DM simulations would capture physical effects
absent from the current model: soliton core oscillations, coherence-
length-set spatial correlations among granules, tidal disruption near
theclustercenter,andbaryonicback-reaction–andwouldultimately
replace the free parameter𝐴𝜓 with a simulation-based prediction.
Finally, applying the analysis to multiple cluster lenses would re-
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

14Ephremidze et al.
ducesource-morphologyvariancebyafactorof1/ √𝑁clusters,thereby
extending sensitivity to lower amplitudes and lighter boson masses.
OngoingJWSTclusterprograms–includingUNCOVER(Bezanson
et al. 2024), MAGNIF (Li et al. 2023), and Director’s Discretionary
programs targeting massive lensing clusters – provide ideal datasets
for such an extension. Additionally, combining𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)constraints
from clusters with those from quad-lens flux ratios (Laroche et al.
2022) and VLBI lensing (Powell et al. 2023) into a joint inference
framework would leverage the complementary environmental and
scale dependences of each probe to break degeneracies among𝑚𝜓,
𝐴𝜓, and the halo mass function suppression.
5 CONCLUSIONS
We have demonstrated a statistical method to probe wave-like dark
matter (𝜓DM) using JWST observations of strongly lensed galax-
ies in galaxy clusters. The method is based on the residual power
spectrum𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)– the two-dimensional power spectrum of normal-
ized fitting residuals from a smooth lens+source model – which
encodes the population-level lensing imprint of dark matter sub-
structure without requiring the resolution of individual subhalos.
Our main conclusions are:
(i)The residual power spectrum is sensitive to both the boson
mass and the fluctuation amplitude of𝜓DM.
At the physical wave-interference amplitudelog10 (𝐴 𝜓)=−0.8
from Laroche et al. (2022) and the heavier particle masses (𝑚𝜓 ≳
10−21 eV), the𝜓DM substructure is CDM-like and the spectra are
indistinguishable. As𝑚 𝜓 becomes lighter, two competing mech-
anisms control𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘): the subhalo mass function is increasingly
suppressed,whileboththescaleandamplitudeofwave-interference
fluctuations grow. At𝑚𝜓 =10 −22 eV, suppression wins: the fluc-
tuations are still too small-scale and low-amplitude to compensate
for the loss of subhalos, and𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)falls below the CDM prediction.
At𝑚 𝜓 =10 −23 eV, the larger de Broglie wavelength and stronger
fluctuations drive𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)above CDM.
Atafixedbosonmass,boostingthefluctuationamplitudeleadsto
a monotonic rise in𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)while preserving its spectral shape.
(ii)The𝜓DM signal – where detectable – manifests as a broad-
band power-law modification, not a sharp spectral peak.
Althoughthe𝜓DMdensityfluctuationshaveacharacteristicthree-
dimensional scale set by𝜆 dB, the two-dimensional projection in-
volvedinlensingsmearsanyfeatureat𝑘∼2𝜋/𝜆 dB intoabroadband
modification of𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)that can appear as either an excess (large𝜆dB
or large𝐴𝜓) or a deficit (small𝜆dB and low𝐴 𝜓) relative to CDM. A
robustsearchmustthereforecomparethemeasuredspectrumagainst
forward-modeled predictions over the full accessible𝑘range, rather
than looking for a localized spectral feature.
(iii)Realistic strong lensing analysis with CAB lens and shapelet
source modeling preserves the𝜓DM signal.
The CAB+shapelet model fit yields stable, well-constrained pos-
teriors regardless of the underlying DM model, reliably capturing
the smooth component of the lensing without absorbing the small-
scale substructure signal. At our 20-hour JWST depth, however, the
post-fitCDMresidualsaredominatedbysource+lensmodelingsys-
tematics rather than by the bare CDM subhalo signal (Appendix A).
The𝜓DM-vs-CDM separations we report should therefore be read
as separations between the𝜓DM signal and a CDM+systematics
baseline.
(iv)A single 20-hour JWST cluster observation can discriminate
𝜓DM with𝑚 𝜓 ≲10 −22 eVfrom CDM.
At the physical amplitude,𝑚𝜓 =10 −23 eVis cleanly separated
from the CDM+systematics baseline, with non-overlapping 16th–
84thpercentilebandsacrossthefullanalysisrange1≲𝑘≲11 kpc −1.
For𝑚 𝜓 =10 −22 eVatlog 10 (𝐴 𝜓)=1.2(100×the physical predic-
tion), the𝜓DM spectrum sits a factor of∼3–10above the baseline
across𝑘∼2–11 kpc −1,againwithnon-overlappingbands.Moread-
vantageous lens configurations (e.g. a galaxy lens in a cluster lens)
and improved modeling methods with lower systematics may allow
us to probe𝜓DM with higher particle masses.
Takentogether,theseresultsestablishtheresidualpowerspectrum
as a promising window into the wave-like nature of dark matter,
offeringapopulation-levelstatisticalprobethatisindependentof,and
complementaryto,existingconstraintsfromindividuallenssystems.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to acknowledge useful discussions with Atınç Çağan
Şengül,ChandrikaChandrashekar,andHadrienPaugnat.CDandNE
were partially supported by the Department of Energy (DOE) Grant
No. DE-SC0025671. DG acknowledges support from the Brinson
Foundation provided through a Brinson Prize Fellowship Grant.
DATA A V AILABILITY
The code used to generate the mock images, perform the
lens modeling, and compute the residual power spectra is
publicly available athttps://github.com/ninoephremidze/
statistically_probing_subgalactic_dark_matter.
APPENDIX A: MODELING-SYSTEMATICS IN𝑃 𝛿 (𝐾)
AcentralquestionraisedbytheCDMresidualsin§3.2iswhetherthe
small, coherent residual structure visible there originates from gen-
uine lensing perturbations by CDM subhalos or from imperfections
in our source and lens modeling. The per-pixel lensing perturbation
from subhalos in our rendered range (106 ≤𝑀 sub/𝑀 ⊙ ≤10 9) is
small, and the CDM ensemble signal could plausibly sit at, near, or
below the modeling-systematics floor at 20-hour JWST depth.
Null test on smooth mocks.To isolate this floor we generate 20
realizations ofsmoothmocks (60 residual maps in total across the
three images per realization), in which no substructure of any kind
is rendered, but every other ingredient of the pipeline described in
§2 is retained. Any non-zero𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)measured from these mocks is
by construction attributable to modeling systematics rather than to
dark-matter substructure.
We then fit the smooth mocks with the same CAB+shapelet
pipeline used in the main analysis and compute𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)on the re-
sulting residual maps. The black dashed curve in Figure A1 shows
thisjoint-fitsystematicsfloor:theresidualpowerthatthefullpipeline
produces even when there is no substructure signal to recover.
Decomposing source vs. lens model systematics.Tosplitthisfloor
into its source- and lens-modeling components, we run a second set
of fits on the same 60 smooth mocks in which the lens model is
fixed to the true local elliptical-NFW deflection field that generated
the mocks and only the source-side shapelet amplitudes are solved
for.Anyresidualpowerinthisnullconfigurationis,byconstruction,
attributabletosource-modelingerroralone–specifically,thefailure
of a given shapelet basis to represent the morphological complexity
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter in JWST15
of COSMOS sources at the noise level. We repeat this source-only
fit at several shapelet expansion orders𝑛max; the coloured curves in
Figure A1 show the resulting𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)at each𝑛 max, illustrating how
thesource-onlyfloordependsontheflexibilityoftheshapeletbasis.
The source- vs. lens-modeling decomposition is meaningful only
betweenthejoint-fitcurveandthesource-onlycurveevaluatedatthe
sameshapeletorder.Throughoutthemainanalysisweuse𝑛 max =20,
so the relevant pair is the joint-fit curve (black dashed in Figure A1)
and the source-only curve (teal) both at𝑛max =20. These two admit
a three-regime interpretation:
•At the highest wavenumbers𝑘, where both curves coincide
with the white-noise plateau, the shapelets are not fitting noise and
the floor is set by the per-pixel noise itself.
•At intermediate scales (𝑘∼3kpc −1), where the two curves
almost coincide above the white-noise plateau, the source modeling
systematics contribute significantly to the joint-fit residual.
•At larger scales, where the source-only curve sits below the
joint-fitcurve,thegapcorrespondstothelens-modelingcontribution
(theresidualerrorfromapproximatingthetrueNFWdeflectionfield
by the local CAB expansion) and dominates the joint-fit systematics
floor.
The other coloured curves show that the source-only floor decreases
monotonically with𝑛 max, indicating that an increasingly complex
source model reduces the systematics, as expected.
Implications for the main results.The black curve in Figure A1
lies at essentially the same amplitude as the post-fit CDM𝑃𝛿 (𝑘)
shown in Figures 10 and 11. We therefore conclude that the post-
fit CDM curve in our main results is dominated by these modeling
systematicsratherthanbythebarelensingsignalfromCDMsubhalos
in the rendered mass range. Two consequences follow.
First, the𝜓DM-vs-CDM separations reported in §3.3 should
be interpreted as separations between the𝜓DM signal and a
CDM+systematicsfloor:thisistherelevantbaselinefordistinguish-
ing𝜓DM from a no-detection scenario in real data, but it is not a
directcomparisonbetweenbareCDMandbare𝜓DMlensingsignals
at this exposure depth.
Second,thesystematicsfloorsetsthesensitivitylimitofthepresent
analysis. Lowering it would require improved, more complex and
flexible source and lens modeling techniques, discussed in more
detail in §4.4.
APPENDIX B: POSTERIOR DISTRIBUTIONS OF CAB
PARAMETERS
We examine the posterior distributions of the 11 free CAB lens
parameters(𝜆 tan,𝑠 tan,𝜙foreachofthethreelensedimages,plus𝜆 rad
for images 2 and 3, with𝜆rad of image 1 fixed to unity) recovered by
thenestedsamplerforeachdarkmattermodel.The4positional-shift
components and 3 source parameters are omitted from the corner
plotsforclarity,astheyarenuisanceparameterswithnosensitivityto
the dark matter model. Figure B1 shows the marginalized posteriors
for a representative CDM realization, and Figures B2–B3 show the
corresponding results for the two𝜓DM cases.
Inallthreecases,theposteriorsarewell-constrained:themarginal
distributions are narrow, nearly Gaussian peaks that are mostly to
the CAB estimates (red lines; derived from smooth elliptical NFW
model without substructure). Any deviation between the posteriors
andestimatesindicatethatsomeofthelarge-scaleperturbationfrom
substructure is absorbed by the local CAB lens model.
Figure A1.Residualpowerspectrum𝑃 𝛿 (𝑘)of60smooth(no-substructure)
mocks at𝑡exp =20 h.Black: joint CAB+shapelet fit using𝑛 max =20– the
full pipeline of the main analysis.Coloured: source-modeling-only null test,
in which the lens is fixed to the true local elliptical-NFW deflection field
used to generate the mocks and only the shapelet amplitudes are solved for.
Shaded bands show the 16th–84th percentile across the 60 maps. The gap
between the black and the teal curves (both at𝑛max =20) at a given𝑘is
the contribution of lens modeling (CAB-vs-true-NFW approximation error)
to the joint-fit floor at that scale: where the two coincide the floor is source-
modeling-limited; where the coloured curve sits below the black curve the
floor is lens-modeling-limited.
REFERENCES
Aalbers J., et al., 2025, Phys. Rev. Lett., 135, 011802
Abbott T. M. C., et al., 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98, 043526
Abolfathi B., et al., 2018, ApJS, 235, 42
Adame A. G., et al., 2025, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2025, 012
Amruth A., et al., 2023, Nature Astronomy, 7, 736
Aprile E., et al., 2025, Phys. Rev. Lett., 135, 221003
Arvanitaki A., Baryakhtar M., Huang X., 2015, Phys. Rev. D, 91, 084011
BanikN.,BovyJ.,BertoneG.,ErkalD.,deBoerT.J.L.,2021,J.Cosmology
Astropart. Phys., 2021, 043
Bayer D., Chatterjee S., Koopmans L. V. E., Vegetti S., McKean J. P., Treu
T., Fassnacht C. D., Glazebrook K., 2023a, MNRAS, 523, 1310
Bayer D., Koopmans L. V. E., McKean J. P., Vegetti S., Treu T., Fassnacht
C. D., Glazebrook K., 2023b, MNRAS, 523, 1326
Bennett C. L., et al., 2003, ApJS, 148, 1
Bergamini P., et al., 2023, ApJ, 952, 84
Bezanson R., et al., 2024, ApJ, 974, 92
Birrer S., 2021, ApJ, 919, 38
Birrer S., Amara A., 2018, Physics of the Dark Universe, 22, 189
Birrer S., Amara A., Refregier A., 2015, ApJ, 813, 102
Birrer S., et al., 2021, The Journal of Open Source Software, 6, 3283
Bo Z., et al., 2025, Phys. Rev. Lett., 134, 011805
Boylan-Kolchin M., Bullock J. S., Kaplinghat M., 2011, MNRAS, 415, L40
Boylan-KolchinM.,BullockJ.S.,KaplinghatM.,2012,MNRAS,422,1203
Brennan S., Benson A. J., Cyr-Racine F.-Y., Keeton C. R., Moustakas L. A.,
Pullen A. R., 2019, MNRAS, 488, 5085
Broadhurst T., et al., 2025, ApJ, 978, L5
BrunaJ.,MallatS.,2013,IEEETransactionsonPatternAnalysisandMachine
Intelligence, 35, 1872
Chan J. H. H., Schive H.-Y., Wong S.-K., Chiueh T., Broadhurst T., 2020,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 125, 111102
Cyr-Racine F.-Y., Keeton C. R., Moustakas L. A., 2019, Phys. Rev. D, 100,
023013
Dalal N., Kravtsov A., 2022, Phys. Rev. D, 106, 063517
Dhanasingham B., Cyr-Racine F.-Y., Peter A. H. G., Benson A., Gilman D.,
2023a, MNRAS, 518, 5843
Dhanasingham B., Cyr-Racine F.-Y., Mace C., Peter A. H. G., Benson A.,
2023b, MNRAS, 526, 5455
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

16Ephremidze et al.
Figure B1.MarginalizedposteriordistributionsoftheCABlensparametersrecoveredbythedynestynestedsamplerforarepresentativeCDMmockrealization.
RedlinesindicatetheCABestimatecomputedfromtheNFWmacromodel.Allposteriorsarewell-constrained,withnosignificantinter-parametercorrelations,
confirming that the smooth CDM signal is well described by the CAB model.
Dhanasingham B., Cyr-Racine F.-Y., Gilman D., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2511.17732
Diaz Rivero A., Cyr-Racine F.-Y., Dvorkin C., 2018a, Phys. Rev. D, 97,
023001
Díaz Rivero A., Dvorkin C., Cyr-Racine F.-Y., Zavala J., Vogelsberger M.,
2018b, Phys. Rev. D, 98, 103517
Du X., et al., 2024, Phys. Rev. D, 110, 023019
Du X., Gilman D., Treu T., Benson A., Gannon C., 2025, Phys. Rev. D, 112,
023009
EphremidzeN.,ChandrashekarC.,ŞengülA.Ç.,DvorkinC.,2025,MNRAS,
542, 2610
Flores R. A., Primack J. R., 1994, ApJ, 427, L1
Gannon C., Nierenberg A., Benson A., Keeley R., Du X., Gilman D., 2025,
Phys. Rev. D, 112, 023532
Gao R., Tian S., Li Z., Gao H., Liao K., Zhang B., Zhu Z.-H., 2025, Phys.
Rev. D, 111, L081302
GentileG.,SalucciP.,KleinU.,VerganiD.,KalberlaP.,2004,MNRAS,351,
903
Gil-Marín H., et al., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 4188
Gilman D., Birrer S., Nierenberg A., Treu T., Du X., Benson A., 2020,
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter in JWST17
Figure B2.Same asFigureB1,but foraCase 1𝜓DMrealization(𝑚 𝜓 =10 −22 eV,100×the physicalamplitude).Theposteriors aresimilarlywellconstrained
asintheCDMcase,demonstratingthatthestrong𝜓DMdensityfluctuationsarenotabsorbedintothesmoothlensparametersandinsteadproducethecoherent
residual structure quantified by𝑃𝛿 (𝑘).
MNRAS, 491, 6077
Hezaveh Y., Dalal N., Holder G., Kisner T., Kuhlen M., Perreault Levasseur
L., 2016, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2016, 048
Hlozek R., Grin D., Marsh D. J. E., Ferreira P. G., 2015, Phys. Rev. D, 91,
103512
Hoof S., Marsh D. J. E., Sisk-Reynés J., Matthews J. H., Reynolds C., 2026,
MNRAS, 546, staf1564
Hu W., Barkana R., Gruzinov A., 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett., 85, 1158
Hui L., 2021, ARA&A, 59, 247
HuiL.,OstrikerJ.P.,TremaineS.,WittenE.,2017,Phys.Rev.D,95,043541
Iršič V., Viel M., Haehnelt M. G., Bolton J. S., Becker G. D., 2017, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 119, 031302
Kawai H., Kamada A., Kamada K., Yoshida N., 2024, Phys. Rev. D, 110,
023519
Klypin A., Kravtsov A. V., Valenzuela O., Prada F., 1999, ApJ, 522, 82
Koekemoer A. M., et al., 2007, ApJS, 172, 196
LaguëA.,BondJ.R.,HložekR.,RogersK.K.,MarshD.J.E.,GrinD.,2022,
J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2022, 049
Laroche A., Gilman D., Li X., Bovy J., Du X., 2022, MNRAS, 517, 1867
Li Z., et al., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2310.09327
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

18Ephremidze et al.
Figure B3.As Figure B1, but for aCase 2𝜓DM realization (𝑚𝜓 =10 −23 eV,log 10 𝐴𝜓 =−0.8, the physical prediction of Laroche et al. 2022). The posteriors
remain well constrained but deviate further away from the CAB estimate, reflecting a mild degeneracy between the large-scale𝜓DM fluctuations at this low
boson mass and the smooth lens parameters.
Louis T., et al., 2025, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2025, 062
MandelbaumR.,HirataC.M.,LeauthaudA.,MasseyR.J.,RhodesJ.,2012,
MNRAS, 420, 1518
Mandelbaum R., et al., 2014, ApJS, 212, 5
Marsh D. J. E., 2016, Phys. Rep., 643, 1
Miller Jr. J. H., Williams L. L. R., 2025, MNRAS, 543, 3952
Moore B., 1994, Nature, 370, 629
Moore B., Quinn T., Governato F., Stadel J., Lake G., 1999a, MNRAS, 310,
1147
Moore B., Ghigna S., Governato F., Lake G., Quinn T., Stadel J., Tozzi P.,
1999b, ApJ, 524, L19
Murray S. G., 2018, The Journal of Open Source Software, 3, 850
Natarajan P., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 468, 1962
Navarro J. F., Frenk C. S., White S. D. M., 1997, ApJ, 490, 493
Oguri M., 2021, PASP, 133, 074504
Oh S.-H., et al., 2015, AJ, 149, 180
Palencia J. M., Morilla P., Li S. K., Diego J. M., Alfred A., Broadhurst T. J.,
Kavanagh B. J., Lim J., 2025, A&A, 701, A24
Perrin M. D., Sivaramakrishnan A., Lajoie C.-P., Elliott E., Pueyo L., Ravin-
dranath S., Albert L., 2014, in Oschmann Jr. J. M., Clampin M., Fazio
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)

Statistical imprints of wave-like dark matter in JWST19
G. G., MacEwen H. A., eds, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers(SPIE)ConferenceSeriesVol.9143,SpaceTelescopesandIn-
strumentation 2014: Optical, Infrared, and Millimeter Wave. p. 91433X,
doi:10.1117/12.2056689
Pierel J. D. R., et al., 2024, ApJ, 967, L37
Planck Collaboration et al., 2020, A&A, 641, A6
Porayko N. K., et al., 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98, 102002
Powell D. M., Vegetti S., McKean J. P., White S. D. M., Ferreira E. G. M.,
May S., Spingola C., 2023, MNRAS, 524, L84
Pozo A., Broadhurst T., de Martino I., Chiueh T., Smoot G. F., Bonoli S.,
Angulo R., 2024, Phys. Rev. D, 110, 043534
Refregier A., 2003, MNRAS, 338, 35
Rigby J., et al., 2023, PASP, 135, 048001
Rihtaršič G., et al., 2025, A&A, 696, A15
Rogers K. K., Peiris H. V., 2021, Phys. Rev. Lett., 126, 071302
Schaller M., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 451, 1247
Schive H.-Y., Chiueh T., Broadhurst T., 2014, Nature Physics, 10, 496
Schive H.-Y., Chiueh T., Broadhurst T., Huang K.-W., 2016, ApJ, 818, 89
Schutz K., 2020, Phys. Rev. D, 101, 123026
Scoville N., et al., 2007, ApJS, 172, 1
SérsicJ.L.,1963,BoletindelaAsociacionArgentinadeAstronomiaLaPlata
Argentina, 6, 41
Sheth R. K., Tormen G., 1999, MNRAS, 308, 119
Shin T.-h., Clampitt J., Jain B., Bernstein G., Neil A., Rozo E., Rykoff E.,
2018, MNRAS, 475, 2421
Singh S., Brando G., Savastano S., Zumalacárregui M., 2025, J. Cosmology
Astropart. Phys., 2025, 025
Smarra C., et al., 2023, Phys. Rev. Lett., 131, 171001
Speagle J. S., 2020, MNRAS, 493, 3132
Springel V., et al., 2005, Nature, 435, 629
Stott M. J., Marsh D. J. E., 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98, 083006
Weinberg D. H., Bullock J. S., Governato F., Kuzio de Naray R., Peter A.
H.G.,2015,ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofScience,112,12249
Winch H., Rogers K. K., Hložek R., Marsh D. J. E., 2024, ApJ, 976, 40
Yavetz T. D., Li X., Hui L., 2022, Phys. Rev. D, 105, 023512
Zhao D. H., Jing Y. P., Mo H. J., Börner G., 2009, ApJ, 707, 354
Çaˇgan Şengül A., Tsang A., Diaz Rivero A., Dvorkin C., Zhu H.-M., Seljak
U., 2020, Phys. Rev. D, 102, 063502
Şengül A. Ç., Birrer S., Natarajan P., Dvorkin C., 2023, MNRAS, 526, 2525
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2026)