Title: SDSS-V: Revealing a weak accretion state in X-ray selected red quasars
Authors: Paloma Guetzoyan, James Aird, Amy L. Rankine, Stephanie M. LaMassa, Peter Breiding, Mara Salvato, Johannes Buchner, Zsofi Igo, Roberto J. Assef, Hector Ibarra-Medel, Catarina Aydar, Castalia Alenka Negrete, Claudio Ricci, W. N. Brandt, Dong-Woo Kim, Dominika Wylezalek, Scott F. Anderson, Donald P. Schneider, Delvin Demke, Anton M. Koekemoer
Published: 2026-05-18
Categories: astro-ph.GA

MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026) Preprint 19 May 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.3
SDSS-V: Revealing a weak accretion state in X-ray selected red quasars.
Paloma Guetzoyan,1★ James Aird,1 Amy L. Rankine,1 Stephanie M. LaMassa,2 Peter Breiding,3 Mara Salvato,4
Johannes Buchner,4 Zsofi Igo,4,5 Roberto J. Assef,6 Hector Ibarra-Medel,7 Catarina Aydar,4
Castalia Alenka Negrete,7 Claudio Ricci,8,9 W. N. Brandt,10,11,12 Dong-Woo Kim,13 Dominika Wylezalek,14
Scott F. Anderson,15 Donald P. Schneider,16,17 Delvin Demke,14 and Anton M. Koekemoer2
1Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Royal Observatory, Edinburgh EH9 3HJ, UK
2Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Drive, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
3Department of Physics, Applied Physics, and Astronomy, Binghamton University, Binghamton, NY 13902, USA
4Max-Planck-Institut für extraterrestrische Physik (MPE), Gießenbachstraße 1, 85748 Garching bei München, Germany
5Exzellenzcluster ORIGINS, Boltzmannstr. 2, 85748 Garching, Germany
6Instituto de Estudios Astrofísicos, Facultad de Ingeniería y Ciencias, Universidad Diego Portales, Av. Ejército Libertador 441, Santiago, Chile
7Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Instituto de Astronomía, AP 70-264, CDMX 04510, México
8Department of Astronomy, University of Geneva, ch. d’Ecogia 16, 1290, Versoix, Switzerland
9Instituto de Estudios Astrofísicos, Facultad de Ingeniería y Ciencias, Universidad Diego Portales, Av. Ejército Libertador 441, Santiago, Chile
10Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 525 Davey Lab, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
11Institute for Gravitation and the Cosmos, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
12Department of Physics, 104 Davey Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
13Center for Astrophysics | Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
14Astronomisches Rechen-Institut, Zentrum für Astronomie der Universität Heidelberg, Münchhofstr. 12-14, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
15Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, Box 351580, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
16Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
17Institute for Gravitation and the Cosmos, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
Red quasars (rQSOs) have been recently recognized as a short-lived, early stage in the evolutionary cycle of Active Galactic
Nuclei (AGN), with fundamental differences in their intrinsic properties compared to typical blue quasars (bQSOs). In this
work, we present the first large X-ray sample of 380 rQSOs, selected from theeROSITA/SDSS-V collaboration, providing
uniform X-ray detection with optical spectroscopy across half the sky, in the German hemisphere ofeROSITA. We combine
X-ray imaging, optical spectroscopy, and multi-wavelength photometry to fully probe the accretion, absorption, spectroscopic,
and host properties of rQSOs and compare them to a bQSO sample. Independent Component Analysis methods are used
to reconstruct optical spectra in a data-driven and non-parametric approach, while accounting for dust reddening and host
contamination. rQSOs are intrinsically X-ray weak compared to bQSOs, with a higher fraction found at low X-ray luminosities
(over 50%of the rQSO sample have𝐿𝑋 <10 43.5 erg s−1). We investigate the relative X-ray strength of rQSOs by measuring the
spectral slope indicator𝛼𝑂𝑋. Despite their suppressed X-ray emission, rQSOs are not optically faint, but show low𝛼𝑂𝑋 values
and higher average dust-corrected optical luminosities, indicating weak X-ray emission relative to their bright optical continua.
X-ray spectral measurements reveal large gas column densities relative to optical reddening due to dust, implying that X-ray
absorption could arise from dust-free gas close to the supermassive Black Hole (BH) rather than a classical dusty torus, while
the dust responsible for optical reddening likely resides on larger host-galaxy scales or is associated with dusty gas carried in
disc winds. rQSOs trace a phase of suppressed BH assembly relative to stellar mass growth, suggesting that they represent a
distinct evolutionary stage where BH accretion is suppressed while the host galaxy continues to grow.
Key words:galaxies:active – X-rays:galaxies – quasars: supermassive black holes – techniques: optical spectroscopy
1 INTRODUCTION
Supermassive Black Holes (BHs) of mass𝑀BH =10 5 −10 10 M⊙
are now recognized as central engines in the evolution of their host
galaxies. Most, if not all, massive galaxies harbour a BH at their
★ E-mail: paloma.guetzoyan@ed.ac.uk
centre(e.g.Magorrianetal.1998;Kormendy2001).Strongcorrela-
tions,suchasrelationsbetweenBHmass,galaxybulges,totalstellar
mass or the stellar velocity dispersion (𝑀BH −𝑀 bulge,𝑀 BH −𝑀 star
and𝑀 BH −𝜎relations, e.g., Kormendy & Richstone 1995; Geb-
hardt et al. 2000; Ferrarese & Merritt 2000; Tremaine et al. 2002;
Kormendy & Ho 2013; Heckman & Best 2014; Reines & Volonteri
2015; Shankar et al. 2016; Greene et al. 2020), indicate the exis-
©2026 The Authors
arXiv:2605.18161v1  [astro-ph.GA]  18 May 2026

2P . Guetzoyan et al.
tenceofco-evolutionmechanismsbetweenBHgrowthandthemass
assembly of their galaxies, bridging their connection across scales.
Although several scenarios could lead to finding such correlations
(commongassupplies,mergeraveraging,e.g.,Breidingetal.2024),
this connection is thought to be driven by the remarkable amount of
energy released in the vicinity of BHs, when they enter the Active
GalacticNuclei(AGN)phase(Shapiro&Teukolsky1983),powered
byaccretionofgasontotheircentralBH.AGNcanproducestrongra-
diationacrossthefullelectromagneticspectrum(e.g.Padovanietal.
2017, for a recent review) including X-ray emission in the corona
and UV/optical emission from the accretion disc, while also driving
outflows of material observed at radio wavelengths. The brightest
AGN, known as quasars, can become so luminous that they com-
pletely outshine their host galaxies, appearing as the most luminous
point-like sources in the Universe. Gas accretion during the AGN
phasesisthoughttobethedominantchannelforBHgrowth,yet,the
physical mechanisms regulating BH accretion remain long-standing
questions. Since the role and efficiency of AGN feedback are intrin-
sicallylinkedtoBHaccretion(Hopkinsetal.2006;Fabian2012),we
cannotfullyunderstandtheco-evolutionofgalaxiesandBHswithout
firstdetermininghowandwhenAGNaretriggered,andunderwhich
conditions BHs grow most efficiently.
We now know that AGN are not static, stable objects, but instead
cyclethroughobscuredandunobscuredstagesasaccretionrisesand
fades (Hickox et al. 2014). Gas inflows can efficiently fuel the BH
butalsosimultaneouslyobscurethenucleusonvariousscales(Ricci
et al. 2017, 2022). With stronger accretion, AGN-driven winds and
radiation pressure start expelling the surrounding dust, transitioning
from a dust-enshrouded quasar to a more unobscured blue quasar
phase,wheretheaccretiondiscisrevealed.Awidelyadoptedexpla-
nationforobscurationisgivenbyanorientation-basedunifiedmodel
(Antonucci 1993). In this model, the diversity of AGN properties
arisesmainlyfromtheobserver’sviewingangletotheoptically-thick
dustytorussurroundingtheaccretiondiscandnotfromcapturingthe
AGNatdifferentevolutionarystages.Withinthisorientationpicture,
obscured and unobscured AGN share the same underlying intrinsic
properties, and only differ due to geometric effects.
Red quasars (rQSOs, e.g., Webster et al. 1995; Richards et al.
2003; Glikman et al. 2004, 2012; Banerji et al. 2012, 2015) have
emerged as a key population, showing a broad-line optical spectrum
withheavilyreddenedcontinuum.Duetothedetectionofbroadlines,
their red colours cannot be explained by orientation effects only and
earlystudiesalreadyquestionedwhethertheirreddeningarisespurely
from obscuration due to a dusty torus or from dust on larger scales
(e.g., Urrutia et al. 2008). In an orientation scenario, differences
between obscured and unobscured AGN would arise purely from
our line-of-sight intersecting the dusty torus or not, predicting that
rQSOs are type-1 AGN, as broad emission lines are found in their
opticalspectra,butviewedthroughmildobscurationfromdustalong
thetorusedge.Iforientationwerethemaineffect,rQSOsshouldhave
the same intrinsic outflow and accretion properties as blue quasars
(bQSOs). However, recent studies, challenge this orientation-based
picture of rQSOs, demonstrating that systematic differences persist
between rQSOs and typical type-1 bQSOs even after correcting for
orientationeffects,thusfavouringanevolutionaryscenario(Glikman
etal.2012;Banerjietal.2015;Klindtetal.2019;Fawcettetal.2020).
In such a scenario, rQSOs represent a transitional phase in the
co-evolution of BHs and their hosts (see Alexander et al. 2025, for a
recent review). This scenario begins with a heavily dust-enshrouded
type-2 AGN phase, where both the BH and host galaxy are rapidly
growing,fuelledbylargegasinflowstriggeredbymergersorinterac-
tions.AsaccretionontotheBHintensifies,AGN-drivenfeedbackin
theformofpowerfulwindsandoutflowsbeginstoclearthesurround-
ingdustandgasinashort-lived“blow-out”phase–therQSOphase.
Once this obscuring material is dispersed, the nucleus is revealed
as a typical unobscured blue type-1 AGN (or bQSOs). In this sce-
nario,dustandgasplayacentralrole:eithergas-fuelledaccretionor
suppressingandobscuringBHgrowththroughfeedbackeffects.Nu-
cleardustnotonlyregulatesBHgrowthbutalsoshapestheobserved
propertiesofAGN,whichmakesitkeyinformationonthegeometry
of the obscuring material and the intrinsic accretion physics. Recent
radio studies provide notable support for rQSOs being a transitional
phase. Klindt et al. 2019 has shown that rQSOs have a higher radio
detection fraction compared to a control sample of bQSOs, suggest-
ing enhanced radio activity in this population. However, despite this
finding,Fawcettetal.2022,2023revealthatrQSOstendtostillbein
theradio-quietregimewithcompactradiomorphologies,suggesting
the enhanced radio detection fractions is due to small scale winds
from the accretion disk or young compact radio jets interacting with
the interstellar medium (ISM) of the galaxy. This out-flowing mate-
rialisthoughttocontainthedustthatisresponsibleforthereddening
of optical spectra and colours of rQSOs.
However, the physical origin of this dust, as well as whether there
are intrinsic differences between these sources and the wider quasar
population,remainunclear,highlightingtheneedforasystematicand
homogeneousstudyofthesesources.Inparticular,itisstillunknown
from radio-selected samples, if dust properties are directly linked to
altered accretion states in rQSOs. X-ray studies provide a powerful
probe to answer these questions. The hard X-ray emission traces the
hot inner corona, providing insights into the accretion state of the
BH, while absorption of soft X-rays provides a tracer of the overall
line-of-sight density of gas and can thus provide complementary
probe of the location of the dusty gas responsible for the reddening
of the optical emission in rQSOs (e.g., Haardt & Maraschi 1991;
Done et al. 2012; Brandt & Alexander 2015).
While most rQSO studies have been focused on their nuclear and
feedbackproperties,someworksaimedatexaminingrQSOhostsdi-
rectlytoconstrainmorphologies,merger-fractionsorhost-scaledust
structures (e.g., Glikman et al. 2015; Zakamska et al. 2019). How-
ever,theconnectiontothehostgalaxyhasoftenbeenlimitedbypoor
imaging,wavelengthcoverageanddifferencesintimescalesonwhich
changes operate, making it difficult to separate AGN and host dust
emission.Withinanevolutionaryscenario,largegasreservoirsasso-
ciated with massive star-forming galaxies can fuel rapid BH growth
while providing substantial dust content on host-scale, potentially
obscuring the optical emission of the nucleus. Thus, dust reddening
could also arise from galaxy-scale dust structures within the ISM of
the host, or dust carried in large-scale winds (Calistro Rivera et al.
2021). Disentangling nuclear and host contributions is thus essen-
tial to understand whether rQSOs suffer from nuclear or large-scale
absorption, as well as robustly constrain stellar masses and star for-
mation rates.
While previous studies suggest that rQSOs are key to understand-
ing obscuration, feedback processes, and possibly new accretion
states, well-defined and homogeneous samples of rQSOs remain
sparse, particularly the X-ray-selected samples. Current X-ray stud-
ies all suffer from several limitations: X-ray follow-up observations
of optically-selected rQSOs, often from small, heterogeneous sam-
ples,andinconsistentdefinitionsofrQSOsthatpreventcomparisons
across samples and redshift. LaMassa et al. 2016 and Glikman et al.
2017 presented a combined sample of four FIRST-2MASS (Skrut-
skie et al. 2006) rQSOs with targeted X-ray spectroscopy and found
all sources to be either X-ray weak or over-luminous in the infrared.
However, small samples and the limitations cited above have pre-
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO3
vented robust conclusions and, in some cases, led to contradictory
results regarding the intrinsic nature of rQSOs. For instance, Gould-
ing et al. 2018 study 11 rQSOs with X-ray data from theXMMand
Chandratelescopes,butonlytwohavesufficientX-raycountsforde-
tailed analysis. They find evidence of substantial obscuring material
along the line-of-sight, measuring line-of-sight absorption columns
oflog 10 𝑁H ∼23−24 cm −2, but after absorption correction, the in-
trinsic X-ray luminosities were consistent with normal bQSOs with
matched optical luminosity, suggesting no intrinsic X-ray weakness.
Incontrast,Maetal.2024selected40rQSOsfromanopticalsample,
to target with X-ray follow-up observations withChandra. Most of
their targets were undetected, while those with X-ray detections sys-
tematically exhibit weaker X-ray emission than expected, compared
to bQSOs.
Thus, a homogeneous and statistically significant X-ray selected
sample is required to accurately measure intrinsic accretion proper-
ties of rQSOs and improve the evolutionary picture of AGN. X-ray
observationsarecapableofpenetratingthedustthatobscuresquasars
at optical and IR wavelengths, and is the selection method the least
biasedtowardsobscuration(Hickox&Alexander2018).X-rayspro-
vide an unbiased probe of accretion activity, allowing the detection
of rQSOs that would otherwise be missed or biased toward only the
brightest sources in other surveys. The emergence of recent all-sky
X-ray surveys witheROSITA(Merloni et al. 2012, 2024) combined
withtheSDSS-VBlackHoleMapperprogram(Kollmeieretal.2026)
provides for the first time uniform X-ray detection of quasars across
halftheskywithhigh-resolutionopticalspectroscopicobservations.
This dataset enables a systematic study of X-ray selected rQSOs to
connect their X-ray emission, dust reddening, and host properties.
Inthispaper,weusealargesampleofX-rayselectedquasarsfrom
eROSITAwith optical spectroscopy with SDSS-V to investigate the
differences in accretion, host, and spectroscopic properties between
rQSOs and bQSOs. Section 2 describes the datasets:eROSITAX-
ray imaging, SDSS-V optical spectroscopy, and multi-wavelength
photometry. Section 3 details our photometric selection of rQSOs,
our novel non-parametric approach for spectroscopic reconstruction
while accounting for host contribution and dust reddening, and our
SEDmodellingmethod.WepresentourvariousresultsinSection4,
investigating the differences between rQSOs and bQSOs in terms of
X-ray emission, spectroscopic and host properties. We discuss our
results in Section 5, by comparing our work to the literature and
exploring scenario for dust origin in rQSOs and its implication for
anevolutionaryscenario.Weconcludeandsummarizeourresultsin
Section 6.
Throughoutthiswork,weassumestandardcosmologyparameters
(𝐻0 =70kms −1 Mpc−1,Ω 𝑚 =0.3,Ω Λ =0.7) and use photometry
defined in the AB system.
2 DATA
In this work, we define a parent sample of X-ray selected quasars,
within which we subsequently identify a subset of reddened QSO
on the basis of observed𝑔−𝑟colours (see Section 3.1). The parent
sample comprises all sources spectroscopically classified as QSO1
within the eROSITA targets in the SDSS spectroscopic follow-up
programme (based on eRASS1 detections). After removing dupli-
cates with the lowest signal-to-noise ratio and sources flagged with
1 TheQSOspectroscopicclassificationcomesfromtheSDSSpipelinebased
on the presence of broad emission lines
a redshift warning, our sample contains 8,625 sources, i.e., X-ray
AGN with robust optical spectroscopic and broad UV/MIR photo-
metric coverage.
In this section, we describe the X-ray and optical datasets used
in this paper, with the X-ray data coming fromeROSITA, the Black
Hole Mapper (BHM) programme of the SDSS-V providing ongoing
optical spectroscopy of the X-ray detected sources, and the multi-
wavelengthphotometriccataloguewecompileaftermatchingoptical
positions.Section2.1describestheX-rayphotometricdatafromthe
eROSITAall-skysurveyandthedeepereROSITAperformanceveri-
ficationfieldeFEDS(eROSITAFinalEquatorialDepthSurveyfield),
Section 2.2 details the optical spectroscopic follow-up of the X-ray
samplewithSDSS,andSection2.3liststhevariousthephotometric
surveys from UV to MIR we cross-matched to our sample.
2.1 X-ray imaging with eROSITA
TheeROSITA/SRGmission(Merlonietal.2012;Predehletal.2021;
Sunyaev et al. 2021), launched in 2019, has conducted the first uni-
form soft X-ray all-sky survey since ROSAT (Trümper 1982; Boller
etal.2016)achievingsignificantlyimprovedsensitivity.Inthiswork,
we exploit eROSITA data from the western Galactic hemisphere
(Galactic longitudes180 ◦ < 𝑙 <360 ◦) provided by the German
eROSITA collaboration (eROSITA-DE). All statements regarding
surveyperformancerefertothedatainthishemisphere.Overthesix-
monthperiodrequiredtocompletethefirstall-skysurvey,eROSITA
detectedroughly900,000pointsourcesinthesoft0.2−2.3 keVband;
75%of events expected to be associated with AGN emission. In the
soft band, eROSITA reaches a flux limit of5×10−14 erg s−1 .cm−2
forasingleall-skyscanand7×10 −13 erg s−1 .cm−2 inthehardband
(2.3−5 keV)(Merloni et al. 2024, eRASS1). These limits repre-
senta∼5×improvementoverROSAT’ssensitivity,whileextending
intohigherenergyranges,andhasalreadydoubledtheknownX-ray
source population.
To obtain a large, uniformly-selected sample for this work, we
require a detection in the soft (0.2−2.3 keV) eROSITA band where
thesensitivityisgreatest.Herewerestrictouranalysistothepublicly
available eRASS1 data release (Merloni et al. 2024; Salvato et al.
2025), as well as eFEDS data (Brunner et al. 2022; Salvato et al.
2022; Aydar et al. 2025), the deeper calibration field of eROSITA
of140 deg 2, located at 126°< 𝛼𝐽2000 <146°and -3°< 𝛿 𝐽2000 <6°.
Our final sample consists of X-ray sources from those eROSITA
public releases that were selected for spectroscopic observations by
SDSS. Since targeting is still ongoing, we limited our sample to the
latest available SDSS data release DR19 (SDSS Collaboration et al.
2025, see Section 2.2 for details of the eROSITA/SDSS catalogue
used in this work). Details of the point-source detection procedure,
photometry, and subsequent flux estimates (including a correction
for the impact of the Point Spread Function) are given by Predehl
et al. 2021 and Maitra et al. 2022. We derive X-ray luminosities
fromthoseobserved0.2–2.3keVfluxes,𝑓 𝑜𝑏𝑠,correctedforGalactic
absorption using𝑁 H,Gal =3×10 20 cm−2 for all sources as the
typical value (Merloni et al. 2024), using the following approach.
Assuming that fluxes follow a powerlaw spectral density of photon
indexΓ =1.9, which is the canonical assumption value assumed for
AGN and is consistent with theΓ∼2typically found ineROSITA
AGN, we convert𝑓 𝑜𝑏𝑠 into rest-frame 0.2–2.3 keV fluxes𝑓𝑅𝐹 =
𝑓𝑜𝑏𝑠 × (1+𝑧) Γ−2, where𝑧is the redshift inferred from the optical
spectrum obtained by SDSS (see Section 2.2 below). Rest-frame
fluxes are converted into rest-frame luminosities in the soft band
suchthat𝐿 0.2−2.3 keV =4𝜋𝐷 2
𝐿 (𝑧)𝑓 𝑅𝐹,with𝐷 𝐿 beingtheluminosity
distance derived under the standard cosmology assumptions.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

4P . Guetzoyan et al.
2.2 SDSS-V optical spectroscopic follow-up
TheSloanDigitalSkySurvey(SDSSYorketal.2000)hasprovided
thebroadestskycoverageofanyground-basedopticalspectroscopic
survey for decades, and has recently expanded with SDSS-IV, using
nowtwoobservingfacilities,oneineachhemisphere,LasCampanas
Observatory in Chile (Bowen & Vaughan 1973), and the Apache
Point Observatory in New Mexico (Gunn et al. 2006). The SDSS
BOSSspectrographs(Smeeetal.2013)haveaspectralresolutionof
𝑅=1560−2650and a wavelength coverage with good throughput
from 3650Å to 9500Å.
SDSS-V(Kollmeieretal.2026)andeROSITAcollaboratethrough
the SPIDERS project (SPectroscopic IDentification of ERosita
Sources, Dwelly et al. 2017; Comparat et al. 2020), where X-ray
detectedsourcesaretargetedfortheBlackHoleMapperprogramme
(Anderson et al. 2026 in prep.), providing optical observations for a
large sample of about 300,000 quasars detected by the X-ray probe,
providing robust spectroscopic classification and redshift measure-
ment of the X-ray sources to a limiting magnitude of about𝑖∼21.5.
ThisambitiousspectroscopicsurveytargetseROSITAAGNandclus-
ters across10,000 deg 2 for eRASS scans, as well as X-ray sources
in eFEDS. All SPIDERS targets from the first eROSITA data re-
lease(Merlonietal.2024)/SDSSDR19(SDSSCollaborationetal.
2025) are listed in a Value Added Catalog2 (VAC) released along-
sideDR19(seeSection7.2ofSDSSCollaborationetal.2025).This
VACcontainsbothopticalandbasicX-raydatainformation,suchas
observed fluxes for a total of 8625 unique quasars from both eFEDS
and eRASS1 with reliable spectroscopic redshifts in DR19. Some
multi-wavelengthphotometricdatafromGAIADR3(GaiaCollabo-
ration et al.2023), unWISE (Meisner et al. 2019),GALEX (Bianchi
2014), and 2MASS (McMahon et al. 2013) are also included in the
VAC, but we supplement it to increase the wavelength coverage as
described in the following sub-section.
We correct each spectrum for Galactic extinction. The amount
of reddening depends on the line of sight dust column through our
Galaxy. We derive the local extinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)at the coordinates
of each source using the dust maps from Schlegel et al. 1998 imple-
mented in thedustmaps pythonmodule (M. Green 2018) and
remove the corresponding reddening from the observed spectrum
using the extinction curve of Fitzpatrick 1999.
2.3 Optical/IR photometry
In this work, we use optical photometry, specifically the𝑔and𝑟
magnitudesfromLegacySurveyDR10toselectrQSO(moredetails
in Section 3.1). Moreover, broad photometric coverage is essential
forrobusthost-galaxycharacterizationthroughSpectralEnergyDis-
tribution (SED) fitting (see Section 3.3). To complement our optical
spectroscopicdata,wecross-matchoursamplewithwidephotomet-
ricsurveysspanningUVtoMIRwavelengths.Thecross-matchingis
donebasedonopticalpositionswithina1 ′′ radiustobeconservative
in case of rounding errors between the two optical positions, but all
matches are found to be within less than0.1′′.
We retrieve UV photometry from the SDSS DR19/eRASS1 VAC
(seeSection2.2formoredetail),takenfromtheGALEXsurvey(data
release6/7 3),providingFUVandNUVmagnitudes.Fortheremain-
ing bands, we perform an independent cross-match between optical
positions to the following surveys to increase photometric coverage.
2 https://www.sdss.org/dr19/data_access/
value-added-catalogs/?vac_id=10004
3 https://galex.stsci.edu/GR6/
Number count
Parent sample
ZWARNING=023827
SPIDERS targets 21995
Unique sources 12138
QSO classification 8625
Detection in𝑊18237
𝑆/𝑁 >1.54143 (3763 bQSOs and 380 rQSOs)
Table 1.Number count of sources for the DL1 parent sample after each cut.
The optical bands𝑔, 𝑟, 𝑖, 𝑧are taken from the Legacy Survey data
release10 4,whichcompilesphotometricdatawithinthefootprintof
the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument survey (Desi Collabora-
tionetal.2022,DESI)fromtheMayallz-bandLegacySurveyMzLS
(Silvaetal.2016),theDarkEnergyCameraLegacySurveyDECaLS
(Blum et al. 2016) and the Beijing-Arizona Sky Survey BASS (Zou
et al. 2017) programmes. We also include NIR photometry from the
Two Micron All Sky Survey (Skrutskie et al. 2006, 2MASS) with
𝐽, 𝐻, 𝐾 𝑠 aswellasthetwowidefieldsurveysfromVISTA,VIKING
(Edge et al. 2013), and VHS (McMahon et al. 2013). MIR pho-
tometry is taken from the WISE all-sky survey (Wright et al. 2010)
providing𝑊1, 𝑊2, 𝑊3, 𝑊4magnitudes. Our photometric data span
a wavelength coverage of∼150nm – 22microns, ensuring reliable
SED modelling across a broad range of rest-frame wavelengths.
3 METHODS
This section describes our method to identify the red QSO (rQSO)
sample, based on a photometric selection criterion, from within our
parentsampleofX-ray–selectedQSOidentifiedbySDSS-V(Section
3.1).Section3.2presentsourmodellingoftheSDSSopticalspectra
using a spectral reconstruction process that accounts for host-galaxy
contributions, measure the intrinsic reddening of the quasar light,
and estimate the intrinsic properties of the rQSO. Section 3.3 de-
scribes our modelling of the broader photometric Spectral Energy
Distribution (SED) used to estimate host stellar masses and provide
further insights into the properties of rQSOs.
3.1 Selecting the red quasar sample
To separate red quasars from the broader blue quasar population,
we adopt a redshift-dependent photometric-selection based on their
observed𝑔−𝑟colour, similar to the method described in Fawcett
et al. 2020, 2022. We split our parent X-ray–selected QSO sample
into bins of redshift with a fixed number count of𝑁=200sources
(which divides our parent sample into 40 bins of redshift), and se-
lect the10%reddest in each bin as our red quasar population. This
selection method, based on observed-frame colour, is a relative and
observationaldefinition.Tominimizecontaminationofbothpopula-
tionswithsourceslyingclosetotheseparation,wesetabufferregion
inbetweenbothpopulations,andonlyselectthebluest2/3quasarsin
eachbintoseparatetheparentpopulationofbQSOs.Figure1shows
thedistributionsofsourcesinthe(𝑔−𝑟)–redshiftspace,highlighting
4 https://www.legacysurvey.org/dr10/catalogs/
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO5
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5
Redshift
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
g r
Figure 1.Redshift evolution of𝑔−𝑟colour. rQSO are selected to be the
10%reddestsourcesineachredshiftbin,whereasthebluequasarsarethe2/3
bluestobjects,toavoidcontaminatingbothpopulationswithsourcescloseto
the limit. Only sources within the two vertical dashed lines are kept in our
sample (𝑧=0.5−2.5).
the selected rQSO and bQSO samples. Throughout the rest of the
paper,weonlyconsidersourceslyingwithinthetwodashedvertical
lines,delimitingthe𝑧=0.5−2.5region,toensurespectroscopiccov-
erage of the Mgii𝜆2800emission line at all redshifts, for BH mass
measurements. We apply a signal–to–noise ratio cut on the quality
of spectra:𝑆/𝑁 >1.5per spectral pixel over the full wavelength
rangeofeachspectrum.Finally,werequireoursourcestohavea𝑊1
counterpart in the WISE catalogue for robust host characterization.
Our final sample consists of 3763 control blue QSO, and 380 red
QSO. We summarize in Table 1 the number of sources at each cut.
3.2 Optical spectral fitting and reconstruction
We now describe our method to fit models to the optical spectra
of our quasar samples that allows the reconstruction of theintrinsic
underlyingspectraandmeasurephysicalpropertiesofbothourrQSO
and bQSO samples. The first step involves reconstructing the global
continuum shape and rough emission line morphologies by fitting a
combination of independent additive components that characterise
both the quasar and host-galaxy emission. This performs an initial
characterisationwhichcruciallyallowsanestimationandsubtraction
of the contribution to the optical spectrum from any underlying host
galaxy (Section 3.2.1). We then correct the reconstructed shape of
the quasar light for reddening due to dust extinction (Section 3.2.2),
enabling robust estimates of both the intrinsic optical luminosity
and the amount of dust along the line-of-sight to the quasar. Finally,
we reconstruct the emission line profiles of the reshaped spectra to
enable accurate measurements needed to derive physical properties,
in particular black hole masses (Section 3.2.3). Figure 2 provides a
visual summary of our process, while more details on each step are
given in the section below.
3.2.1 Reconstructing QSO spectral shape and host decomposition
We perform spectral fitting using a non-parametric and data-driven
approach to avoid making assumptions on spectral shape, as de-
scribed in Rankine et al. 2020. Rather than modelling spectra with
analytical functions such as Gaussians for line profiles and power
laws for continua, we reconstruct QSO spectra using a physically-
motivatedmodel,assumingthatQSOspectrashareacommonunder-
lying shape that can be reconstructed through a linear combination
of components derived from a large sample of observed spectra. We
adopt QSO components from Rankine et al. 2020 which were cre-
ated using Mean-Field Independent Component Analysis (MFICA;
Højen-Sørensen et al. 2002; Allen et al. 2013) applied to∼4000
individual QSO spectra from SDSS DR14 (Pâris et al. 2018), cover-
ing the rest-frame wavelength range1260−3000Å. This range was
chosen to cover emission lines relevant to the work in Rankine et al.
2020 across a broad range of redshift. Here we detail the process
of spectral reconstruction using the QSO components from Rankine
etal.2020,combinedwithfivegalaxycomponentsfromthekcor-
rect pythonmodule (Blanton & Roweis 2007) generated from
non-negative matrix factorization.
Weperformafirstreconstructionoftheoverallshapeofourspec-
tra and the emission lines (denoted𝑅1, shown by the smooth black
line on the top panel of Figure 2) by fitting a linear recombination
of the eight QSO component set and the five galaxy components.
This set of eight QSO components is used to reconstruct the global
continuum shape of our individual spectra as well as the broad mor-
phology of the main emission lines. By combining both QSO and
galaxycomponents,weareabletoaccountforhost-galaxycontribu-
tion,whichprimarilyaffectslow-redshift,low-luminosityQSOs.The
host-galaxy component is subtracted from the original flux, which
provides𝐷2,theQSO-onlydata(notshownonFigure2forclarity).
We then subtract the host-galaxy component from the reconstruc-
tion𝑅1to derive a pure QSO smoothed spectrum (𝑅2, red line). To
recover the intrinsic, reddening-corrected spectral slope, we morph
the observed reconstruction to match the shape of a typical unred-
dened QSO template, here using the template from Maddox et al.
2012, described in Rankine et al. 2020. To achieve this reshaping,
we compute a wavelength-dependent morph array (green line on the
middle panel), defined as the ratio of the continua between the ob-
servedQSO-onlyreconstruction(𝑅2)andthetemplateoutsideofthe
maskedemissionlines,wherethecontinuumisinterpolatedlinearly.
This morph array quantifies the deviation in spectral shape between
the observed spectrum and the template due to extinction. We then
divide the reconstruction𝑅2by this morph array, producing a third
reconstruction,denoted𝑅3shownbytheblueline,whosecontinuum
has been morphed on to the template’s continuum shape, capturing
the overall intrinsic spectral shape, with emission line profiles. The
host-subtracted data,D2, is also morphed in a similar manner but is
not shown in Figure 2 for clarity.
3.2.2 Dust correction
As we selected the rQSO sample to have red photometric colours,
weexpectsomeamountofdustalongthelineofsight,reddeningthe
continuum of the QSO component. A minor contribution to the ob-
served reddening may arise from differential atmospheric refraction
affecting the spectrophotometry, particularly at blue wavelengths.
This effect can introduce small biases in the measured extinction for
suboptimal spectrophotometric conditions.
This dust along the line of sight makes our red sample appear
somewhat different than the QSO template used for morphing, built
to resemble a typical blue QSO. We can use this difference to di-
rectly measure the spectroscopic extinction in both populations, by
quantifying the reddening needed to be applied to the morphed re-
construction𝑅3to best fit the observed QSO-only data𝐷2, acting
as a model of𝑅2by reddening𝑅3.
We choose to model the optical extinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)and normal-
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

6P . Guetzoyan et al.
Figure2.Diagramofthereconstructionprocessandreddeningcorrection;seeSection3.2fordetails.Colourcodingismaintainedacrosspanels.Top panel:We
perform a first QSO+galaxy component reconstruction (R1 in black) of the total observed SDSS spectrum (light grey) and subtract the host-galaxy contribution
(purple) to obtain a pure observed QSO reconstruction (R2 in red).Middle panel:We create the morph array shown by the green line which is the ratio of the
observed continuum and the QSO template continuum (dashed brown) with emission lines masked (mask shown in grey). We divide R2 by the morph array to
reshape the reconstruction and match it to the slope of the QSO template, which produces a de-reddened QSO reconstruction, R3 in blue.Bottom panel:We
derive a physical extinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)by applying an attenuation curve to R3 to best fit R2 (dashed pink). The median normalization𝐾is used to rescale R3
and produces R4 in light blue, the intrinsic dust-corrected QSO reconstruction.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO7
ization𝐾usingapowerlawattenuationcurveasmotivatedinFawcett
et al. 2022, which describes the intrinsic flux as:
𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑡 (𝜆)=𝐾 𝐹 𝑜𝑏𝑠 (𝜆) ×10 0.4𝐴 𝜆 ,(1)
𝐴𝜆 =𝑅 𝑉 ×𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)
 𝜆
5500
 𝛼
,(2)
with𝑅 𝑉 =4, 𝛼=−1. We explore values of extinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)
and normalization𝐾through MCMC with Stan (Stan 2024) using
a Gaussian likelihood, by applying the attenuation curve to𝑅3until
it best matches the slope of the galaxy-subtracted data𝐷2, to mea-
sure reddening itnrinsic to the QSO. After iterating until the chains
converge,weusethemedian𝐾and𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)fromtheposteriordis-
tributions of the individual sources to create𝑅2𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 (pink dashed
lineinthebottompanelofFigure2),thebest-fitof𝐷2.Toobtainthe
intrinsic de-reddened QSO-only reconstruction, indicated as R4 in
light blue, we rescale the morphed reconstruction𝑅3. Rescaling by
the median𝐾recovers the true continuum level that was originally
attenuated.
3.2.3 Accurate reconstruction for emission line measurements
OncethecontinuumshapehasbeenreconstructedfollowingSection
3.2.1 and corrected for dust as per Section 3.2.2, we perform a final
reconstruction on the morphed flux using the ‘standard’ 10 QSO
componentsetfromRankineetal.2020toreconstructemissionlines.
This set of components is generated from the same training sample
of 4,000 DR14 quasars but with their continuum shape morphed
as described in Section 3.2.1. As described in section 2 of Rankine
etal.2020,reconstructingthemorphedspectrareducesthenumberof
componentsnecessarytoachieveaspecifiedaccuracy.The‘standard’
setproducesaccuratereconstructionsofthecontinuumandemission
linescovering1260–3000Å,with∼90%ofspectrahavingamedian
fraction error ((data−reconstruction)/reconstruction) of less than
2%.
3.3 SED fitting
To derive the physical properties of host-galaxies, such as stellar
masses,weemploySpectralEnergyDistribution(SED)fitting,using
theextensivephotometricdatadetailedinSection2.3.Thereliability
of stellar mass measurements is however challenged by the presence
ofAGNemission.Thiscanintroducescatterinthe𝑆𝐹 𝑅−𝑀 ★relation,
due to uncertainties driven mostly by stellar mass measurements,
whichareoftenoverestimatedduetoAGNcontribution(Cieslaetal.
2015;Buchneretal.2024).However,ourcomprehensivewavelength
coverageallowsustocompareSEDsbetweenthebQSOsandrQSOs
fairlyacrossawiderangeofredshiftsandconstrainthecontributions
from different processes including stars, dust, and active galactic
nuclei (AGN).
Many codes are publicly available to perform SED fitting. Here,
we chose to use thepythonCode Investigating GALaxy Emission
(cigale;Boquienetal.2019),makinguseofitsshortcomputingtime
andlowdiskstorageneedsaswellasinnovativeadditionalAGNand
X-ray components in the model of SEDs (Yang et al. 2022). In the
following,wedescribethemodelswebuiltandthecomponentsused
to accurately fit the SEDs of quasar-dominated galaxies.
We adopt the same grid of models to describe galaxy and AGN
contributions to the SED of both the rQSO and control samples. To
incorporatethetemporalevolutionofstarformationrates(SFRs),we
choose a delayed Star Formation History (SFH) model. This model
offers smoother variations in SFR over time rather than the sudden
onsetofstarformationthatisassumedwhenmodellinggalaxieswith
exponentiallydecliningSFHmodels.Itreachesapeakat𝜏 𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛,then
gradually decreases.
Todescribethestellarpopulation,weadoptthewidelyusedlibrary
defined in Bruzual & Charlot 2003 using a grid of fixed metallicity
alongwiththeSalpeterInitialMassFunction(IMF).Todifferentiate
betweenyoungandoldstars,weallowforanage-dependentredden-
ingfactor,to accountforyoungstellarpopulations stillembeddedin
their dust clouds which absorb at short wavelengths, in addition to
absorption by dust in the Interstellar Medium (ISM). To account for
this age dependency, we assume an attenuation law from Charlot &
Fall 2000 which allows the computation of two different attenuation
contributions: dust clouds surrounding young stars and the ISM for
starsofallages.Additionally,weaccountfornebularemissionman-
ifested by emission lines from gas ionised by the radiation field of
youngstarsandabsorptionbytheintergalacticmedium(IGM)using
the model developed by Inoue et al. 2014. This model considers the
emission originating from the most massive stars, which ionize the
surroundinggas,resultinginthere-emissionoflightthroughaseries
ofemissionlines.DustemissionismodelledasinDraineetal.2013,
and is separated into two components. The first component is the
diffuse dust emission, heated by the global stellar population, while
the second component models dust emission specifically linked to
star-forming regions, where, contrary to the first case, dust is heated
by a variable radiation field ranging from𝑈𝑚𝑖𝑛 to𝑈 𝑚𝑎𝑥 =10 7.
We add an AGN component following the SKIRTOR clumpy
torus model (Stalevski et al. 2012, 2016) to disentangle the nuclear
emission from star formation; both contributing strongly in the UV.
AGN emission is modelled using three radiative components: the
primary source located within the torus, the scattered emission by
dust, and thermal dust emission (Casey 2012). The attenuation by
dust is modelled by the empirical SMC curve, which resembles our
analytical model using a power-law extinction curve described in
Section 3.2.2, but starts slightly deviating below𝜆∼2500Å. A set
ofseveralparametersdescribesthiscomponent,includingtheradius
𝑟of the torus and the fraction of light coming from the AGN.
Finally, we include X-ray fluxes in the total SEDs, modelled as a
galaxy component to include the minor contribution from hot stars
and off-nucleus binary systems, and an AGN component.
Full details of the parameter grid used can be found in Table B1.
4 RESULTS
We now present our results on the differences in intrinsic properties
between rQSO and a bQSO control sample defined in Section 3.1.
Section 4.1 examines their differences in terms of X-ray luminosity
as calculated in Section 2.1, to establish a first comparison of their
accretion properties. Section 4.2 derives spectral properties of red
and blue quasars after careful dust and host correction following
the method outlined in Section 3.2, to measure optical extinction by
dust, single-epoch virial BH masses, and Eddington ratios. Finally,
we investigate the host-galaxy properties of rQSO in Section 4.4 to
assess whether they could also differ at the galaxy scale.
4.1 X-ray properties of reddened Quasars
We investigate here the potential differences in the X-ray emission
of red and blue quasars and their prevalence as a function of X-ray
luminosity.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

8P . Guetzoyan et al.
43.0 43.5 44.0 44.5 45.0 45.5 46.0
log LX(0.2 2.3) [erg/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
rel = 8.98%
p-value = 2.698e-02
Figure 3.X-ray luminosity distribution of red and blue quasars photometri-
callydefined(seeSection3.1).TheCumulativeDistributionFunctions(CDF)
displayed as the solid and dashed lines to compare both populations with-
out binning effects. There is an over-density of rQSOs at the low-end of the
luminosity distribution compared to bQSOs. We quantify the statistical sig-
nificance of this difference between the two CDFs through the two-sample
KS-test, giving a𝑝-value<null-hypothesis 0.05, which is evidence for a
significant difference between the two samples.
43.5 44.0 44.5 45.0
log LX(0.2 2.3)keV [erg/s]
10
20
30
40
50
60
70fred [%]
eRASS:1, Lobs
eFEDS, Lint
eFEDS, Lobs
Figure 4.Fraction of rQSOs as a function of various X-ray luminosities:
observed𝐿 𝑋 from our full sample within eRASS1 (light pink), intrinsic𝐿𝑋
corrected for obscuration in eFEDS (fuchsia) and observed𝐿𝑋 from our
sample within eFEDS only (dark red). All relations show a decrease of the
fraction of rQSO with increasing luminosity regardless of obscuration effect
by dust and gas.
Figure 3 displays the distribution of observed X-ray luminos-
ity in the 0.2−2.3 keV band for both samples, red and blue. Both
distributions span roughly the same range in luminosity, covering
𝐿 𝑋 ∼10 43−46 erg s−1, as well as having a similar mean, with both
distributionspeakingaround𝐿 𝑋 =10 44.5 erg s−1.Despitethosesim-
ilarities, there is an over-density of rQSO in the low-end of the lu-
minosity distribution (𝐿𝑋 <10 44 erg s−1) compared to the control
sample. To assess the significance of this difference, we turn to the
CumulativeDistributionFunction(CDF)indicatedbythesolidlines
inFigure3.DirectlyexaminingtheCDFremovesanybiasesinduced
bythebinningeffectofastandarddistribution.Here,therelativeover-
density of rQSOs at low X-ray luminosity is even clearer, as the red
CDFdominatesatthefaintend,whichisthenover-takenbytheblue
CDFatthebrighterend.Wethenperforma1-dimensional2-sample
KStest(Hodges1958)whichcomparestheCDFtodeterminewhere
themaximumdifferenceliesbetweenthetwodistributionsandeval-
uateitsstatisticalsignificance.Werequirea𝑝−valuelowerthan0.05
torejectthenullhypothesisthatthetwodistributionsareidenticalat
moderate significance (∼2𝜎equivalent). This test yields a𝑝-value
of∼0.027, lower than the2𝜎threshold to reject the null hypothesis
that the two samples were drawn from the same underlying distribu-
tion.Thisresultsuggeststhatwhilethemagnitudeofthedifferences
seemstobemoderate,theredandblueQSOsamplesarestatistically
different in terms of their X-ray emission, and that the distribution
of rQSOs is more skewed towards lower X-ray luminosities than for
the bQSO sample.
TodeterminetherelativeabundanceofrQSOasafunctionofX-ray
luminosity,wecompute𝑓 𝑟 𝑒𝑑,thefractionofrQSOrelativetothetotal
numberofQSOsintheparentsampleinbinsof𝐿 𝑋,showninFigure
4. We observe a clear decrease in𝑓𝑟 𝑒𝑑 with increasing X-ray lumi-
nosity,reflectingthehigherprevalenceofrQSOatlower𝐿 𝑋 already
identified. However, we stress that the X-ray luminosities derived in
this work for our full sample from eRASS1 have not been corrected
for intrinsic obscuration, only Galactic absorption (see Section 2.1).
As such, the dark blue curve showing the𝑓𝑟 𝑒𝑑 −𝐿 𝑋 relation across
our full eRASS1 sample is based on observed luminosities (𝐿𝑜𝑏𝑠)
that may be underestimated due to intrinsic absorption effects. To
ensure that the prevalence of rQSO at faint X-ray luminosities is not
driven by obscuration effects causing an under-estimate of the true
luminosity of dusty quasars, we use the intrinsic luminosities (𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑡)
of a sub-sample from eFEDS (Liu et al. 2022), which are corrected
for absorption based on X-ray spectral fitting, providing measure-
ments of the absorbing column density𝑁𝐻 along the line-of-sight.
We only retain sources with sufficient fit quality as explained in
Section 5.2.1. This sample contains a total of 720 bQSOs and 134
rQSOs. The curves in light pink and dark red in Figure 4 show the
𝑓𝑟 𝑒𝑑 −𝐿 𝑋 relation in eFEDS using intrinsic (absorption-corrected)
and observed X-ray luminosities, respectively. Regardless of the ab-
sorptioncorrection,thesametrendremainsforallthreecases,where
rQSOs are more prevalent at fainter X-ray luminosity. This suggests
that rQSOs are intrinsically X-ray weaker than bQSOs. However,
obscuration and absorption of the X-ray emission by dust could still
play a significant part in the difference between observed and intrin-
sicproperties,especiallyatsoftenergieswhereluminositiesaremore
sensitivetoabsorptionandwhereeROSITAisthemostsensitive.We
note that while absorption correction based on X-ray spectral fitting
was done on the eFEDS sample, some sources have unconstrained
column density measurements, especially at faint luminosities and
are removed from our sample. The sources kept in our analysis have
on average over 20 counts per source, both rQSOs and bQSOs, sat-
isfying a high enough photon count threshold for reliable column
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO9
density measurements. We discuss these limitations and potential
effect of absorption on our results in Section 5.2.1.
4.2 Spectroscopic properties of reddened Quasars
Here,wederivespectralpropertiesofredandbluequasarsaftercare-
ful host decomposition and dust correction as described in Section
3.2. After quantifying optical extinction by dust in Section 4.2.1, we
determine whether rQSOs show intrinsic differences with bQSOs in
terms in terms of accretion properties by deriving Eddington ratios
(Section 4.2.2).
In Figure 5, we split our sample in bins of𝐿𝑋 −𝑧(bottom panel)
and create composite optical spectra for the rQSOs and bQSOs in
each bin. To generate the composite spectra, we first normalise each
individual spectrum over the 2575-2625Å wavelength range (where
the continuum dominates). We then take the median of the normal-
ized spectra over their common wavelength range to produce one
reference spectrum per𝐿 𝑋 −𝑧bin for both the rQSO and bQSO
samples (top panel). The numbers displayed on the top right corner
of each cell is the number of spectra we average over to produce one
single composite. We require a minimum of five individual spectra
in a bin to generate a meaningful composite. The dashed grey verti-
cal line identifies the Mgiiemission line at 2800Å, which is always
spectroscopicallycoveredinourselectedredshiftrange𝑧=0.5−2.5.
From the composite spectra, we see that our control bQSO sample
conservesthebluespectralslopesuchthattheemissiondropstoward
redderwavelengths,thetypicalfeatureofQSOs,evenatlowerX-ray
luminosities, where we may expect more obscured AGN. With our
selection, we can thus confidently confront our rQSO sample with
the bQSOs acting as reference for normal unreddened QSOs. As a
first look at the spectroscopic properties of red and blue QSOs, the
compositespectrashowstrikingdifferencesinthecontinuumshape.
The flux in the composite of rQSO is significantly attenuated in the
blue end of the wavelength range, making them appear much less
steepthanthecontrolsample.Weobservearedshiftevolutionofthis
slope in rQSO at fixed X-ray luminosity (moving to the right across
the grid), where their continuum slope is more similar to bQSOs
with increasing redshift. This result shows that rQSOs might be less
affected by dust attenuation at higher redshift, which is most likely
a selection effect from our𝑆/𝑁requirement and our photometric
definition of rQSO (see Section 3.1) struggling to detect strongly
reddened broad-line AGN as seen in Figure 1. This could be due
to the wider high-z bins which includes moderate𝑔−𝑟excess that
wouldhavebeenclassifiedasbQSOatlowerredshift.However,Sec-
tion 4.2.1 introduces a more physical and independent way to select
rQSOsbasedontheirinferredspectralextinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉),showing
that our results do not rely exclusively on a photometric selection.
WhileFigure5servesasillustrativepurposes,wenowindividually
measure in detail spectroscopic properties of rQSO and their X-
ray luminosity and redshift dependences from the individual spectra
directlyandcomparetoa𝐿 𝑋 −𝑧matchedcontrolsampleofbQSOs.
4.2.1 Optical extinction
We model the optical extinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)using a power-law atten-
uation curve as described in Section 3.2.2. We perform a Bayesian
fit on each individual source with the same exploration range for
extinction and scale parameters0⩽𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)⩽2.5,0⩽𝐾⩽10 3,
with𝐾the parameter rescaling𝑅3to the intrinsic flux level of the
dust-corrected QSO-only reconstruction. We use the same uniform
prior for both samples of red and blue quasars. For each source, the
best estimate of𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)is taken as the median of the posterior
distribution once the fit is completed.
Figure 6 displays the 1-dimensional distribution of the measured
extinction,𝐸(𝐵−𝑉). The error bars represent the average normal-
ized 1𝜎spread in each𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)bin. The distributions for rQSO
and bQSO show many differences: rQSO span a much broader
extinction range than bQSO with𝐸(𝐵−𝑉) 𝑟 𝑒𝑑 <0.7, against
𝐸(𝐵−𝑉) 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒 <0.35. The median of the extinction distribution
of rQSO is⟨𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)⟩ 𝑟 𝑒𝑑 =0.21and∼0.04for bQSO. The two
distributionshavelittleoverlapathigh𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)valuesbecauseofthe
wide spread of rQSO across extinction values and the rapid decline
in the bQSO distribution. This result shows that from an observed
photometric selection of rQSO, we can robustly recover a sample
of optically attenuated quasars due to dust along the line-of-sight
measured spectroscopically. Our method for spectroscopic extinc-
tionmeasurementcanprovideanotherrobustdefinitionoftherQSO
sub-sample,selectedasthehigh-end𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)tailofthedistribution.
Cutting at⟨𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)⟩>0.35, where the bQSO distribution stops
andnooverlapremainsbetweenthetwodistributions,wouldprovide
acleanandrobustsampleofrQSO,conservingover10%oftheorig-
inalsampleofrQSOs.Foralessconservativedefinition,mergingthe
two distributions and only selecting QSO with⟨𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)⟩>0.21,
the median of the current rQSO distribution, would retain2%of
the total bQSO sample, which are QSOs with high spectroscopic
extinction but missed in our selection due to their blue photomet-
ric colours. We note that the interpretation of individual extinction
measurements should be treated with caution due to possible host
contribution residuals, especially in the faintest or reddest systems.
However, our interpretation relies on robust statistical trends across
our full sample and our conclusions remain.
Figure7presentstheX-rayluminosityandredshiftdependenceof
theopticalextinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)forrQSOsandbQSOs.Thesolidlines
arethemedian⟨𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)⟩andtheshadedareasshowthe1𝜎spread
in bins of𝐿 𝑋 −𝑧. Redshift increases with darker shades. For both
samples, there is a decreasing trend of𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)with increasing
luminosity, indicating that the intrinsic emission from X-ray faint
quasarsismorelikelytobeattenuatedbydust.Again,weseeclearly
here that the red and blue quasar samples do not overlap in terms
of extinction, and this is true at all redshifts. Indeed, bQSOs span
a small range of𝐸(𝐵−𝑉) ∼0−0.05on average, with very little
𝐿 𝑋−evolution,whereasrQSOsspanamuchbroaderrangeofoptical
extinctionandathighervaluesthanbQSOwith𝐸(𝐵−𝑉) ∼0.1−0.4
onaverage.Examiningthedependenceoftheextinctionwithredshift
at fixed luminosity,𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)appears to decrease with increasing
redshift for rQSO. This behaviour could represent an evolutionary
effect that quasars become progressively enshrouded by dust with
time. However, there could be strong selection effects biasing this
correlation due to our redshift-dependent definition of rQSO.
4.2.2 Eddington ratio
We now assess whether intrinsic differences between rQSO and
bQSO are found in their accretion properties rather than mass. To
traceinstantaneousaccretion,wederiveEddingtonratios𝜆 𝐸 𝑑𝑑 from
theirintrinsicUVluminosities(correctedfordustextinctionandhost
contamination following Section 3.2) such that:
𝜆𝐸𝑑𝑑 = 𝐿 𝐵𝑜𝑙
𝐿𝐸𝑑𝑑
= 𝑘 𝐵𝑜𝑙 𝐿3000
1.26×10 38 𝑀𝐵𝐻
(3)
BHmasses(𝑀 𝐵𝐻)arederivedfromsingle-epochvirialBHmasses
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

10P . Guetzoyan et al.
Figure 5.Bottom:Distribution of rQSOs (red open circles) and the control blue sample in the X-ray luminosity - redshift space. No difference is found in the
redshift distribution of rQSO as their selection is𝑧-dependent. Both luminosity distributions peak around𝐿𝑋 ∼3×10 44 erg s−1 but with an over-density of
rQSOsinthelow-endofthedistribution.Top:Wegridthis2Dspaceinbinsof𝐿 𝑋 −𝑧andproducecompositespectraineachbin,showingtheluminosity-redshift
evolution of the spectral shape of rQSOs and the control sample.
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
E(B V)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Number density
bQSO
rQSO
Figure 6.Distribution of the median of the posterior distributions of the
optical extinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)for red and blue quasars. The error bars are the
average normalized 1𝜎spread in each bin.
using Mgiiline and re discussed in Section 5.3. Here we use a
luminosity-dependent bolometric correction from Netzer 2019:
𝑘 𝑏𝑜𝑙 =𝑐
 𝐿𝜆
1042erg s−1
 𝑑
(4)
with𝑐, 𝑑=25,−0.2for𝐿 𝜆 =𝐿 3000.
Figure8displaysthedistributionofEddingtonratioforbothsam-
ples. Both distributions span a wide range oflog𝜆Edd =−2−0, but
itshouldbenotedthatthehighestvalueslog𝜆⪆0.1couldbedriven
by unreliable BH mass measurements where the virial assumption
likely fails. Similar to Figures 3 and 15, we add the two CDFs and
the medians of both distributions shown by the arrows. This time,
thedifferencesin𝜆 𝐸 𝑑𝑑 betweenredandbluequasarsaremuchmore
statisticallysignificantcomparedtothedifferencesin𝑀 𝐵𝐻,anoffset
thatalsopersistsbetweendistributionsatfixedBHmass,demonstrat-
ing that uncertainties and trends on𝑀BH are not driving the effect
observedin𝜆 Edd.Wefindanegligible𝑝-valueof3.12×10 −7 ≪0.05,
and a larger relative difference ofΔ𝑟 𝑒𝑙 =11.46%. This result shows
that the difference in observed properties chosen to select red and
blue quasars are driven by intrinsic effects, linked to differences in
theaccretionpropertiesofBHs,andthatrQSOsshowsystematically
suppressed accretion relative to blue quasars.
4.3 Relative optical and X-ray strength
Insection4.1,wedemonstratedthatrQSOsaremoreprevalentinthe
lowX-rayluminosityregimeandthattheirabsoluteX-rayluminosity
is, on average, lower than bQSOs. We now investigate this potential
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO11
43.0 43.5 44.0 44.5 45.0
log LX(0.2 2.3) keV [erg/s]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4E(B V)
z
 1
2
Figure7.Evolutionoftheintrinsicopticalextinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)asafunction
of X-ray luminosity and redshift for rQSO and bQSO. The solid lines are the
median⟨𝐸(𝐵−𝑉) ⟩and the shaded areas show the 1𝜎spread in bins of
𝐿𝑋 −𝑧.Redshiftincreaseswithdarkershades.Inbothsamples,wefindalarger
average extinction at faint X-ray luminosities and a decrease in𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)
with increasing𝐿 𝑋. bQSOs show on average very little extinction even in
the faintest quasars, and do not overlap with rQSOs in terms of𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)
(<0.1).
X-ray weakness relative to their optical emission by deriving the
spectral slope indicator𝛼𝑂𝑋 (Tananbaum et al. 1979):
𝛼𝑂𝑋 =log
 𝐿2keV/𝐿 2500
𝜈2keV/𝜈2500

=0.384 log
 𝐿2keV
𝐿2500

.(5)
The optical monochromatic luminosity𝐿2500 is taken as the dust-
correctedcontinuumluminosityaveragedover2495-2505Å,divided
bythe2500Åfrequency.TheX-raymonochromaticluminosity𝐿 2keV
iscomputedfromtherest-frame0.2-2.3keVluminosity(seeSection
2.1), not corrected for obscuration since the effect of gas absorption
isminimalontheX-rayemissionasshowninSection4.1andfurther
discussed in Section 5.2.1. Extrapolating the rest-frame 0.2-2.3 keV
luminosity to the 2-10 keV band, integrating over this energy range,
and dividing by the 2keV frequency, this gives:
𝐿2keV = 𝐿2−10keV
Í𝜈10keV
𝜈2keV 𝜈1−Γ 𝜈 𝜈 (1−Γ )
2keV (6)
Figure9presentsthe𝛼 𝑂𝑋 −𝐿 2500 relation(mainpanel)andcom-
pares our sample to the Lusso et al. 2010 scaling relation (dashed
black line). The error bars are the uncertainties on theeROSITA
0.2-2.3 keV flux propagated to the 2 keV monochromatic luminos-
ity𝐿 2keV. We assume that the uncertainties on𝛼𝑂𝑋 are dominated
by uncertainties on the X-ray measurements and that the errors on
optical luminosities are relatively negligible.
Both rQSOs and bQSOs follow the scaling relation from Lusso
etal.2010withlittletonooffset.However,thereisasignificantshift
in the𝛼 𝑂𝑋 distribution between the two populations (side panel,
𝑝-value<0.05), with rQSOs occupying systematically lower values
of𝛼 𝑂𝑋 at fixed optical luminosity compared to bQSOs, indicating
weakerX-rayemissioncomparedto𝐿 2500.Atthesametime,the1D
distribution of𝐿 2500 shows that rQSOs are not simply faint objects
2
 1
 0
log Edd(LX)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
p-value = 3.12e-07
rel = 11.46%
Figure 8.Distribution of the Eddington ratio measured from intrinsic UV
luminosities. The median of the distributions are shown by the arrows and
theirrelativedifferenceΔ 𝑟 𝑒𝑙isaround11.46%.TheCumulativeDistribution
Functions (CDFs) are shown by the solid red and dashed blue lines. We
perform the 2-sample KS-test on the CDFs, providing a𝑝-value of3.12×
10−7.
across all bands, rQSOs are on average slightly more luminous in
the optical than bQSOs, arguing against rQSOs being globally faint
sources but rather have distinct X-ray weakness. The slight devia-
tion at low optical luminosities from the scaling relation for both
populations is due to our sample being X-ray selected and thus bi-
ased towards slightly brighter X-ray sources than the sample used to
calibrate the relation.
The bottom panel shows the distribution ofΔ𝛼𝑂𝑋, defined as the
deviation of sources from the Lusso et al. 2010 scaling relation. We
observe a significant higher prevalence of rQSOs within the nega-
tive regime compared to bQSOs, with a higher fraction of sources
classified as X-ray weak relative to predictions based on their opti-
calluminosity,whichreinforcesthatrQSOsaresystematicallyX-ray
weaker than bQSOs at matched𝐿2500.
Pointsarecolour-codedbyopticalreddening𝐸(𝐵−𝑉).Thisformat
revealsacleartrendinbothpopulations,mostlyvisibleinrQSOs:at
fixed optical luminosity, sources with higher extinction have lower
𝛼𝑂𝑋 and more negativeΔ𝛼𝑂𝑋. This result indicates that larger dust
contentalongtheline-of-sightisassociatedwithmorereducedintrin-
sic X-ray emission relative to the optical, suggesting a link between
the origin of the dust and X-ray weakness, which we discuss further
in Section 5.
4.4 Host properties of reddened Quasars
Wenextinvestigatethehost-galaxypropertiestoexplorewhetherthe
reddening observed in quasars is linked to the stellar mass of their
hosts.StellarmassesarederivedthroughSEDfittingasdescribedin
Section 3.3.
Figure10showsthefractionofrQSO,𝑓 𝑟 𝑒𝑑,asafunctionofstellar
mass, split into different X-ray luminosity cuts. In all luminosity
bins,𝑓 𝑟 𝑒𝑑 increasessystematicallywithincreasingstellarmass.This
trend indicates that rQSO preferentially occupy massive galaxies,
regardless of luminosity, which further demonstrates that the red
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

12P . Guetzoyan et al.
rel = 16.83%
p-value = 4.972e-05
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
ox
rel = 3.25%
p-value = 6.68e-07
28 29 30 31 32
log L2500 [erg/s/Hz]
0.5
0.0
0.5
ox
X-ray weaker
rel = 57.58%
p-value = 3.79e-05
0.0
0.5
E(B V)
Figure 9.Center:Distribution of blue and red quasars in the𝛼𝑂𝑋 −𝐿 2500
space. The error bars show the uncertainties propagated from the 0.2-2.3
keVeROSITAflux. The scaling relation indicated by the dashed black line is
adapted from Lusso et al. 2010. Points are colour-coded by their measured
𝐸(𝐵−𝑉). A larger absolute value of𝛼 𝑂𝑋 (below the scaling relation)
indicates weaker X-ray emission relative to optical. The side histogram is
the𝛼 𝑂𝑋 distribution. The rQSO distribution is shifted towards lower𝛼𝑂𝑋
relative to bQSO, indicating a stronger X-ray weakness relative to optical
luminosity. The median of the distributions are shown by the arrows and
their relative differenceΔ𝑟 𝑒𝑙 is around 3.25%. The top panel displays the
distributions of monochromatic luminosity𝐿2500 for red and blue quasars.
rQSOs have a larger average𝐿2500 compared to bQSOs and a relative differ-
enceΔ 𝑟 𝑒𝑙 ∼16.8%. The 2-sample KS-test yields a p-value of 4.972×10−5.
Bottom:Δ𝛼 𝑂𝑋, the distance of red and blue quasars to the Lusso et al. 2010
scaling relation, as a function of monochromatic optical luminosity𝐿2500.
The side histograms show that rQSOs are more often X-ray weak than bQ-
SOs.
colour is not driven solely by luminosity selection effects making it
easier to detect sources in massive galaxies due to their brightness,
but instead reveals an underlying dependence on host-galaxy mass.
Figure11showstherelationbetweenthedustextinction,𝐸(𝐵−𝑉),
and stellar mass of the host galaxy for rQSO on the left panel and
bQSOontheright.SimilartoFigure7,thesolidlinesarethemedian
⟨𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)⟩and the shaded areas indicate the 1𝜎spread in bins of
𝑀★ −𝑧.Redshiftincreaseswithdarkershades.Forbothpopulations,
weobservenodependenceonstellarmassfortheextinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)
across the full range of masses. In the case of rQSO, the level of
extinction remains approximately constant from low to high-mass
hosts, despite the increase in rQSO fraction visible in Figure 10.
rel = 1.57%
p-value = 1.816e-07
9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0 11.5
log M [M ]
5
10
15
20
25
fred [%]
LX =  1e43-1e44 erg s 1
LX =  1e44-3e44 erg s 1
LX >  3e44 erg s 1
Figure 10.Fraction of rQSO,𝑓 𝑟 𝑒𝑑, as a function of host stellar mass in
different X-ray luminosity bins. The top panel displays the stellar mass dis-
tributions and CDFs for both populations.
Similarly, blue quasars show no evidence for higher extinction in
more massive galaxies.
These results demonstrate that while rQSOs are more commonly
associated with massive hosts, the host stellar mass itself does not
regulate the amount of dust reddening. Hence, the increase in the
fraction of rQSO with stellar mass cannot be attributed to a scaling
ofdustcontentwithgalaxymass;instead,theabsenceofacorrelation
between𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)andstellarmassimpliesthatthereddeningarises
from processes that are independent of the global stellar mass of the
host.
5 DISCUSSION
5.1 Comparison with previous studies
PreviousworkonrQSOsshowedcontradictoryresultsontheirphys-
ical nature, mainly due to the non-homogeneous definitions and se-
lectionmethodsused.Moststudiesrelyonradioorinfrared-selected
rQSOs,usuallywithnodirectX-rayconstraints.Majoranalysessuch
as Klindt et al. 2019; Fawcett et al. 2020, 2022, 2023 have demon-
strated that rQSOs have higher radio detection fractions than con-
trolbQSOsamples,althoughradio-detectedrQSOstendtobeinthe
radio-quietregime.TheseworkshavealsoshownrQSOstobemostly
associated with compact radio morphologies, indicating that power-
ful but non-extended outflows are likely to be responsible for their
radio emission. These works conclude that while outflow properties
candiffer,accretionappearstooperateinasimilarmanneracrossthe
red and blue populations. Specifically, Fawcett et al. 2022 conclude
thatrQSOsdonotappeartolackaradiativelyefficientaccretiondisc
once corrected for dust extinction and that the differences in radio
emission trace the interaction between AGN-driven winds and the
dusty ISM, rather than differences in accretion physics. Their en-
hanced radio emission is not produced in the radiatively inefficient,
jet-dominated quasar mode (Heckman & Best 2014), instead rQSOs
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO13
9.00 9.25 9.50 9.75 10.00 10.25 10.50
log M [M ]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4E(B V)
9.00 9.25 9.50 9.75 10.00 10.25 10.50
log M [M ]
1
2
z
 1
2
z
Figure 11.Same format as Figure 7. Evolution of the intrinsic optical extinction𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)as a function of stellar mass and redshift for rQSO (left) and bQSO
(right).Thesolidlinesarethemedian⟨𝐸(𝐵−𝑉) ⟩andtheshadedareasshowthe1𝜎spreadinbinsof𝑀 ★ −𝑧.Redshiftincreaseswithdarkershades.Wefind
nocorrelationbetweentheaverageopticalextinctionandstellarmass,suggestingthatthegalaxymasshaslittletonoincidenceonthedustextinctioninrQSOs.
areassociatedwithcompactradiostructures,inconsistentwithlarge-
scaleextendedjets.However,thelackofhomogenousX-raycoverage
prevented the authors from reaching firm conclusions as to whether
their red quasar samples also produce the X-ray emission expected
in the standard AGN model.
The study of the X-ray properties of rQSOs is mostly limited to
the work of LaMassa et al. 2016 and Glikman et al. 2017. They pre-
sented a combined sample of four luminous rQSOs at low redshift
(𝑧 <1) and found moderate absorption with column densities of
𝑁𝐻 ∼10 23 cm−2. Section 5.2.1 describes in more detail their re-
sult on the dust properties compared to our sample. Relevant to this
work, Goulding et al. 2018 and Ma et al. 2024 have also presented
X-raystudiesonreddenedquasars,althoughthesestudiesyieldcon-
tradictory results. Both works focus on relatively small samples of
extremely rQSOs (ERQs), taken from Ross et al. 2015 and Hamann
etal.2017,selectedbasedontheirextremelyhighinfrared-to-optical
fluxratiosaswellasspectroscopicpropertiessuchashighequivalent
widths of emission lines, indicative of continuum suppression, and
observedwithtargetedX-rayobservations,for11ERQsoutof∼300
in the parent samples. Goulding et al. 2018 did not find differences
in the intrinsic X-ray emission of ERQs compared to bQSOs and
that ERQsdo notappear to beintrinsically fainterin X-rays fortheir
bolometricluminosity.However,Maetal.2024foundcontradictory
evidence. Within their sample of 50 ERQs, they found that half of
their sources lacked an individual detection in X-ray, and that once
stacked, their luminosity was on average lower by a factor of 10
than expected based on their infrared luminosities, concluding that
ERQs are both intrinsically X-ray weak and heavily obscured. Our
approachherediffers,asoursampleisinitiallyselectedfromall-sky
X-raysurveyswitheROSITAforwhichweobtainopticalspectrawith
SDSS. Thus we probe a different population, representing the rela-
tivelyreddestobjectsfromwithintheeROSITAX-raysample,based
onobservedopticalcolours.Byconstruction,oursampleisrequired
to be X-ray detected. However, our X-ray selected rQSOs tend to
havelowerX-rayluminositiesthanourcontrolbQSOs.Thesediffer-
encesintheX-rayluminositiesremainevenaftercorrectingforX-ray
absorption effects for the subsample in eFEDS where we have esti-
matesofabsorption-correctedluminosities.Thus,ourworksuggests
that, consistent with the Ma et al. 2024 findings for ERQs, rQSOs
correspond to an intrinsically X-ray weak population as supported
by our measured𝛼 𝑂𝑋 (Section 4.3), on average lower in rQSOs,
indicating weaker X-ray luminosities than expected based on their
optical emission compared to bQSOs.
5.2 Origin of the absorbing material
OurworkdemonstratesthatthefractionofrQSOsislargerinhigher
stellarmasshosts,indicatingthatrQSOsaremorelikelytobehosted
byhigherstellarmassgalaxiescomparedtothegeneralQSOpopula-
tion(Figure10),butnocorrelationbetweendustreddening𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)
and stellar mass is found (Figure 11). This key result implies that
massive hosts may have the conditions required for dust production,
butthereddeningitselfmayinsteadstemfromAGN-scalestructures.
Disentanglinghost-scaleandnucleardustisessentialforunderstand-
ing how dust relates to accretion, feedback, and galaxy evolution
(Hickox&Alexander2018).Opticalreddeningtracesdustalongthe
line-of-sight to the accretion disc and broad-line region, whereas X-
rayabsorptionprobesgasalongtheline-of-sighttotheX-raycorona.
Comparing these two measurements provides a powerful diagnostic
of whether gas and dust are coupled or come from spatially distinct
structures. If the dust is nuclear, it will probe the close environment
ofBHsandthegeometryoftheobscuringtorus.However,ifthedust
is of host origin, it becomes a tracer of large-scale processes such as
feedback-driven outflows that can temporarily obscure and suppress
accretion. In Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2, we investigate whether the
dust responsible for extinction in rQSOs is of nuclear or host origin.
5.2.1 X-ray absorption as an indicator of nuclear dust structures
To investigate whether the dust reddening of rQSOs originates from
the nuclear region, we examine their line-of-sight X-ray absorption.
If the reddening was primarily due to the classical dusty torus, we
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

14P . Guetzoyan et al.
would expect to find systematically higher equivalent neutral hydro-
gen column densities,𝑁𝐻, in rQSOs compared to blue quasars.
In this section, we further explore the connection between the
reddening due to dust measured from optical spectroscopy and line-
of-sight X-ray absorption measured from X-ray spectral analysis by
Liuetal.2022fortheeFEDSsubsetofoursample(720blueand134
red QSOs). This subset spans the same X-ray luminosity - redshift
space as our parent sample, but somewhat clusters around the lower
luminosityendofthedistributionduetodeeperexposuresineFEDS.
The top panel of Figure 12 compares the distributions of𝑁𝐻 be-
tween the two populations using X-ray spectral measurements from
Liu et al. 2022 for the eFEDS subsample. We make use of the fit-
tingresultsfortheirabsorbedpowerlawmodel 5 tostudythespectral
properties𝑁 𝐻 andΓ. In the following, we exclude all sources with
fitting results classified as “uninformative” by the authors, which
includes∼10%of the bQSO sample and∼5%of rQSOs. We re-
tain “unobscured” sources where it was not possible to provide an
accurate measurement of𝑁𝐻 but the column density is constrained
to be≲10 20 cm−2. For these sources, we instead set their col-
umn density values to𝑁 𝐻 =10 19.5 cm−2 (shown by the dashed
histograms).ThedistributionsshowthatbothrQSOsandbQSOsre-
side predominantly in the Compton-thin regime, with most sources
having𝑁 𝐻 <10 22 cm−2. Both distributions peak at similar moder-
atevalues(𝑁 𝐻 ∼10 20.5−21 cm−2),indicatingthatmostoftherQSOs
in our sample are not heavily obscured in X-ray and do not resem-
ble classical type-2 quasars, which differs from the measurements
of Ma et al. 2024 who report much higher column density values
(𝑁 𝐻 ∼10 23−24 cm−2) based on targeted X-ray observations of an
extremelyredquasarsample,withhigheropticalreddeningthanour
sample. As such, our results do not favour a purely geometric expla-
nation i.e., an optically-thick dusty torus blocking our line-of-sight
tothecentralaccretiondiscastheprimarycauseofreddeninginrQ-
SOs, that also absorbs the X-ray photons. However, we also observe
an excess of rQSOs at𝑁𝐻 >10 22 cm−2, suggesting that for a small
subset there is significant obscuring material along the line-of-sight
totheX-rayemittingregion.Thisfeatureisabsentinthebluequasar
population and could reflect dust embedded within the inner AGN
structure, but it does not dominate the population.
Here,weonlypresentresultsfromLiuetal.(2022)basedontheir
singleabsorbedpowerlawmodel,aftertestingtherobustnessofthese
measurements compared to then more complex absorption models
explored by Liu et al. (2022) (including a double power law i.e. a
partially covering absorber model, and a power law plus blackbody
emissionmodel).Wefindthat𝑁 𝐻 remainsconsistentacrossmodels,
withratiosbetweenmodelsroughlyaround1butwithhoweverlarger
deviations between the powerlaw and double power law models. It
seems that more complex models lead to slightly higher column
densitiesbutthisdoesnotaltertheoveralldistributionsortherelative
comparison between rQSOs and bQSOs as this effect is observed
homogeneouslyacrossbothpopulations.However,thelimitedphoton
countsintheeFEDSX-rayspectrapreventsrobustconstraintsofmore
complexabsorptionfeaturessuchasionisedabsorbersthatcannotbe
capturedwiththesemodels.Westressthatthe𝑁 𝐻 measurementswe
present must be interpreted as equivalentneutralhydrogen column
densities, which do not account explicitly for absorption by ionised
gas along the line of sight. Thus we might underestimate thetotal
columndensityofgas,bothneutralandionisedwhichisnotcaptured
in the definition of𝑁𝐻. However, this effect would thus increase the
true column densities of both populations, supporting that rQSOs
5 Model 1.
have even larger gas reservoirs than currently measured, lowering
the dust-to-gas ratio (Figure 13), further supporting that the X-ray
absorption in rQSOs likely originates from dust-free gas.
The bottom panel of Figure 12 displays the distribution of photon
indices,Γ,fortheabsorbedpower-lawfitstotheeFEDSsubsamples
ofrQSOsandbQSOs.rQSOsshowslightlylowerphotonindicesand
thus harder spectra with a medianΓ∼1.9versusΓ∼2.0−2.1for
bQSOs, consistent with the averageΓineROSITAsamples, indicat-
ing an intrinsically altered corona and lower Eddington ratios (e.g.,
Brightmanetal.2013),aspreviouslyshowninSection4.2.2,butnot
consistent with typical heavily obscured type-2 AGN. Importantly,
we note that theeROSITAselection will be biased against the se-
lection of heavily obscured sources, frequently missed due to strong
absorption in the soft band whereeROSITAis the most sensitive,
and thus preferentially detecting sources with soft spectra. Thus, the
relatively high photon indices compared to most X-ray AGN sam-
ples(Nandraetal.2007)measuredforbothsamplescouldatleastbe
partially driven by selection effects witheROSITA. Even so, rQSOs
have slightly flatterΓcompared to bQSOs despite the selection bias
toward steeper slopes that should impact both samples. This slight
shifttowardshardersourcescanarisefromdifferencesintheirintrin-
siccoronalproperties.However,theabsenceofstronglyhardspectra
(Γ<1.5), associated with the predominantly Compton-thick𝑁 𝐻
values rules out heavy nuclear obscuration as the primary cause of
reddening in our sample since rQSOsdoexist within the eROSITA-
selected quasar population. Instead, our results are consistent with a
scenario where rQSOs could experience a weakened accretion state,
causing reduced soft X-ray emission without requiring substantial
line-of-sight absorption by a dusty torus.
Figure 13 shows the relation between gas absorption𝑁𝐻 and op-
tical reddening𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)for the eFEDS subsample. We find no
significantcorrelationbetweenX-rayabsorptionandopticalredden-
ingforbothrQSOsandbQSOs.Moreover,rQSOscoverawiderange
of𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)atfixed𝑁 𝐻,withsourcesgoingthroughsubstantialred-
dening but little to no measurable X-ray absorption. The absence of
acorrelationbetween𝑁 𝐻 and𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)showsthattheydonottrace
the same absorbing medium; instead, the gas responsible for X-ray
absorption and dust reddening the optical emission likely arise from
different spatial structures.
These results demonstrate that the rQSOs in our sample do not
haveX-raypropertiesexpectedfromstrongnuclearabsorptionifthe
optical reddening was dominated by an optically-thick torus. The
X-ray absorption likely originates from dust-free gas located close
to the black hole, while the dust responsible for optical reddening is
producedatgreaterdistances.Thus,theX-rayspectralmeasurements
rule out a scenario where the reddening in rQSOs is dominated by
a classical, optically thick dusty torus. Instead, the dust originates
from more scattered nuclear dusty gas structures within the AGN
that could attenuate the UV/optical emission without necessarily
absorbing the compact X-ray corona along most line-of-sights or
from dusty structures at larger spatial scales within the host, which
we explore in Section 5.2.2
5.2.2 Absorption from host-scale dust structures
To test whether dust reddening in rQSOs stems from extended host-
scale structures, we use our ICA-based spectral decomposition (see
Section 3.2.1), which separates each spectrum into quasar and host-
galaxy components. We quantify the host contribution as the ratio
between the sum of the five galaxy component weights and the total
spectral weight. The distribution of the galaxy fraction is given in
Figure14forredandbluequasarsanditsevolutionwithAGNoptical
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO15
Figure12.X-rayspectralmeasurementsfortheeFEDSsub-samples(Liuetal.
2022).Top:FractionofrQSOsasafunctionofhydrogencolumndensity𝑁 𝐻.
Below are the𝑁𝐻 distributions for bQSOs and rQSOs. The dashed bin are
”unobscured” sources set atlog𝑁𝐻 =19.5 cm −2.Bottom:Photon indexΓ
distribution. The median of the distributions are shown by the arrows, and
the Cumulative Distribution Functions (CDFs) are shown by the solid red
anddashedbluelinesforredandbluequasarsrespectively.Wefindarelative
difference in𝑁 𝐻 ofΔ 𝑟 𝑒𝑙 ∼0.91%andΔ 𝑟 𝑒𝑙 ∼3.86%inΓ. A 2-sample
KS-test on the CDF produces a𝑝-value of∼0.1448and2.568×10 −3
respectively.
luminosity𝐿 2500. As expected, bQSOs are mainly AGN-dominated,
withthebulkofsourceshavinggalaxyfractionstypicallylowerthan
∼0.2, consistent with classical unobscured quasars where broad
lineemissionoverwhelmsfeaturesfromtheunderlyinggalaxyemis-
sion.Incontrast,rQSOsspanasignificantlybroaderrangeofgalaxy
fraction,withalongertailextendingtogalaxyfractions∼0.5,asur-
prisinglystrongcontributionforsourcesspectroscopicallyclassified
as QSO by the BOSS pipeline due to their broad line emission. This
result indicates that, while many rQSOs are still AGN-dominated, a
substantial fraction shows strong host-galaxy contributions to their
optical continuum. On host-scales, dust can scatter the AGN light
into the line of sight, resulting in a redder continuum. Thus, higher
galaxy fractions imply a more prominent stellar or dust-scattered
emission, in line with host-scale absorption or enhanced star forma-
tion. Combined with low-to-moderate absorbing column densities,
25
 24
 23
 22
 21
 20
log(E(B V)/NH)
100
101
T otal number
LaMassa+16, Glikman+17
20 21 22 23 24
log NH cm 2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4E(B-V)
Figure 13.Top panel:Dust-to-gas ratio distribution for rQSOs and bQSOs,
compared to the rQSO samples from LaMassa et al. 2016; Glikman et al.
2017. The solid black line indicates the Milky Way dust-to-gas ratio (1.7×
10−22 cm2; Bohlin et al. 1978).Main panel:Relation between gas and dust
absorption𝐸(𝐵−𝑉) −𝑁 𝐻.
𝑁𝐻, indicating a lack of strong X-ray absorption (Section 5.2.1),
these observations suggest that the main source of reddening in rQ-
SOsmightnotbeatraditionalcompactdustytoruswithinthenuclear
region, but could also be associated with dust distributed on larger
scaleswithinthehost,orpatchyduststructuresintheAGNpolarre-
gions,partiallyobscuringthequasaroptical/UVandX-rayemission.
Importantly, the lack of strong X-ray absorption in rQSOs does not
ruleoutahostoriginscenario,ashost-duststructuresarelikelytobe
more spatially extended and less optically thick than nuclear struc-
tures (Goulding et al. 2012; Hickox & Alexander 2018). Moreover,
the prevalence of rQSOs in higher stellar mass galaxies support the
model where that the dusty material originates from the host itself
and that the reddening cannot be attributed to a simple torus.
Taken together, the X-ray and optical measurements point to a
structured absorption geometry in rQSOs, where gas and dust are
notlocatedwithinthesameenvironment.Theabsenceofcorrelation
between𝑁 𝐻 and𝐸(𝐵−𝑉),combinedwithlowtomoderatecolumn
densities, suggest that the optical reddening is not dominated by a
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

16P . Guetzoyan et al.
43 44 45 46 47
log L2500 [erg/s]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5Galaxy fraction rel = 30.71%
p-value = 4.25e-15
10
11
12
log M [M ]
Figure 14.The total spectral galaxy fraction as a function of dust-corrected
optical luminosity𝐿 2500. Points are coloured by their stellar mass measured
via SED fitting. We don’t find an obvious trend between stellar mass and
galaxyfraction,althoughthemostmassivegalaxiestendtohavehighergalaxy
fraction. The brighter a source is in the optical, the more host-dominated it
becomes (increasing galaxy fraction with luminosity). We show on the side
the distribution of the galaxy fraction for red and blue quasars. There is a
striking difference between the two populations, with rQSOs showing much
more often higher galaxy contributions to their optical continuum.
dusty torus. Instead, the X-ray absorption most likely arises from
dust-freegaswithinthenucleus,whilethedustreddeningtheoptical
light originates from larger spatial scales, either from dusty gas in
the polar regions of the AGN or from the host itself, as suggested by
the large galaxy fractions in rQSOs and their prevalence in massive
hosts, indicating that the dusty material could be of host origin.
5.3 Fractional black hole and stellar growth
Here,wefirstinvestigatethedifferencesintermsofBHmassbetween
red and blue quasars. Single epoch virial BH masses are measured
from the Mgiiemission line width𝐹𝑊 𝐻 𝑀Mgii and continuum lu-
minosity at 2100 Å,𝐿 2100 reconstructed with the 10 component
high-accuracy fit (see Section 3.2.3), and corrected for dust atten-
uation and host contribution. We adopt the scaling relation from
Vestergaard & Osmer 2009:
𝑀𝐵𝐻 =10 6.79
 𝐹𝑊 𝐻 𝑀Mgii
1000km s−1
2  𝜆𝐿 𝜆
1044erg s−1
0.5
.(7)
In Figure 15, we show the distribution of BH mass as well as the
CDF in the solid and dashed lines. The medians of the distributions
areindicatedbythearrows.ThereisnostrikingdifferenceintheBH
massdistributionbetweenredandbluequasars,exceptforaslighttail
atthelowendofthedistributioninrQSO.However,whenquantifying
the significance of this difference using a 2-sample KS-test (see
Section 4.1), the𝑝-value=2.14×10 −6 is small enough to reject
the null-hypothesis that the BH mass distributions are drawn from
the same populations, but not as convincingly as𝐿𝑋. The median
of both samples are very similar with⟨log𝑀𝐵𝐻 ⟩𝑟 𝑒𝑑 ∼8.84 M ⊙ and
⟨log𝑀 𝐵𝐻 ⟩𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒 ∼8.73 M ⊙, and well within the intrinsic scatter in
Mgii-based BH single-epoch BH masses of∼0.3−0.4dex. Thus,
the statistically significant KS-test result could be primarily driven
by the large sample size rather than a physically meaningful mass
difference. The medians have a relative differenceΔ𝑟 𝑒𝑙 of about
1.25%.
The main panel of Figure 15 illustrates how BHs and their host
galaxies are currently growing across the𝑀𝐵𝐻 −𝑀 ★ plane for red
and blue quasars. Due to our selection criteria requiring a relatively
bright AGN component, and thus selecting preferentially higher BH
mass quasars, we tend to find both rQSOs and bQSOs above the
scaling relations (black lines: Kormendy & Ho 2013; Greene et al.
2020), i.e., our sample misses low-mass BHs in massive galaxies.
To understand this bias, we create a 2D grid shown by the shaded
grey areas. The vectors represent the average fractional growth rates
in each𝑀 𝐵𝐻 −𝑀 ★ bin, where the horizontal and vertical compo-
nents correspond to the average specific star-formation rate sSFR
measured via SED fitting (normalized by stellar mass) and Edding-
ton ratio𝑠𝜆 𝐸𝑑𝑑 measured from dust-corrected optical luminosities
𝐿3000 (Section 4.2.2), respectively. As noted in Section 3.3, AGN
contribution to the SED can lead to uncertainties in SFR measure-
ments. In Appendix A, we compare our growth vectors based on the
measuredSFRswithalternativeestimatesusingpriormeasurements
ofthemainsequenceofstarformation,findingconsistenttrendsthat
indicate — at least on average within a𝑀★ −𝑀 BH bin — that our
estimates are reasonable. Each vector thus traces the instantaneous
growth and evolution of sources in this space, i.e., the relative rates
at which BHs and galaxies are assembling their mass, as a function
of stellar and BH mass. The length of the arrow corresponds to the
rateatwhichthegalaxiesinagivenbinaregrowingboththeirstellar
and BH components, relative to their current stellar and BH mass.
Individual sources are coloured by their spectroscopic redshift, with
darker shades indicating higher redshift.
Both populations show vectors that broadly converge towards the
main𝑀 𝐵𝐻 −𝑀 ★scalingrelations.Sunetal.2015andZhuang&Ho
2023haveshownsimilarevolutionarypathwayswithapersistentmo-
tion,suggestingaself-regulatedmodeofco-evolutionwhereBHand
stellargrowthhappenintandem,suchthat,onaverage,sourcesevolve
towards the local scaling relation regardless of their offset from it.
Indeed,forsourcesbelowthescalingrelations(under-massiveBHor
over-massivegalaxy),theirevolutionismostlydrivenbyBHgrowth,
risingverticallytoreachtherelation.Theoppositeoccursforsources
above the line, now with over-massive BHs ceasing significant BH
massassembly,whilethegalaxyappearstocontinuebuildingstellar
mass to reach the relation.
However, the individual behaviour differs between the two quasar
populations.ForbQSOs,arrowsaretypicallylongerandmoreverti-
cal, indicating a higher fractional BH growth relative to their hosts.
bQSOs are accreting efficiently (higher Eddington ratios) and are
capable of rapidly increasing their BH mass compared to their stel-
lar mass. Their evolutionary vectors often lie parallel to or slightly
steeperthantheKormendy&Ho2013relation,implyingthatbQSOs
can maintain or even increase their BH-to-stellar-mass ratio if their
current growth is sustained. In contrast, rQSOs show systematically
shorter arrows with lower slopes. Their vertical components, which
tracenormalizedBHaccretion,aresmaller,consistentwiththeiron-
average lower Eddington ratios and lower X-ray luminosities found
inSection4.1.ThisbehaviourindicatesthatrQSOsareaccretingless
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO17
9 10 11 12 13
log M [M ]
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0log MBH [M ]
Kormendy & Ho +13
Greene+20 Late-type
Greene+20 Early-type
p-value = 2.14e-06
rel = 1.25%
Figure15.Main panel:Blueandredquasarsinthe𝑀 𝐵𝐻 −𝑀 ★space.Points
are colour-coded by redshift, a darker shade indicating higher𝑧. BH masses
are measured from Mgiisingle-epoch virial masses and stellar masses are
estimated via SED fitting (Section 3.3). We compare our measurements to
thescalingrelationfromKormendy&Ho2013(solidline),andGreeneetal.
2020(early-typeindottedlineandlate-typeindashedline).Wegridthespace
inbinsof𝑀 𝐵𝐻 −𝑀 ★andcomputeforbothredandbluesamplestheaverage
𝜆𝐸𝑑𝑑 (y-component of the vectors) and sSFR (x-component of the vectors)
measuredfromSEDfitting.ThevectorsindicatetheamountofBHandstellar
growth in each cell and that both rQSOs and bQSOs are in general moving
towardthescalingrelations.Right:DistributionoftheBHmass.Themedian
ofthedistributionsareshownbythearrowsandtheirrelativedifferenceΔ 𝑟 𝑒𝑙
is around 1.25%. The Cumulative Distribution Functions (CDFs) are shown
by the solid red and dashed blue lines. We perform the 2-sample KS-test
on the CDFs, providing a𝑝-value of 2.14×10−6 consistent with the rQSO
sample having, typically, higher BH masses than the bQSO sample.
efficiently,despitesimilarstellargrowthrates.Thus,theirevolution-
ary vectors are more horizontal, pointing towards a phase in which
the host galaxy grows faster than the central BH.
Figure 16 quantifies these trends by comparing the slope of the
growth vectors (𝑚®𝑣 = Δlog𝑀 𝐵𝐻 /Δlog𝑀 ★ =𝜆 𝐸𝑑𝑑 /𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅) to the
slope of the Kormendy & Ho 2013 relation𝑚𝐾13. The slope ratio
measureshowtheinstantaneousdirectionofgrowthcomparestothe
onerequiredtoremainonthescalingrelation.Aratioofone(dashed
line) corresponds to growth parallel to the relation, preserving the
same growth rate predicted by the empirical relation. Ratios greater
thanoneindicaterelativelystrongerBHgrowth,i.e.,sourcesbecom-
ingover-massiveiftheratioissustained,whilevalueslowerthanone
mean stronger stellar mass increase.
Taking the average slope across stellar mass for each BH mass
bin, Figure 16 shows the evolution of the fractional BH growth
rates with BH mass. Both populations show a clear decrease of
the slope ratio with increasing BH mass. At low BH masses
(log(𝑀 𝐵𝐻 /M⊙)⩽7.5−8), both red and blue QSOs have ratios
above one, implying that low-mass BHs are currently in a phase
whereBHsgrowfasterrelativetotheirhosts,potentiallycatchingup
to the scaling relation. At higher BH masses, the ratio drops below
7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5
log MBH [M ]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0mv/mK13
move along K13
BH growth dominated
Stellar growth dominated
Figure 16.The slope ratio between𝑚 𝐾13 from Kormendy & Ho (2013,
K13) and𝑚 ®𝑣, the average growth vectors across stellar mass from Figure
15, against BH mass. A ratio of one indicates an evolution along K13, above
one indicates a steeper vector and thus more fractional BH growth compared
to K13, whereas below one vectors are shallower and dominated by stellar
growth.
one, and more rapidly for rQSOs. This result indicates that once the
BH reaches∼10 7.5−8 M⊙, its fractional accretion rate declines rela-
tive to the sSFR of the host, a sign of a transition to a BH-regulated
growth mode. In this regime, galaxy growth proceeds faster than
BH accretion, leading to an evolutionary track that moves sources
towards the scaling relation. This finding is consistent with the need
for rapid early BH assembly to reach the local relation by𝑧∼0
to produce massive BHs above the scaling relations, so they do not
have to grow their mass as much at later times (Guetzoyan et al.
2024; Terrazas et al. 2025). At fixed BH mass below108.5M⊙, bQ-
SOs show systematically higher fractional BH growth than rQSOs,
reflecting the different phases of BH fuelling within the lifetime of
a quasar. Indeed, tracking BH assembly in time shows that quasars
undergoasharpriseinaccretionrateintheearlyphasesofgrowthto
reachthemostefficientaccretionregimewheremostoftheirmassis
assembled. This early rise corresponds to the rQSO phase, (having
systematically lower slope ratios and thus less fractional BH growth
than bQSOs at fixed BH mass), which is succeeded by a more sus-
tained and efficient accretion state, when transitioning to the bQSO
phase.ThismodelsuggeststhatbQSOsareobservedduringthepeak
ofBHgrowthactivitybeforeslowingdowntheirBHmassassembly
once high BH masses are reached, but continuing to grow their stel-
lar mass, while rQSOs could be consistent with capturing an earlier
dust-enshrouded stage of BH growth, when the absolute BH growth
is lower (Hopkins et al. 2006; Alexander et al. 2025).
Moreover, the more pronounced and earlier drop with BH mass
forrQSOssuggeststhattheytransitiontoahost-dominatedbuild-up
phaseatlowerBHmassthanbQSOs.Thisproposalsuggeststhatfor
low-mass BHs to continue building mass and eventually reach the
expected local scaling relation, they need to transition from a red to
a blue quasar phase, where BH growth becomes more efficient and
catches up to the assembly of the host. This interpretation is con-
sistent with the broader evolutionary scenario of rQSOs, explained
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

18P . Guetzoyan et al.
Figure17.Columndensity𝑁 𝐻 -Eddingtonratio𝜆 Edddiagram.Thehorizon-
tal black line is the𝑁𝐻 =10 22 cm−2 limit, while the intersecting black line
represents the effective Eddington limit for dusty gas. The area in-between
corresponds to sources with𝜆Edd higher than the effective limit for a given
𝑁𝐻, i.e., able to expel the surrounding material due to higher radiation pres-
sure. This region is denoted as the “blow-out” phase (Ricci et al. 2017) and
shown by the light orange area. A higher fraction of sources in the blow-out
region are from our rQSO sample. Points are coloured by their dust-to-gas
ratio value.
as transitional phases between the obscured, dust-rich growth phase
and the unobscured luminous QSO phase. The rQSOs’ suppressed
accretion rates and flattened evolutionary vectors suggest that they
are transitioning to a more active phase of BH growth.
Takentogether,Figures15and16supportascenariowhereredand
blue quasars trace distinct phases of BH–galaxy assembly. bQSOs
mostoftenrepresentagrowth-dominatedphasewhereBHaccretion
overtakes stellar mass increase, while rQSOs correspond to a less
evolved or transitional stage in which the galaxy continues forming
stars but BH growth is suppressed, potentially by strong feedback
processes during a blow-out phase.
5.4 Implications for an evolutionary scenario
Figure 17 shows the𝑁𝐻 −𝜆 Edd diagram, which has been proposed
asameansofidentifyingAGNatdifferentstagesinafeedbackcycle
regulating obscuration, with sources potentially transitioning from
obscured to unobscured phases. The solid black lines (adapted from
Riccietal.2017)showwherehost-scaledustisexpectedtocontribute
to the column density versus torus obscuration above the horizontal
limit (fixed limit at𝑁𝐻 =10 22 cm−2), and the effective Eddington
limit (𝜆eff
Edd) for dusty gas. The region in-between is defined as the
blow-outregion. Indeed, the cross-section of material made up of
gasanddustishigherthanthatofpureneutralgasalone,asassumed
when measuring𝑁 𝐻. Thus, radiation pressure applied on dusty gas
is much stronger than predicted by the classical Eddington limit in
theabsenceofdust.Sourceswith𝜆 Edd > 𝜆eff
Eddthusproducesufficient
radiation pressure to expel obscuring material, placing them in the
blow-out region.
Relative to the total number of rQSOs and bQSOs, rQSOs prefer-
entiallypopulatethisblow-outregion,withafractionofrQSOsinthe
blow-out region,𝑓 BO,red of more than15%, against𝑓BO,blue ∼5%of
bQSOs. We test the significance of this difference by computing the
confidence intervals on fractions from Cameron 2011 and find that
the ranges of blow-out fraction for both populations do not overlap
and are statistically significant at the1𝜎level. In absolute terms, 22
quasarsfallwithinthisspace,including9and13redandbluequasars
respectively,correspondingtoroughly8%ofthetotalquasarsample.
Although, rQSOs are less numerous by definition, they occupy the
blow-outregionnearlyasmuchasbQSOsandconstituteoverdouble
the fraction of their own population within this phase. The presence
ofsourcesinthisregionsuggeststheyhavealargerdustcontentthan
predicted by the column density measurements, enabling radiation
pressure to reach high enough values to drive outflows and expel
surrounding obscuring material.
There is also an inhomogeneous distribution of sources in the
𝑁𝐻 −𝜆 Edd space, with the bulk of sources clustering below the
𝑁𝐻 =10 22 cm−2 limit,whileasmallersubsetappearsdirectlyinthe
blow-out region with no clear continuum between the two regimes.
This clustered distribution of sources supports that the blow-out
phase is relatively short-lived, with sources rapidly evolving in and
out of this stage.
Our work supports the model that rQSOs differ fundamentally
fromtypicalbQSOsintheiraccretionproperties.rQSOsshowlower
intrinsic X-ray luminosities for a given optical luminosity (see Sec-
tion 4.3) and have relatively harder photon indicesΓ, while, for our
selection at least, having relatively low levels of X-ray absorption
(𝑁 𝐻 ≲10 22 cm−2) (see Section 5.2.1). These are signatures of sup-
pressed corona emission rather than orientation effects due to gas
absorption, indicating a lower accretion state. Recent radio analy-
sis demonstrated that rQSOs launch strong compact outflows and
exhibit enhanced radio emission compared to bQSOs, evidence for
dusty winds creating shocks as it impacts the ISM in an early AGN
“blow-out” phase (Fawcett et al. 2022, 2023). These results support
a scenario where rQSOs represent a distinct phase in the lifecycle of
AGN when feedback has cleared out the surrounding dust and gas
from the central region. The lower X-ray luminosities and Edding-
ton ratios in rQSOs strengthen this evolutionary scenario. Indeed,
rQSOs reside in a systematically X-ray weaker regime, implying a
lower accretion mode occurring in different stages of BH growth.
Moreover, the larger host-galaxy contributions in rQSOs are consis-
tent with the dust that is responsible for the reddening of the optical
quasar light being distributed throughout the host galaxy rather than
confinedtothetorus.Thisresultsuggeststhatfeedback-drivenwinds
could temporarily attenuate the accretion disc and suppress coronal
emission,regulatingBHgrowth.Ourresultssupportanevolutionary
sequencewhererQSOsaretransitioningfromanobscured,feedback-
dominated phase toward unobscured luminous bQSOs. Thus, they
represent a key stage in the self-regulated growth cycle of BHs.
This evolution model also suggests a continuum with recently dis-
covered Little Red Dots (LRDs, Labbé et al. 2023; Maiolino et al.
2024;Greeneetal.2024)athighredshift,wheretheircommoncom-
pactmorphology,extremereddening,andX-rayweaknessmaytrace
early-universe analogues of this same phase.
6 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Inthiswork,wehavepresentedthefirstlargemulti-wavelengthstudy
of X-ray selected rQSOs compared to a robust control sample. Our
main conclusions are as follows:
•We compiled the largest X-ray sample of rQSOs to date, based
on their observed𝑔−𝑟colour excess, relative to a parent sample of
∼4,000 spectroscopically-classified QSOs. Taking the 10%reddest
sources in bins of redshift as the rQSO sample, we selected in total
380 rQSOs and 3763 bQSOs based on their X-ray emission and
optical spectroscopic observations.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO19
⟨Red⟩ ⟨Blue⟩𝑝-valueΔ 𝑟 𝑒𝑙 (%)
𝐿𝑋 [erg s−1 ]4.8×10 44 5.3×1044 2.698×10 −2 8.98 Fig 3
log𝜆 𝐸𝑑𝑑 -0.91 -0.81 3.12×10 −7 11.46 Fig 8
𝐿2500 [erg s−1 Hz−1 ]1.78×10 30 1.49×1030 4.972×10 −5 16.83 Fig 9
𝛼𝑜𝑥 -1.45 -1.41 6.68×10 −7 3.25 Fig 9
Δ𝛼𝑜𝑥 0.064 0.035 3.79×10 −5 57.58 Fig 9
𝑀★ [M ⊙ ]10 10.70 1010.53 1.816×10 −7 1.57 Fig 10
log(𝑁 𝐻 /cm−2 )20.9 20.7 1.448×10 −1 0.91 Fig 12
Γ2.0 2.05 2.568×10 −3 3.86 Fig 12
𝑀𝐵𝐻 [M ⊙ ]10 8.84 108.73 2.14×10 −6 1.25 Fig 15
Table 2.Comparison of medians between red and blue quasars (first two columns),𝑝-values and relative differencesΔrel for all parameters explored in this
work.
•We successfully reconstructed quasar spectra while accounting
for heavy dust reddening in rQSOs and host contribution using a
novelICA-baseddata-drivenapproach,withover90%accuracy.With
our non-parametric approach, we recovered the true distribution of
optical reddening𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)in rQSOs to measure intrinsic optical
luminosities, BH masses, and Eddington ratios. Our photometric
selectionofrQSOsisconsistentwithourmeasured𝐸(𝐵−𝑉)values,
findingamedianof0.21inrQSOsand0.04inbQSOs,withverylittle
overlap between the two distributions, enabling a robust separation
of the two populations using spectroscopic selection.
•We found an over-density of rQSOs at faint X-ray luminosities
(𝐿 𝑋 ≲10 44 erg s−1) compared to bQSOs. Furthermore, we measure
a high rQSO fraction at low X-ray luminosities that decreases as𝐿𝑋
increases,regardlessofabsorptioncorrection,indicatingthatrQSOs
are more prevalent at low𝐿𝑋 and are thus in an intrinsically weak
accretion state.
•ThemoststatisticallysignificantdifferencebetweenrQSOsand
bQSOs is in terms of Eddington ratios based on𝐿3000 continuum
luminosities and MgiiBH masses, with a relative difference of
over 11%between the median of the two distributions. The rela-
tive number of rQSOs is higher than bQSOs at low Eddington ratios
(𝜆Edd ≲0.1).
•We investigated the X-ray weakness in rQSOs we found pre-
viously, relative to their optical emission by measuring their𝛼𝑂𝑋
compared to bQSOs. There is a shift towards lower𝛼𝑂𝑋 values for
rQSOs, indicating a weaker X-ray emission than expected based on
their optical luminosity𝐿 2500. rQSOs do not tend to have lower
(𝐿 2500) values compared to bQSOs, which confirms that rQSOs are
notjustfaintsourcesbuthavespecificallyattenuatedX-rayemission
due to a weaker accretion regime.
•rQSOs hosts show significant differences to bQSOs. A higher
fraction of rQSOs reside in the most massive galaxies (𝑀 ★ ≥
1010.5 M⊙) and have a larger contribution to their spectral contin-
uum, but no correlation is found between stellar mass and optical
reddening𝐸(𝐵−𝑉).
•Based on X-ray spectral measurements from the eFEDS sur-
vey for a subset of our sources, rQSOs have lower dust-to-gas ratio
than the Milky Way, indicating a greater gas column density at fixed
extinction, absorbing X-ray emission along the line-of-sight. More-
over, there is no correlation between X-ray absorption by gas𝑁𝐻
and optical reddening by dust𝐸(𝐵−𝑉), indicating that the material
responsibleforX-rayandopticalabsorptionmightnotstemfromthe
same structures and spatial scales.
•ThehighgascolumndensitiesinrQSOsindicatethatX-rayab-
sorption is dominated by dust-free gas located close to the nucleus,
rather than the same dusty structures responsible for the optical red-
dening.
•Alternatively,theabsorbingmaterialresponsibleforopticalred-
dening could be distributed on larger scales, either from dusty gas
structures distributed further from the nucleus carried by disc winds
or within the host galaxy itself. This scenario is supported by the
higher prevalence of rQSOs in massive galaxies, and the enhanced
galaxy fraction in the continuum of rQSOs spectra.
•Combining Eddington ratios and SFRs, we found that rQSOs
are in a growth regime where BH assembly is suppressed relative
to stellar mass growth. Compared to bQSOs, rQSOs are more often
associated with a stellar growth-dominated phase, suggesting they
represent a distinct evolutionary stage where efficient BH accretion
is temporarily suppressed while the host galaxy continues to grow.
This work presents the first study of a large and homogeneous
X-rayselectedrQSOsamplefromtheopticalspectroscopytargetting
program ofeROSITAsources with SDSS-V. We robustly identified
∼400 rQSOs based on a redshift-dependent photometric selection.
Compared to a control sample of bQSOs, we found that rQSOs
are intrinsically X-ray weaker relative to their dust-corrected optical
emission.Weplacedindirectconstraintsondustpropertiesbasedon
X-ray and optical absorption and found that the obscuring material
responsible for optical reddening in rQSOs is likely decoupled from
the material absorbing X-ray emission and must arise from differ-
ent regions. We propose that the mild X-ray absorption in rQSOs
stems from dust-free gas close to the BH, while optical reddening
could be caused by dusty gas transported outwards in disc winds.
However, high-resolution imaging and mid-IR spectroscopy would
be necessary to properly disentangle the contribution and origin of
the different obscuring material.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
PG acknowledges funding from an STFC studentship. JA acknowl-
edges support from a UKRI Future Leaders Fellowship (grant code:
MR/Y019539/1). ALR acknowledges support from a Leverhulme
Early Career Fellowship.
Funding for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey V has been provided
by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Heising-Simons Foundation,
the National Science Foundation, and the Participating Institutions.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

20P . Guetzoyan et al.
SDSSacknowledgessupportandresourcesfromtheCenterforHigh-
PerformanceComputing attheUniversityof Utah.SDSStelescopes
arelocatedatApachePointObservatory,fundedbytheAstrophysical
ResearchConsortiumandoperatedbyNewMexicoStateUniversity,
andatLasCampanasObservatory,operatedbytheCarnegieInstitu-
tion for Science. The SDSS web site iswww.sdss.org.
SDSS is managed by the Astrophysical Research Consortium for
the Participating Institutions of the SDSS Collaboration, including
the Carnegie Institution for Science, Chilean National Time Alloca-
tion Committee (CNTAC) ratified researchers, Caltech, the Gotham
ParticipationGroup,HarvardUniversity,HeidelbergUniversity,The
Flatiron Institute, The Johns Hopkins University, L’Ecole polytech-
niquefédéraledeLausanne(EPFL),Leibniz-InstitutfürAstrophysik
Potsdam (AIP), Max-Planck-Institut für Astronomie (MPIA Hei-
delberg), Max-Planck-Institut für Extraterrestrische Physik (MPE),
Nanjing University, National Astronomical Observatories of China
(NAOC), New Mexico State University, The Ohio State University,
Pennsylvania State University, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa-
tory, Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI), the Stellar Astro-
physics Participation Group, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México,UniversityofArizona,UniversityofColoradoBoulder,Uni-
versityofIllinoisatUrbana-Champaign,UniversityofToronto,Uni-
versity of Utah, University of Virginia, Yale University, and Yunnan
University.
This work is based on data from eROSITA, the soft X-ray instru-
mentaboardSRG,ajointRussian-Germansciencemissionsupported
by the Russian Space Agency (Roskosmos), in the interests of the
Russian Academy of Sciences represented by its Space Research
Institute (IKI), and the Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raum-
fahrt (DLR). The SRG spacecraft was built by Lavochkin Associa-
tion (NPOL) and its subcontractors, and is operated by NPOL with
support from the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics
(MPE). The development and construction of the eROSITA X-ray
instrument was led by MPE, with contributions from the Dr. Karl
RemeisObservatoryBamberg&ECAP(FAUErlangen-Nuernberg),
the University of Hamburg Observatory, the Leibniz Institute for
Astrophysics Potsdam (AIP), and the Institute for Astronomy and
AstrophysicsoftheUniversityofTübingen,withthesupportofDLR
andtheMaxPlanckSociety.TheArgelanderInstituteforAstronomy
of the University of Bonn and the Ludwig Maximilians Universität
Munich also participated in the science preparation for eROSITA.
DATA AVAILABILITY
All datasets used in this work have been made public and are part
of SDSS-V DR19 (SDSS Collaboration et al. 2025) which includes
the DL1 catalogue containing level one X-ray measurements from
eRASS1 (Merloni et al. 2024). X-ray spectral measurements for
eFEDS sources were taken from Liu et al. 2022. The measurements
derived in this work are available from the corresponding author by
request.
REFERENCES
Alexander D., et al., 2025, New Astronomy Reviews, 101, 101733
AllenJ.T.,HewettP.C.,RichardsonC.T.,FerlandG.J.,BaldwinJ.A.,2013,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 430, 3510
AntonucciR.,1993,AnnualReviewofAstronomyandAstrophysics,31,473
Aydar C., et al., 2025, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 698, A132
Banerji M., McMahon R. G., Hewett P. C., Alaghband-Zadeh S., Gonzalez-
Solares E., Venemans B. P., Hawthorn M. J., 2012, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 427, 2275
Banerji M., Alaghband-Zadeh S., Hewett P. C., McMahon R. G., 2015,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 447, 3368
Bianchi L., 2014, Astrophysics and Space Science, 354, 103
Blanton M. R., Roweis S., 2007, The Astronomical Journal, 133, 734
Blum R. D., et al., 2016. p. 317.01,https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/
abs/2016AAS...22831701B
Bohlin R. C., Savage B. D., Drake J. F., 1978, The Astrophysical Journal,
224, 132
Boller T., Freyberg M. J., Trümper J., Haberl F., Voges W., Nandra K., 2016,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 588, A103
Boquien M., Burgarella D., Roehlly Y., Buat V., Ciesla L., Corre D., Inoue
A. K., Salas H., 2019, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 622, A103
Bowen I. S., Vaughan A. H., 1973, Applied Optics, 12, 1430
Brandt W. N., Alexander D. M., 2015, The Astronomy and Astrophysics
Review, 23, 1
Breiding P., et al., 2024, The Astrophysical Journal, 963, 91
Brightman M., et al., 2013, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 433, 2485
Brunner H., et al., 2022, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 661, A1
Bruzual G., Charlot S., 2003, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 344, 1000
Buchner J., et al., 2024, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 692, A161
Calistro Rivera G., et al., 2021, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 649, A102
CameronE.,2011,PublicationsoftheAstronomicalSocietyofAustralia,28,
128
CaseyC.M.,2012,MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSociety,425,
3094
Charlot S., Fall S. M., 2000, The Astrophysical Journal, 539, 718
Ciesla L., et al., 2015, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 576, A10
Comparat J., et al., 2020, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 636, A97
Desi Collaboration et al., 2022, The Astronomical Journal, 164, 207
Done C., Davis S. W., Jin C., Blaes O., Ward M., 2012, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 420, 1848
Draine B. T., et al., 2013, The Astrophysical Journal, 780, 172
Dwelly T., et al., 2017, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
469, 1065
EdgeA.,SutherlandW.,KuijkenK.,DriverS.,McMahonR.,EalesS.,Emer-
son J. P., 2013, The Messenger, 154, 32
Fabian A. C., 2012, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 50, 455
Fawcett V. A., Alexander D. M., Rosario D. J., Klindt L., Fotopoulou S.,
Lusso E., Morabito L. K., Calistro Rivera G., 2020, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 494, 4802
FawcettV.A.,AlexanderD.M.,RosarioD.J.,KlindtL.,LussoE.,Morabito
L.K.,CalistroRiveraG.,2022,MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronom-
ical Society, 513, 1254
Fawcett V. A., et al., 2023, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 525, 5575
Ferrarese L., Merritt D., 2000, The Astrophysical Journal, 539, L9
Fitzpatrick E., 1999, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
111, 63
Gaia Collaboration et al., 2023, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 674, A1
Gebhardt K., et al., 2000, The Astrophysical Journal, 543, L5
GlikmanE.,GreggM.D.,LacyM.,HelfandD.J.,BeckerR.H.,WhiteR.L.,
2004, The Astrophysical Journal, 607, 60
Glikman E., et al., 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 757, 51
Glikman E., Simmons B., Mailly M., Schawinski K., Urry C. M., Lacy M.,
2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 806, 218
Glikman E., LaMassa S., Piconcelli E., Urry M., Lacy M., 2017, The Astro-
physical Journal, 847, 116
Goulding A. D., Alexander D. M., Bauer F. E., Forman W. R., Hickox R. C.,
Jones C., Mullaney J. R., Trichas M., 2012, The Astrophysical Journal,
755, 5
Goulding A. D., et al., 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 856, 4
Greene J. E., Strader J., Ho L. C., 2020, Annual Review of Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 58, 257
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO21
Greene J. E., et al., 2024, The Astrophysical Journal, 964, 39
Guetzoyan P., Aird J., Georgakakis A., Coil A. L., Barlow-Hall C., Hickox
R.C.,RankineA.L.,TerrazasB.A.,2024,MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyal
Astronomical Society, 536, 79
Gunn J. E., et al., 2006, The Astronomical Journal, 131, 2332
Haardt F., Maraschi L., 1991, The Astrophysical Journal, 380, L51
HamannF.,etal.,2017,MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSociety,
464, 3431
Heckman T. M., Best P. N., 2014, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astro-
physics, 52, 589
Hickox R. C., Alexander D. M., 2018, Annual Review of Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 56, 625
Hickox R. C., Mullaney J. R., Alexander D. M., Chen C.-T. J., Civano F. M.,
GouldingA.D.,HainlineK.N.,2014,TheAstrophysicalJournal,782,9
Hodges J. L., 1958, Arkiv for Matematik, 3, 469
Hopkins P. F., Hernquist L., Cox T. J., Di Matteo T., Robertson B., Springel
V., 2006, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 163, 1
Højen-SørensenP.A.,WintherO.,HansenL.K.,2002,NeuralComputation,
14, 889
Inoue A. K., Shimizu I., Iwata I., Tanaka M., 2014, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 442, 1805
Klindt L., Alexander D. M., Rosario D. J., Lusso E., Fotopoulou S., 2019,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 488, 3109
Kollmeier J. A., et al., 2026, The Astronomical Journal, 171, 52
Kormendy J., 2001, in AIP Conference Proceedings. AIP, Austin, Texas
(USA), pp 363–381, doi:10.1063/1.1419581,https://pubs.aip.
org/aip/acp/article/586/1/363-381/573439
KormendyJ.,HoL.C.,2013,AnnualReviewofAstronomyandAstrophysics,
51, 511
Kormendy J., Richstone D., 1995, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astro-
physics, 33, 581
LaMassa S. M., et al., 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 820, 70
Labbé I., et al., 2023, Nature, 616, 266
Liu T., et al., 2022, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 661, A5
Lusso E., et al., 2010, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 512, A34
M. Green G., 2018, Journal of Open Source Software, 3, 695
MaY.,GouldingA.,GreeneJ.E.,ZakamskaN.L.,WylezalekD.,JiangY.-F.,
2024, The Astrophysical Journal, 974, 225
MaddoxN.,HewettP.C.,PérouxC.,NestorD.B.,WisotzkiL.,2012,Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 424, 2876
Magorrian J., et al., 1998, The Astronomical Journal, 115, 2285
Maiolino R., et al., 2024, Nature, 627, 59
Maitra C., Haberl F., Sasaki M., Maggi P., Dennerl K., Freyberg M. J., 2022,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 661, A30
McMahonR.G.,BanerjiM.,GonzalezE.,KoposovS.E.,BejarV.J.,Lodieu
N., Rebolo R., VHS Collaboration 2013, The Messenger, 154, 35
Meisner A. M., Lang D., Schlafly E. F., Schlegel D. J., 2019, Publications of
the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 131, 124504
Merloni A., et al., 2012, eROSITA Science Book: Mapping the Structure
of the Energetic Universe, doi:10.48550/ARXIV.1209.3114,https://
arxiv.org/abs/1209.3114
Merloni A., et al., 2024, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 682, A34
NandraK.,O’NeillP.M.,GeorgeI.M.,ReevesJ.N.,2007,MonthlyNotices
of the Royal Astronomical Society, 382, 194
Netzer H., 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 488,
5185
Padovani P., et al., 2017, Astronomy and Astrophysics Review, 25, 2
Popesso P., et al., 2022, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
519, 1526
Predehl P., et al., 2021, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 647, A1
Pâris I., et al., 2018, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 613, A51
Rankine A. L., Hewett P. C., Banerji M., Richards G. T., 2020, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 492, 4553
Reines A. E., Volonteri M., 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 813, 82
Ricci C., et al., 2017, Nature, 549, 488
Ricci C., et al., 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 938, 67
Richards G. T., et al., 2003, The Astronomical Journal, 126, 1131
Ross N. P., et al., 2015, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
453, 3933
SDSS Collaboration et al., 2025, The Nineteenth Data Release of the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey, doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2507.07093,https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2507.07093
Salvato M., et al., 2022, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 661, A3
Salvato M., et al., 2025, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 704, A344
Schlegel D. J., Finkbeiner D. P., Davis M., 1998, The Astrophysical Journal,
500, 525
ShankarF.,etal.,2016,MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSociety,
460, 3119
Shapiro S. L., Teukolsky S. A., 1983, Black holes, white dwarfs and neutron
stars. The physics of compact objects, doi:10.1002/9783527617661. ,
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983bhwd.book.....S
Silva D. R., et al., 2016. p. 317.02,https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/
abs/2016AAS...22831702S
Skrutskie M. F., et al., 2006, The Astronomical Journal, 131, 1163
Smee S. A., et al., 2013, The Astronomical Journal, 146, 32
Stalevski M., Fritz J., Baes M., Nakos T., Popovic L. C., 2012, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 420, 2756
Stalevski M., Ricci C., Ueda Y., Lira P., Fritz J., Baes M., 2016, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 458, 2288
Stan Development T., 2024
Sun M., et al., 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 802, 14
Sunyaev R., et al., 2021, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 656, A132
Tananbaum H., et al., 1979, The Astrophysical Journal, 234, L9
TerrazasB.A.,AirdJ.,CoilA.L.,2025,TheAstrophysicalJournal,993,187
Tremaine S., et al., 2002, The Astrophysical Journal, 574, 740
Trümper J., 1982, Advances in Space Research, 2, 241
Urrutia T., Lacy M., Becker R. H., 2008, The Astrophysical Journal, 674, 80
Vestergaard M., Osmer P. S., 2009, The Astrophysical Journal, 699, 800
Webster R. L., Francis P. J., Petersont B. A., Drinkwater M. J., Masci F. J.,
1995, Nature, 375, 469
Wright E. L., et al., 2010, The Astronomical Journal, 140, 1868
Yang G., et al., 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 927, 192
York D. G., et al., 2000, The Astronomical Journal, 120, 1579
Zakamska N. L., et al., 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 489, 497
Zhuang M.-Y., Ho L. C., 2023, Nature Astronomy, 7, 1376
Zou H., et al., 2017, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
129, 064101
APPENDIX A: EMPIRICAL MAIN SEQUENCE STAR
FORMATION RATE
In Sections 3.3 and 5.3, we discuss the reliability of our measured
SFR fromcigaleSED fitting, particularly the possible bias intro-
ducedbyAGNemission.FigureA1reproducestheanalysisshownin
Figure15,nowusingMainSequence(MS)SFRvaluesfromPopesso
etal.2022insteadofourSED-inferredSFRmeasurements.Overall,
ourmainconclusionshold,regardlessofthemethodusedtoestimate
SFR. Assuming a MS star-formation does not significantly alter our
results on BH-galaxy assembly discussed previously, we still find
that rQSOs and bQSOs evolve across the𝑀BH −𝑀 ★ space by con-
verging towards the scaling relations, and transitioning from BH to
stellar-growthdominatedphasesdependingontheiroffsetfromlocal
scaling relations. This supports that average SFR measurements via
SED fitting our reliable enough to be considered in this work.
APPENDIX B: SED FITTING PARAMETERS
In this Appendix, we share the full parameter grid used in the SED
fittingwithcigaleforbothrQSOandbQSOsamples(seeTableB1).
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

22P . Guetzoyan et al.
Table B1.cigaleparameter values used in each module. This grid leads to∼1.5 and 1.1 billion models for the bQSO and rQSO samples respectively.
Module Parameter Value
sfhdelayed
tau_main(Myr) 1,50,200,800,1000
age_main(Myr) 100, 200,1000, 2000, 3000, 4000
tau_burst(Myr) 50
age_burst(Myr) 20
f_burst0
sfr_A1
bc03
imf1 (Chabrier)
metallicity0.02
separation_age(Myr) 10
nebular
logU-2
zgas0.02
ne100
f_esc0.0, 0.02, 0.5
f_dust0
lines_width(km.s −1) 300
dustatt_modified_CF00
Av_ISM0,0.1,0.2,0.5,1.0,1.5,2,2.5,3
mu0.44
slope_ISM-0.7
slope_BC-1.3
filtersV_B90 & FUV
dl2014
qpah2.5
umin1
alpha2
gamma0.1, 0.9
skirtor2016
t5, 7
pl1
q1
oa10, 40, 80
R20
Mcl0.97
i30, 70, 90
disk_type0 (Skirtor)
delta-0.36
fracAGN0,0.1,0.2,0.5,0.8,0.99
lambda_fracAGN0/0
law0 (SMC)
EBV0,0.05,0.1,0.15,0.2,0.25,0.3,0.35,0.4,0.45,0.5,0.5,0.7,0.8,0.9,1
temperature(K) 100
emissivity1.6
xray
gam1.9
E_cut300
alpha_ox-1.9, -1.7, -1.5, -1.3, -1.1
max_dev_alpha_ox0.2
angle_coef0.5 & 0
det_lmxb0
det_hmxb0
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)

X-ray selected rQSO23
9 10 11 12 13
log M [M ]
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0log MBH [M ]
Kormendy & Ho +13
Greene+20 Late-type
Greene+20 Early-type
p-value = 2.14e-06
rel = 1.25%
Figure A1.Same as Figure 15. The x−component of the growth vectors is
replaced with the average main sequence SFR from Popesso et al. (2022) as
a function of𝑀★ −𝑧.
MNRAS000, 1–22 (2026)