Title: A Designer's Guide to Lunar Far-Side Interferometer Array: Power Spectrum Measurement and Cosmological Constraints from the Dark Ages
Authors: Yuewei Wen, Bin Yue, Yidong Xu, Furen Deng, Chen Zhang, Fengquan Wu, Xuelei Chen
Published: 2026-05-28
Categories: astro-ph.CO

Prepared for submission to JCAP
A Designer’s Guide to Lunar
Far-Side Interferometer Array:
Power Spectrum Measurement
and Cosmological Constraints
from the Dark Ages
Y uewei Wen a Bin Y ue a Yidong Xu a Furen Deng a,b
Chen Zhang a,b Fengquan Wu a,b Xuelei Chen a,b
aState Key Laboratory of Radio Astronomy and Technology, National Astronomical
Observatories of China, CAS, 20A Datun Road, Beijing, China 100101
bSchool of Astronomy and Space Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China 100049
arXiv:2605.29276v2  [astro-ph.CO]  29 May 2026

E-mail: wenyw@bao.ac.cn, xuelei@cosmology.bao.ac.cn
Abstract.The 21-cm emission line from neutral hydrogen during the cosmic Dark Ages
can be a powerful probe of cosmological models and early universe physics. This work
provides a quantitative forecast for the design requirements of a lunar far-side interferom-
eter array aimed at measuring the 21-cm power spectrum and constraining inflationary
models through the running of the spectral indexαs. During the Dark Ages, larger col-
lapsed objects have not yet formed, allowing linear perturbation theory to remain valid
down to much smaller scales than is possible in current large-scale structure or CMB
surveys. We first validate this linearity assumption by quantifying the contribution of
minihalos to the 21-cm signal. We then establish a generalized and flexible analytical
framework for the baseline density distribution of interferometers that may consist of
an arbitrary number of stations or sub-arrays. Incorporating a realistic noise model, we
determine the configurations necessary to reach the detection threshold and demonstrate
that distributing the total collecting area into multiple stations can improve the signal-
to-noise ratio of the power spectrum at a tunable small scale of interest by up to two
orders of magnitude. We then show that a lunar array requires at least∼30,000probed
Fourier modes to achieve a constraint on inflation ofσ(αs) = 0.034, a result competitive
with the Planck 2018 results and capable of distinguishing between different inflationary
scenarios. We quantitatively explain how thermal noise severely erodes modes at high
redshifts and small scales—scales previously considered easily accessible to Dark Ages
observations in the literature—and discuss the prospects for Dark Ages observations as
a new and independent probe despite this limitation.
Keywords:21-cm, Dark Ages, power spectrum, lunar far-side, interferometer, inflation,
running of the spectral index

Contents
1 Introduction 2
2 Power Spectrum of the 21-cm Signal 4
2.1 Redshift-Space Distortion and the Alcock-Paczyński Effect 5
2.2 The Impact of Minihalos 7
2.2.1 Minihalo Power Spectrum 8
2.2.2 Comparison with the Total 21-cm Power Spectrum 10
3 A Lunar Far-Side Interferometer: Instrument and Survey Design 12
3.1 Noise Power Spectrum 12
3.2 Baseline Distribution 14
3.3 Foreground Avoidance 17
3.4 Interferometer and Survey Specifications 18
4 Power Spectrum Measurement 18
4.1 Detection Significance for a Single Array 19
4.2 Measuring Small Scales with a Multi-Array Configuration 20
5 Constraining Inflation through the Running of the Spectral Index 22
5.1 Single-Array Constraints 23
5.2 Multi-Array Constraints 24
5.3 Discussion 26
6 Conclusion 29
A Calculating the 21-cm Power Spectrum of Minihalos 30
B Baseline Density Distribution 32
B.1 Circular Random Array 32
B.2 Two Circular Arrays Separated by a Distance 33
– 1 –

1 Introduction
The cosmic Dark Ages are a pivotal yet largely unexplored epoch in the evolutionary his-
tory of our Universe. This period begins after the recombination of hydrogen (z∼1100)
and ends before the formation of the first stars (roughlyz∼30)[1]. Before gas clouds are
reionized during star formation, the baryonic content of the Universe is predominantly
neutral hydrogen (HI). Through interactions between HI and photons from the cosmic
microwave background (CMB), a spin-flip transition due to the hyperfine structure split-
ting in hydrogen can either emit or absorb a photon of wavelength 21.1 cm[2, 3]. In the
absence of any luminous sources, this “21-cm” signal becomes almost the sole observable
and a most critical tracer of matter density distribution and structural growth during
the Dark Ages[4].
Informing us about physical processes during the first billion years after the Big
Bang, this signal holds great potential for addressing fundamental questions in cosmol-
ogy, concerning inflation, CMB spectral distortions, the physical nature of dark mat-
ter and the formation history of supermassive black holes[4–8]. Unlike CMB surveys,
which are limited tok≲0.1hMpc −1 by Silk damping and instrumental resolution, or
large-scale structure (LSS) surveys, which are confined tok∼1hMpc −1 by nonlinear
structure formation in the late Universe [9], the Dark Ages 21-cm signal can, in princi-
ple, access a much larger Fourier volume. As a result, the 21-cm signal from the cosmic
Dark Ages holds great potential to become a new and independent probe that not only
complements observations from the CMB and late-Universe LSS surveys but also reaches
regions previously inaccessible in observational space.
During this epoch, structural growth remains largely linear. Complicated astrophys-
ical processes associated with star formation have not yet begun. Nonlinearity manifests
mainly through a sparse population of minihalos (halos too small to cool and form stars)
with masses10 4–108 M⊙ [10, 11]. Therefore, primordial density fluctuations generated
by inflation are well preserved, making the 21-cm signal an excellent probe of cosmic ini-
tial conditions. With sufficient angular resolution, one can approach scales on the order
of∼1000Mpc −1. Moreover, in a clean and ideal radio environment, a three-dimensional
tomographic survey can cover a wide range of frequency bands, which translates into a
large volume in redshift space. In the limit of cosmic variance, one could access∼1012
independent Fourier modes using 21-cm measurements from the Dark Ages, far exceeding
the∼10 8 modes from Stage-IV LSS surveys and the∼106 modes from the Planck 2018
analysis [4, 12, 13].
The 21-cm signal is present only when the spin temperature of the neutral hydrogen
gas deviates from that of the CMB. Prior to the formation of the first stars and the
onset of radiative processes, this deviation occurs after baryons decouple from the CMB
and cool adiabatically as the Universe expands, giving rise to an absorption signal that
roughly corresponds to30≲z≲200. The 21-cm signal in this epoch is redshifted to
wavelengths of about 6.5 to 47 meters, or frequencies of 45 to 6 MHz, which correspond
to the longest wavelengths of radio astronomical observation. Observations in this low-
frequency band have been extremely limited to date because any ground-based radio
telescope must deal with absorption and refraction from Earth’s ionosphere and eliminate
– 2 –

radio frequency interference (RFI) from human activities worldwide. This is precisely
why the far side of the Moon—no ionosphere and shielded from RFI from Earth—is an
ideal site for observing signals from the Dark Ages.
Proposals to deploy radio telescopes to the far side of the Moon emerged as early
as the 1960s [14]. Six decades later, remarkable advancements in space technology have
made the construction of lunar surface or cislunar telescopes a conceivable prospect
[4, 15, 16]. China’s Chang’e-4 mission made the first landing on the far side of the Moon
in 2024 and carried out low-frequency radio experiments from the lunar surface[17], from
orbit [18, 19] and via the relay satellite [20]. Further low-frequency radio experiments
on the lunar surface include the Radiowave Observations on the Lunar Surface of the
photo-Electron Sheath instrument (ROLSES-1) [21] and the upcoming Lunar Surface
Electromagnetics Explorer (LuSEE-night)[22]. Several low-frequency experiments in lu-
nar orbit have also been proposed, including DARE/DAPPER [23, 24], Hongmeng (also
known as Discovering the Sky at Longest Wavelengths, the DSL Project)[15, 25, 26],
CosmoCube[27, 28], PRATUSH [29], and SEAMS [30]. There are also proposals to build
large radio telescopes on the lunar surface by using a lunar crater as a reflector [31] or
by constructing an array of radio telescopes linked by interferometry, such as the Dark
Ages Lunar Interferometer (DALI) [32], the Cosmic-dawn Dark-ages EXplorer (CoDEX)
[16], the Astronomical Lunar Observatory (ALO) [33], the Large-scale Array for Radio
Astronomy (LAFAR) [34], and FarSide/FarView [35, 36].
CosmologicalstudiesbasedontheDarkAgesdemandmorethanjustameasurement
of the global 21-cm spectrum; they require the spatial fluctuations—a power spectrum
accessible only with an interferometric array. Given the considerable technological and
engineering challenges involved in constructing such large radio arrays on the lunar sur-
face, reliable and accurate forecasts that incorporate careful theoretical modeling of the
21-cm signal and realistic levels of noise are essential. This work focuses on developing
such forecasts, quantifying the ability of various lunar far-side configurations to measure
the power spectrum and constrain cosmological parameters, in particular those related
to inflation.
While the evolution of matter density perturbations during the Dark Ages is rela-
tively “simple”, as in it does not involve complicated star formation and feedback, it still
includes the growth of structure under the influence of both dark matter and baryons,
the thermal evolution of gas and the coupling between photons and baryons. All of these
affect the 21-cm signal. To plan large radio arrays on the lunar surface, a carefully scru-
tinized predictive framework for the 21-cm signal from the Dark Ages is worthwhile, and
we present a comprehensive study in this work.
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of 21-cm physics
during the Dark Ages and explains how the power spectrum is computed, including
redshift-space distortions (RSD) and the Alcock–Paczyński effect. In Section 2.2, we
analyze the contribution from minihalos and determine the scales up to which linear
perturbation theory remains valid. We then turn to observational considerations. Sec-
tion 3.1 discusses the modeling of thermal noise for an interferometer array. Section 3.2
presents the baseline density distributions for the various array configurations consid-
– 3 –

ered in this work. The impact of foregrounds and the choice of basic survey parameters
are addressed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4, respectively. Building on these, we present the
array designs necessary for detecting the 21-cm power spectrum and study the advan-
tages of different configurations in Section 4. Then, in Section 5, we use the running
of the spectral indexαs as a case study to demonstrate the constraining power of Dark
Ages observations for inflation, identifying the configurations needed to achieve mean-
ingful constraints and comparing our forecasts to existing CMB results. We conclude in
Section 6.
Alongside this manuscript, we release a public Python code,DarkAgesCosmology1,
which enables robust and customizable calculations of the 21-cm signal from the cosmic
Dark Ages. The code has the flexibility to model interferometer sensitivity for configura-
tions with any number of stations or sub-arrays and to provide forecasts for cosmological
and inflationary parameters.
Throughout this work, we assume aΛCDM cosmology and adopt the best-fit values
from the Planck 2018 results as our fiducial cosmology:Ωbh2 = 0.02242,Ω ch2 = 11933,
H0 = 67.66,ln
 
1010As

= 3.03,n s = 0.9655, andτ= 0.053[37].
2 Power Spectrum of the 21-cm Signal
In radio astronomy, the intensity of radiation is usually expressed as a brightness tem-
peratureT b ≡
 
λ2/2kB

Iν, defined as the temperature of a blackbody that emits the
same intensity at the same wavelength. For the 21-cm signal from hydrogen’s spin-flip
transition, the average brightness temperature relative to the CMB temperatureδ¯Tb in
the diffuse intergalactic medium (IGM) is
δ ¯Tb(z) = Ts(z)−T γ(z)
1 +z
 
1−e −τ
,(2.1)
whereT γ is the CMB temperature,T s is the spin temperature, andτis the 21-cm
optical depth. Fluctuations in this 21-cm brightness temperature, sourced by matter
density, gas temperature and radiative effects, contain rich information about the growth
of large-scale structure and the cosmic initial conditions and can serve as a critical test
of cosmology.
In this work, we compute the spatial fluctuations in the 21-cm brightness tem-
perature, specifically its cylindrically averaged power spectrumP21(k⊥, k∥, z), using the
numerical packageCAMB 2, which solves the Boltzmann-Einstein equations for the evo-
lution of the photon distribution function due to interactions with neutral hydrogen.
As the benchmark tool for the linear-theory 21-cm power spectrum of the Dark Ages,
CAMBincorporates many subtle effects that contribute to the power spectrum, including
redshift-space distortions, perturbations in the ionized fractionxe (minimal during the
Dark Ages but not entirely negligible) and perturbations in the 21-cm optical depth. A
detailed treatment of these effects was given in [38], and we recapitulate only several key
1https://github.com/wen-yuewei/DarkAgesCosmology.git
2https://camb.readthedocs.io
– 4 –

steps in the calculation of the power spectrum here.CAMBincludes the baryon peculiar
velocityv b, which is numerically equal to the baryon-CDM relative velocityvbc because
the CDM velocity is set to zero in the synchronous gauge. However, in its calculation
of the 21-cm power spectrum,vb contributes only at linear order through RSD and the
Doppler effect. The second-order effective viscous damping arising fromv2
bc, which is
expected to suppress the power spectrum by about 10–20% on scalesk≳10Mpc−1, is
not included3[39].
ThecodeCAMBcalculatesandoutputsthetransferfunctionofanisotropic“monopole”
sourceT mono(k)of the 21-cm fluctuations, defined as
Tmono(k) = ∆s + (rτ −1)(∆ HI −∆ Ts).(2.2)
The first term∆s ≡∆ HI+T γ(∆Ts −∆ Tγ)/(Ts −T γ)incorporates perturbations from fluc-
tuations in baryon density (∆HI), gas temperature (∆Ts) and photon temperature (∆Tγ),
using the notation∆x to denoteδx/¯x. The second term inTmono(k)represents contribu-
tions from perturbations to the 21-cm optical depth, with the factorrτ ≡τ e −τ /(1−e −τ).
A key quantity that enters both the calculation of the global brightness temperature
δ ¯Tb and its fluctuations∆s is the spin temperatureTs. It is the excitation temperature of
the spin-flip transition in neutral hydrogen and effectively describes the relative popula-
tion of the singlet and triplet states. Because the 21-cm transition is driven by collisional
interactions between gas particles and with CMB photons (ignoring all radiative effects
during the Dark Ages), the spin temperature can be solved by assuming an equilibrium
where the population in the singlet or triplet state is conserved, yielding
T −1
s = T −1
γ +x cT −1
K
1 +x c
,(2.3)
wherex c is the collisional coupling coefficient andTK is the kinetic temperature of the
gas.CAMBextends this expression further by incorporating effects from small changes
in the fraction of ionized species and perturbations to the photon phase space density.
We refer the reader to Section IV of [38] for a detailed derivation of the fullTs and its
perturbations∆ Ts −∆ Tγ.
2.1 Redshift-Space Distortion and the Alcock-Paczyński Effect
In redshift space, perturbations in the brightness temperature also have an anisotropic
source from velocity effects, which in Fourier space takes the formδv(k) =µ 2δb, whereµ
is the cosine of the angle between the wavenumber vectorkand the line-of-sight direction,
andδ b represents fluctuations in the baryon density. Combining the monopole and the
anisotropic sources, fluctuations in the brightness temperature is
δTb(k, µ)≃δ mono(k) +µ 2δb(k).(2.4)
3Not including this suppression does not affect our results. As we will show, the maximum scales we
probe in later sections arek∼0.5Mpc −1, well below the regime where the effect becomes significant.
When we do venture into the rangek∼1–5Mpc−1 in Sec. 3, this effect contributes only a percent-level
correction to the signal-to-noise ratio we discuss. Moreover, our analysis focuses on the relative change
in S/N between different array configurations rather than on absolute values.
– 5 –

Figure 1: The dimensionless, spherically averaged 21-cm power spectrum at various
redshifts during the cosmic Dark Ages calculated usingCAMB.
Definingthe21-cmpowerspectrumas(2π) 3δD(k1+k2)P21(k1)≡
 
δ ¯Tb
2 ⟨δTb(k1)δTb(k2)⟩,
whereδ D is the Dirac delta function, it can be expanded as a polynomial inµ:
P21(k, µ) =
 
δ ¯Tb
2
µ0Pµ0(k) +µ 2Pµ2(k) +µ 4Pµ4(k)

,(2.5)
where
Pµ0(k) =P χ(k)T 2
mono(k)
Pµ2(k) = 2Pχ(k)Tmono(k)Tb(k)
Pµ4(k) =P χ(k)T 2
b (k).(2.6)
In practice, the global brightness temperatureδ¯Tb, the primordial power spectrumPχ(k),
the 21-cm monopole transfer functionTmono and the baryon transfer functionTb(k)can
all be obtained from the output ofCAMB. The spherically-averaged 21-cm power spectrum,
integrated over all angles, is
P21(k) =
 
δ ¯Tb
2
Pµ0(k) + (1/3)Pµ2(k) + (1/5)Pµ4(k)

,(2.7)
and Fig. 1 shows examples of this power spectrum at various redshifts during the Dark
Ages.
In the analysis of the 21-cm signal, it is often necessary to adopt a specific cos-
mological model, which may differ from the true geometry of the Universe [40]. This
– 6 –

potential geometrical distortion scales both in the line-of-sight and transverse directions
and will introduce anisotropy, including aPµ6 moment, into the 21-cm power spectrum.
Denoting the power spectrum without this Alcock-Paczyński (AP) effect asPtr(k), the
observed power spectrum becomes [41]
P21(k, µ) =µ 6Pµ6(k, µ) +µ 4Pµ4(k, µ) +µ 2Pµ2(k, µ) +P µ0(k, µ),(2.8)
where
Pµ6 =−α
 
4P tr
µ4 −
∂P tr
µ4
∂logk
!
Pµ4 =P tr
µ4 +α
 
5P tr
µ4 −2P tr
µ2 +
∂P tr
µ2
∂logk
!
−α ⊥
 
3P tr
µ4 +
∂P tr
µ4
∂logk
!
Pµ2 =P tr
µ2 +α
 
3P tr
µ2 +
∂P tr
µ0
∂logk
!
−α ⊥
 
3P tr
µ2 +
∂P tr
µ2
∂logk
!
Pµ0 = (1 +α)P tr
µ0 −α ⊥
 
3P tr
µ0 +
∂P tr
µ0
∂logk
!
,(2.9)
evaluated at the observedk. The AP effect parameters are defined as
1 +α= Htr(z)Dtr
A(z)
Hassumed(z)Dassumed
A (z) ,
1 +α ⊥ = Dtr
A(z)
Dassumed
A (z) .(2.10)
Fig. 2 shows the monopole, dipole and quadrupole parts of the power spectrum at
z= 50and their percent changes induced by including the AP effect. As expected, the
monopole term is the major contributor to the overall 21-cm power spectrum. The AP
effect correction is about percent-level in both the monopole and dipole components.
Although the AP effect is more pronounced in the third column, the quadrupole term’s
impact on the total power spectrum is itself subdominant.
2.2 The Impact of Minihalos
Even though during the cosmic Dark Ages the perturbations are largely linear and most
neutral hydrogen atoms reside in the intergalactic medium (IGM), structure formation
is already underway, and a population of minihalos is present, with masses in the range
of10 4 to10 8 M⊙ and radii typically less than10−2 kpc. As shown by [10] and later
substantiated through N-body and hydrodynamic simulations by [42], the intense col-
lisions between gas particles inside minihalos can produce a 21-cm signal distinct from
that of the IGM [43] and contribute nonlinear effects to the 21-cm power spectrum on
small scales. We first quantitatively determine the impact of minihalos and the scales up
to which linear perturbation theory remains applicable.
– 7 –

Figure 2: The monopole, dipole, and quadrupole components of the 21-cm power spec-
trum atz= 50with (green) and without (black) the Alcock-Paczyński effect. The
bottom panel shows the percent difference in the power spectrum due to the AP effect.
2.2.1 Minihalo Power Spectrum
We base our calculations of minihalos on the framework laid out in [11], which employs a
halo model approach [44]. The power spectrum of the 21-cm signal fromonlyminihalos
consists of a “one-halo” termP1h
mh(k, z)that accounts for correlations within a single
minihalo and a “two-halo” termP2h
mh(k, z)that accounts for correlations between different
halos. These two components at redshiftzare given by [11]
P 1h
mh(k) =δ ¯T 2
b
Z Mmax
Mmin
dm
 m
¯ρ
2
nh(m)T 2
mh(m)|u(k|m)|2
(2.11)
P 2h
mh(k) =δ ¯T 2
b Plin(k)I 2
mh(k)(2.12)
Imh(k) =
Z Mmax
Mmin
dm
 m
¯ρ

[nh(m)b(m)Tmh(m)u(k|m)],(2.13)
whereδT b is the global 21-cm signal atz,¯ρis the average matter density of the Universe,
nh(m)is the number density of minihalos,b(m)is the linear halo bias factor,T 2
mh is a
temperature factor defined as(Ts −T γ)/Ts, andu(k|m)is the Fourier transform of the
halo mass profile. Detailed explanations and calculations for most of these quantities are
given in Appendix A; here we discuss only those that require special clarification.
For the temperature factorTmh ≡(T s −T γ)/Ts in Eqs. (2.11), (2.12), and (2.13),
the spin temperatureT s is determined by the kinetic gas temperatureT K, the CMB
– 8 –

temperature, and a collisional coupling constant, as given by Eq. (2.3). In [11], the gas
temperature was set to several values (adiabatic coolingTad ≡2.58 [(1 +z)/10] 2 K, 20
K, 100 K, and 1000 K) to demonstrate how the minihalo signal varies withTK.
In this work, we adopt a physical modeling of the gas temperature inside minihalos
using the “TIS” model (nonsingular, truncated isothermal spheres) proposed by [10] and
assume the gas temperature equals the virial temperature [1]:
Tvir(m) = 1.98×10 4
 µ
0.6
 m
108 h−1M⊙
(2/3) Ωm,0
Ωm(z)
∆c
18π2
1/31 +z
10

K,(2.14)
where the mean molecular weightµ= 1.22for the neutral hydrogen gas during the Dark
Ages.∆ c = 18π2 + 82d−39d 2 is the ratio of the overdensity at collapse to the critical
density, withd= Ω m(z)−1[1]. The gas temperature profile has a significant impact
on the 21-cm signal [45, 46], but during the Dark Ages, before any star formation or the
presence of rapid radiative cooling from metals, the gas temperature model is simpler
than at later epochs.
In the absence of any ionization or Lyman photon scattering effects, the spin tem-
perature is determined by collisions in the gas and scattering with CMB photons, as
described in Eq. 2.3. To determine the collisional coupling constantxc, we need only
consider the dominant collisional processes—those between hydrogen atoms. Thus,
xc ≈x HH
c = T∗
A10Tγ
κHH
1−0(TK)nH ,(2.15)
whereT ∗ = 0.068K is the excitation temperature andA 10 = 2.85×10 −15 s−1 is the
Einstein A coefficient [3],nH = ¯ρmh/mH = ∆cρcrit(z)/mH is the number density of hy-
drogen atoms inside the halo, andmH is the atomic mass of hydrogen. For the scattering
rateκ HH
1−0, whenT k <300K, we follow the tabulated values provided in Table 2 of [47];
whenT k >300K, we employ the fitting formula given by [47].
The number density of minihalos,nh(M, z), is calculated from a halo mass function
vian h(M, z) = (dn/dlnM)/M, and the comoving number density of halos in an interval
dMaround massMis given by the Press-Schechter formalism:[48]
dn(M, z)
dlnM = ρm,0
M

dF(M, z)
dlnM
 = ρm,0
M

dlnσ(z)
dlnM
 f(ν),(2.16)
whereρ m,0 is the present-day matter density,F(M)is the collapse fraction, andν≡
δc/σ(M, z).
F(M, z) = 1√
2πσ(M, z)
Z ∞
δc
e−δ2/2σ2(M,z) dδ(2.17)
f(ν) =
r
2
π νeν2/2 (2.18)
Here,σ(M, z)isextrapolatedfromthepresentusingthelineargrowthfunction:σ(M, z) =
σ(M,0)D(z). The rms matter density fluctuation smoothed over a spherical region of
– 9 –

radiusRenclosing a total massMtoday is
σ2(M,0) =
Z ∞
k=0
∆2(k)
3j1(kR)
kR
2
dlnk,(2.19)
wherej 1(x) = sinx/x 2 −cosx/xis the first spherical Bessel function and∆ 2(k)≡
k3P(k)/2π 2 is the dimensionless matter power spectrum measured today. The linear
growth function is calculated through the growth suppression factor defined asD(a)≡
ag(a)/g(a= 1), and the growth suppression is evaluated using an analytical fitting
formula for theΛCDM cosmology:[49]
g(z) = 2
5
Ωm(z)
Ω4/7
m (z)−Ω Λ(z) +

1 + 1
2Ωm(z)

1 + 1
70ΩΛ(z)
 ,(2.20)
whereΩ m(z)andΩ Λ(z)are the density parameters of matter and dark energy, respec-
tively.
Alternatively, one may adopt the Sheth–Tormen mass function based on an el-
lipsoidal collapse model, which predicts stronger fluctuations in the 21-cm brightness
temperature [46].
f(ν) =A
r
2q
π

1 +qν 2−p
exp
 
−qν2/2

.(2.21)
For the Sheth-Tormen mass function, we choose the following parameter values:A=
0.3222,q= 0.707, andp= 0.3[44].
In Fig. 3, we show the Press-Schechter and Sheth-Tormen halo mass functions at
selected redshifts from30≤z≤200, a period during the Dark Ages that has potential to
be observed by radio telescopes. In both cases, the mass function increases substantially
as redshift decreases, but the Sheth-Tormen mass function consistently predicts a larger
number density of minihalos than the Press–Schechter mass function; at high redshift
this difference can be orders of magnitude.
2.2.2 Comparison with the Total 21-cm Power Spectrum
Having established the formalism for computing the minihalo contribution to the 21-cm
power spectrum, we now ask: how does it compare to the total 21-cm signal from neutral
hydrogen atoms in all environments?
To see the full effect of minihalos on very small scales, we extended our calculations
to the Jeans scale, below which baryonic gas cannot collapse into halos. The Jeans
scale is defined askJ ≡
p
4πGρm(z)/cs(z), where the sound speed can be estimated by
assuming an ideal gas:c s(z) =
p
γkBTgas(z)/µmp. During the observable window of
the Dark Ages, neutral hydrogen gas in the IGM has already decoupled in temperature
from the CMB and begun cooling adiabatically. Withγ= 5/3andT gas ∼(1 +z) 2,
we estimate the Jeans scale atz= 30, 50, and 80 to bek J ≃1500, 1200, and 950h
Mpc−1, respectively. Therefore, we choose to calculate the power spectra up tok= 1000
hMpc −1 in the comparison that follows.
– 10 –

Figure3: HalomassfunctioncalculatedatvariousredshiftsduringthecosmicDarkAges
assuming either the Press-Schechter model (solid) or the Sheth-Tormen model (dashed).
In Fig. 4, we juxtapose the 21-cm signal from minihalos and that from all neutral
hydrogen atoms at three different redshifts during the Dark Ages. For minihalos, we
show results assuming either the Press-Schechter or the Sheth-Tormen mass function.
We plot the rms 21-cm brightness temperature fluctuations∆(k)in units of mK (the
square root of the power spectrum) to facilitate cross-reference with the results in [11].
Towards the end of the Dark Ages, the number density of minihalos undergoes a
relatively rapid increase. Atz= 30, the power spectrum on large scales is dominated
by the correlation between different halos, i.e., the two-halo term. Then, a distinct
transition occurs aroundk∼10hMpc −1, and the correlation between neutral hydrogen
atoms within a single halo begins to dominate. At higher redshifts, minihalos become
much more sparse. The impact of the two-halo term thus decreases, and the power
spectrum is dominated by the one-halo term.
At high redshifts during the Dark Ages, the Sheth-Tormen mass function predicts
a higher number density of minihalos than the Press-Schechter mass function. Conse-
quently, the 21-cm signal from minihalos computed using the former is stronger. Never-
theless, regardless of the choice of mass function, the brightness temperature fluctuations
from minihalos during this epoch are tens of orders of magnitude smaller than the overall
signal because the volume fraction of minihalos is too small. Therefore, we conclude that
up to the Jeans scale of∼1000hMpc −1, the initial clustering of matter in the form
of minihalos can be safely neglected in the analysis of the 21-cm brightness temperature
power spectrum during the Dark Ages.
– 11 –

Figure 4: The rms 21-cm brightness temperature fluctuationssolelyfrom HI atoms in
minihalos, assuming a Press-Schechter (solid) or Sheth-Tormen (dashed) mass function,
compared with the signal from neutral hydrogen atoms (dotted) in all environments at
various redshifts during the Dark Ages. (Owing to the scale of this plot and the faintness
of the minihalo signals, the three dotted lines forz= 30, 50, and 80 appear to overlap;
we refer readers to Fig. 1 for a more accurate representation.)
3 A Lunar Far-Side Interferometer: Instrument and Survey Design
Measuring the 21-cm power spectrum from the cosmic Dark Ages requires an interferom-
eter array. As previously explained, the far side of the Moon offers a unique environment
by shielding observations from terrestrial radio interference. In this section, we discuss
various plausible array configurations and establish the associated noise model.
3.1 Noise Power Spectrum
We present the theoretical framework for computing the uncertainty in a 21-cm power
spectrum measurement using an interferometer array [50, 51].
For two arbitrary antennas in an interferometer array forming a baseline⃗ u, the
thermal noise when measuring the sky brightness temperature over an observed full
bandwidth∆νis
∆TN(⃗ u⊥, u∥) = λ2(z)∆ν
Ae
Tsys√∆νt⃗ u
,(3.1)
whereλ(z)is the redshifted wavelength of the 21-cm transition,Ae is the effective collect-
ing area of the antenna,Tsys is the system temperature andu∥ and⃗ u⊥ are the line-of-sight
and transverse components of this baseline, respectively. The integration time for this
– 12 –

specific baseline is related to theuv-space resolution and the number of baselinesnb(⃗ u)
that sample this particular⃗ uthrought ⃗ u= (A e/λ2(z))nb(u)tint, where the integration
time per grid istint = (ΩFoV/Sarea)ttot, assuming that the survey areaSarea is larger than
the field of viewΩFoV. Thus, for two baselines⃗ ui and⃗ uj, their covariance is
CN(⃗ ui, ⃗ uj) =⟨∆T N(⃗ ui)∆TN(⃗ uj)⟩=δ ijT 2
sys∆ν
 λ2(z)
Ae
3 1
nb(u⊥)ttot
Sarea
ΩFoV
.(3.2)
Apart from instrumental thermal noise, the other source of noise is sample variance
CSV(⃗ ui, ⃗ uj) =⟨δV(⃗ u i)δV(⃗ uj)⟩. The brightness temperature is related to the visibility
throughδV(⃗ ui) =
R
d3⃗ u R(⃗ ui −⃗ u)δTb(⃗ ui), whereR(⃗ u)represents a smearing in the
uv-plane from the main beam pattern. Then, the sample variance can be written as
CSV(⃗ ui, ⃗ uj) =δ ij
Z
d3⃗ u|R(⃗ ui)−⃗ u||R(⃗ uj)−⃗ u| ⟨δTb(⃗ ui)δTb(⃗ uj)⟩
=
Z
d3⃗ u|R(⃗ ui)−⃗ u|2P21(⃗ ui).(3.3)
AssumingP 21(⃗k)varies on scales much larger than|R(⃗ u)| 2, the variance becomes a
total integral whose angular part isΩA =λ 2(z)/Ae and line-of-sight part is∆ν. After
convertingP 21(⃗ ui)toP 21(⃗ki)using the following change-of-variable relations
⃗k⊥ = 2π⃗ u⊥
r(z) , k ∥ = 2πH(z)
λ(z)(1 +z) u∥ = 2πu∥
y(z) ,(3.4)
the sample variance is
CSV (⃗ ui, ⃗ uj) = λ2(z)∆ν
Ae
1
r2(z)y(z) P21(⃗k⊥, k∥),(3.5)
wherey(z)≡λ(z)(1 +z)/H(z) = ∆r/∆ν, andr(z)is the comoving angular diameter
distance (please confirm).
WiththetotalcovariancematrixC=C N+C SV , weusetheFishermatrixformalism
to predict the uncertainty in the 21-cm power spectrum via
Fij =Tr
"
C−1 ∂C
∂P21(⃗ki)
C−1 ∂C
∂P21(⃗kj)
#
.(3.6)
We assume that different⃗kmodes are independent, so only the diagonal terms of the
Fisher matrix are nonzero. In this way, the forecast error in the 21-cm power spectrum
at wavenumber⃗kis
δP21(⃗k) = 1q
N(⃗k)
Ae
λ2(z)∆ν r2(z)y(z)
h
CN(⃗k, ⃗k) +C SV (⃗k, ⃗k)
i
.(3.7)
The total number ofk-modes in a small cylindrical volumed 3karound ⃗kisN( ⃗k) =
k⊥dk⊥dk∥Vsurvey/(2π)2, where the total survey volumeVsurvey =S arear2(z)y(z)∆ν.
– 13 –

On this basis, we compute the total measurement error of a cylindrically averaged
21-cm power spectrum in terms of a thermal noise power spectrumPN(⃗k):
δP21(k⊥, k∥, z) = 2πpk⊥dk⊥dk∥Vsurvey

P21(k⊥, k∥, z) +P N(k⊥, z)

,(3.8)
where
PN(k⊥) =T 2
sys(z)r2(z)y(z)
 λ2(z)
Ae
2 1
nb(u⊥)ttot
Sarea
ΩFoV
.(3.9)
3.2 Baseline Distribution
The noise power spectrum of an interferometer (Eq. 3.9) depends on the baseline distribu-
tionn b(k⊥). We first express the density of baselines in the physical plane of the interfer-
ometer as a function of physical baseline lengthD, denotednphys
b (D), with units of m−2.
This is then converted to the dimensionlessuv-plane density vianb(u) =λ 2(z)n phys
b (D=
uλ(z))[52], and finally to a function ofk⊥ using Eq. 3.4.
Random Circular ArrayWe consider an array with antennas randomly distributed
within a circle. For an array of diameterDmax containingN ant antennas, the number
density of baselines of lengthdis
nb(d) = Nant(Nant −1)
2
8d
π2D2max

arccos
 d
Dmax

− d
Dmax
s
1−
 d
Dmax
2

 .(3.10)
A detailed derivation is provided in Appendix B.1. Figure 5 plots the baseline density
distribution for this configuration.
Approximate ModelA fitting formula for the baseline density distribution was pro-
posed in [51]. The number density of baselines of physical lengthdis given by
nphys
b (d,{D 0, w}) =A(d−D 0)2 exp
"
−
 d−D 0
w
2#
,(3.11)
where the normalization constantAis fixed by the condition
Z Dmax
Dmin
2πD nphys
b (D)dD= Nant(Nant −1)
2 ,(3.12)
withN ant the total number of antennas. The two parametersD 0 andwcontrol the
overall shape of the distribution and are chosen by the user. For example, in the Stage-
III design proposed by the FarView/FarSide project, these two parameters are set to
D0 =−2100m andw= 6200m. Fig. 5 also shows several baseline density distributions
for different combinations of(D 0, w)and demonstrates their control over the overall
shape. AsD 0 becomes more negative, the distribution skews more towards shorter
baselines. Meanwhile, increasingwincreases the density of longer baselines. These
models have a generally similar shape to the random distribution, though they tend to
predict more long baselines.
– 14 –

Figure 5: Example configurations of baseline distribution of a circular array with ran-
domly distributed antennas (solid) and of ones following the fitting function adopted by
the FarView/FarSide project (dotted) for different combinations of(D0, w). The top
axis indicates the Fourier scalek⊥ corresponding to the physical length of a baseline,
evaluated at redshiftz= 40. In each configuration, the array consists of105 antennas.
The minimum and maximum baseline lengths are set to 10 m and 10,000 m, respectively.
Configurations with Two, Three, or More Circular ArraysA prospective sce-
nario for 21-cm cosmology on the lunar far-side involves multiple stations. It is interesting
to explore this possibility and see whether such a configuration can achieve baseline cov-
erage across a range of different scales. Constructing multiple stations may arise from
necessity too, for example, if a single suitable lunar site is limited in size. Moreover, it
is likely to result from international cooperation, when multiple countries or institutions
deploy arrays at different sites on the Moon. The use of multiple distributed sub-stations
to achieve flexible baseline coverage and target small angular scales is already a mature
technique in ground-based interferometry. For example, LOFAR has 16 remote and 8
international stations extending up to∼1,000km from its core array[53]; SKA-Low
designed three spiral-arms that extend to form a maximum baseline of 65 km[54].
With these prospects in mind and inspired by the designs of ground-based experi-
ments, we examine configurations comprising multiple circular arrays, starting with the
simplest case of two identical arrays4 whose centers are separated by a distanceL. Each
circular array hasNant antennas and a diameterDmax.
There are two types of baselines: those formed by antennas within a single array
4For simplicity, we consider only identical arrays here. This also maximizes the number of long and
cross-array baselines, thereby amplifying the advantages of a multi-array configuration over a single-array
one.
– 15 –

(intra-array) and those formed by antennas from two different arrays (cross-array). For
intra-array baselines, the density distribution follows the expression from the previous
section:
nintra
b (d) = 2× Nant(Nant −1)
2 × Pintra(d)
2πd = Nant(Nant −1)
2πd Pintra(d),(3.13)
where the probability distribution functionP intra(d)is the same as in Eq. B.4. For
cross-array baselines, the density distribution is
ncross(d) =N 2
antPcross(d;L) =N 2
antd
Z 2π
0
Pintra(
p
d2 +L 2 −2dLcosϕ)
2π
p
d2 +L 2 −2dLcosϕ
dϕ,(3.14)
which can be integrated numerically (derivations provided in Appendix B.2). Summing
the two contributions, the total baseline density distribution for two identical arrays
separated byLis
nb(d) =n intra(d) +n cross(d).(3.15)
Building on this categorization, we now give the general expression for the baseline
density distribution of an interferometer consisting ofsidentical stations. Each station
is placed at a vertex of ann-gon (not necessarily regular) and is itself a circular array
of diameterD max containingN ant randomly distributed antennas. The baseline density
distribution is:
nb(d) = 1
2πd

s
Nant
2

Pintra(d) +N 2
ant
X
i<j
Pcross(d;L ij)

 ,(3.16)
whereP intra(d)follows Eq. B.4 andP cross follows Eq. B.8. The variableLij denotes the
distance between the centers of thei-th andj-th arrays/stations.
In a multi-station interferometer, the baseline density distribution develops addi-
tional peaks beyond the first one that originates from intra-array baselines. These extra
peaks arise from cross-array baselines and their locations are determined by the distances
between stations. Fig. 6 illustrates this for a triple-station configuration. When the three
stations form an equilateral triangle, all cross-array baselines aggregate into a single nar-
row peak corresponding to the side length. If the side lengths differ but are close in value,
the three sets of cross-baseline peaks formed by each pair of stations will overlap into
a broadened feature, as shown in configuration 2. When the side lengths are radically
different, each set of cross-baselines forms a distinct, separate peak, as in configuration
3.
Fig. 7 shows the baseline density distribution for different numbers of stations while
keeping the total number of antennas fixed. For visual clarity, all configurations in this
plot are assumed to be regularn-gons. The triple-station case produces the highest
second peak because it maximizes the second term in Eq. (3.16). Fornstations >3, the
second peak splits into several distinct ones, each lower in amplitude than the single
cross-baseline peak of the triple-station configuration.
– 16 –

Figure 6: Baseline density distributions for various triple-station configurations, in-
cluding an equilateral triangle and cases with unequal side lengths. The numbers in
parentheses give the ratios of the triangle’s side lengths, and the reference side length
isL= 30km. The top axis indicates the Fourier scales probed by these baselines at
z= 40.
3.3 Foreground Avoidance
Interferometers are intrinsically chromatic, and their frequency dependence gives rise
to foreground contamination in the 21-cm power spectrum, which takes the shape of a
wedge ink ⊥-k∥ space. The contaminated modes are given by [55]
k∥ ≤ H(z)r(z)
c(1 +z) k⊥,(3.17)
or alternatively ink-µspace whereµis the cosine of the angle with the line-of-sight
direction,
µ≤µ min =


s
1 +
 H(z)r(z)
c(1 +z)
2


−1
,(3.18)
whereH(z)is the Hubble parameter andr(z)is the radial comoving distance. Fig. 8
illustrates the removal of the foreground wedge from the 2D power spectrum atz= 40.
The wedge occupies the majority ofk-space, completely excluding information from
small scales withk⊥ ≳1. Compounded with restrictions onk∥ from the survey’s allowed
bandwidthandfrequencyresolution(discussedinthenextsection), acompleteremovalof
the foreground wedge would substantially reduce the number of Fourier modes available
for cosmological analysis. Moreover, as [56] demonstrates, losing access to modes inside
– 17 –

Figure 7: Baseline density distribution for configurations with different numbers of
identical circular arrays/stations while keeping the total number of antennas fixed. The
side length of each regularn-gon is 30 km?. The arrays are all compactly packed with
a minimum separation of half a wavelength. The top axis indicates the Fourier scales
probed by these baselines atz= 40.
the foreground wedge significantly reduces the detectability of the Dark Ages 21-cm
signal by a factor of∼10. In this work, we take the more optimistic position that future
foreground-removal techniques will allow access to all modes up to the interferometer’s
angular resolution limit. Nevertheless, for completeness, we also include a brief discussion
in Sec. 5 of results obtained using onlyk-modes outside of the foreground wedge.
3.4 Interferometer and Survey Specifications
We specify the instrumental and survey parameters of our fiducial model in Table 1.
This setup is consistent with the Stage-III design of the FarView/FarSide project [51],
which we consider a good balance between ambitious scientific prospects and engineering
feasibility in the foreseeable future.
4 Power Spectrum Measurement
Detecting the 21-cm power spectrum from the cosmic Dark Ages is particularly chal-
lenging. The signal is intrinsically faint and easily overwhelmed by instrumental noise.
Therefore, this section quantifies the signal-to-noise ratios achievable with an interfero-
metric array resembling the one specified in Table 1. The key to overcoming the noise
– 18 –

Figure 8:Left:Example of the 21-cm power spectrum atz= 40after removing the
foreground wedge.Right:Foreground wedge atz= 1, 10, and 40, displayed on linear
scales ink ⊥ andk ∥ to highlight its evolution.
Table 1: Lunar far-side survey and radio array parameters.
Parameter Value/Model
Minimum baseline lengthDmin 4.5 m
System temperatureT sys Tsys ≃T sky = 5000K(ν/50MHz) −2.5
Number of polarizationsNpol 2
GainG 2
Effective collecting areaAe λ2(z)G/(4π)
Field of viewΩFoV 10300 deg2
Survey areaS area 20,000 deg2
Fractional bandwidth∆ν(%) 30%
Channel widthδν 10 kHz
lies in averaging over as many Fourier modes as possible. When the primary goal is de-
tection, this is a worthwhile exchange of angular resolution for detectability. In addition
to examining the S/N in individualk-bins, we quantify the overall detection significance
(in units ofσ) by the Pythagorean sum of signal-to-noise ratios across all bins, following
the convention set in [57].
4.1 Detection Significance for a Single Array
Figure 9 presents two single-array designs that can achieveS/N≳1atz= 40in key
bins and reach∼4σsignificance of detection. In both cases, we adopt a transverse bin
sizedlogk= 0.7Mpc −1.
•Compact design (left panel):10 5 antennas spaced∼10m apart (slightly more
– 19 –

than half a wavelength atz= 40), forming an array of diameter∼3.6km. An
integration time of 60,000 hours brings the maximal S/N to∼1.
•Sparse design (right panel):To access smaller scales (kmax
⊥ ∼0.7Mpc −1), we
increase the diameter to10km. This requires2×10 5 antennas and 100,000 hours
of integration to achieve the same level of S/N.
Figure 9: Signal-to-noise ratios from two array configurations that can reach the de-
tectability threshold of S/N≳1.Left: A compact array of 3.6 km diameter containing
105 antennas, observing for 60,000 hours.Right: An array of 10 km diameter containing
2×10 5 antennas, observing for 100,000 hours.
This comparison highlights the crucial role of antenna compactness. With a single
array, accessing smaller scales or higherkmax
⊥ requires both a substantial increase in the
number of antennas to preserve baseline density and an extension of observation time.
Even a one-order-of-magnitude improvement inkmax
⊥ places a tremendous strain on the
required resources.
4.2 Measuring Small Scales with a Multi-Array Configuration
Given these resource demands, it is imperative to find a more economical way to mea-
sure small scales, which leads us to consider multi-array configurations. They not only
align with prospective international collaborations, but also, by sacrificing mid-length
baselines, have the ability to generate far more long baselines with the same number of
antennas, providing a high signal-to-noise ratio at aspecific, tunablesmall scale, mirror-
ing the design philosophy of the ground-based precedents.
Fig. 10 compares the signal-to-noise ratio at the maximum probed scale for single,
double, and triple-array configurations under equal total resources (3×10 6 antennas
and 100,000 hours of integration). In the double and triple-array cases, each station is
identical and compactly packed (minimum separation set to half a wavelength atz= 40).
For the double array, each of the two stations has1.5×106 antennas; for the triple array,
each of the three stations has10 6 antennas, placed at the vertices of an equilateral
triangle.
– 20 –

Figure 10: Signal-to-noise ratio at the maximum probedk⊥ scale for single-array (blue),
double-array (red), and triple-array (green) configurations. With equal total resources
(integration time, number of antennas, etc.), the triple-array configuration consistently
outperforms the double array, which in turn outperforms the single array in the regime
k≳1Mpc −1.
Atz= 40and for scalesk≳1Mpc −1, the triple array can improve the S/N
of the single array by up to two orders of magnitude. In this regime, the triple array
consistently outperforms the double-array configuration, which in turn is better than
the single scenario. An equilateral triangle is the only configuration that concentrates
all long baselines onto a very narrow range of scales centered on the one corresponding
to the side length. With four or more stations, these cross-baselines will split into side
lengths and diagonals, diluting the density at the scale of interest, as demonstrated in
Fig. 7.
While the previous figure assumes regular polygons, this need not be the case.
Placing stations/sub-arrays at the vertices of non-regular polygons may not only better
reflect engineering realities but also offer unique advantages in terms of the flexibility and
breadth of coverage in the small-scale regime. Fig. 11 takes the triple-station scenario as
an example, using the baseline density distributions from Fig. 6 to show the S/N in each
k⊥ bin atk≳1Mpc −1. By adjusting the distances between stations, one can, depending
on the specific scientific goal, either sacrifice some maximum S/N for broader small-scale
coverage or, by keeping the triangle nearly equilateral, concentrate all baselines into
a narrow range to measure fewerk-bins with higher significance. This tunability is
particularly valuable when the theoretical signal is expected to exhibit features over a
range of scales.
Thus, distributing the total collecting area among multiple compact stations is a
powerful strategy to achieve high S/N on small scales with great flexibility. This is
– 21 –

Figure 11: Signal-to-noise ratios atz= 40fork ⊥ ≳1Mpc −1 bins, assuming various
triple-station configurations. The numbers in parentheses indicate the ratios of the tri-
angle’s side lengths. The horizontal bars represent the width of eachk⊥ bin.
crucial for testing dark matter models, such as warm or self-interacting dark matter,
that predict significant suppression of the power spectrum atk≳1Mpc −1—a regime
not readily accessible to LSS and CMB surveys. A precise measurement in even a single
k-bin can yield valuable insights.
5 Constraining Inflation through the Running of the Spectral Index
We now turn to a potential cosmological application of the measured 21-cm power spec-
trum from the Dark Ages: constraining inflationary parameters.
Inflation is the leading model for the origin of the cosmos. In this model, primor-
dial perturbations are generated by quantum fluctuations during the inflationary period
and become the seeds for subsequent cosmic structure growth. Measurements of these
perturbations offer important insight into the extremely early universe, but such data
remain limited and are obtained primarily from the CMB. While CMB observations
have provided tight constraints on the spectral indexns and the amplitude of primordial
perturbationsA s, the running of the spectral indexαs ≡dn s/dlnkremains modestly
constrained, withσ(α s) = 0.012from the Planck 2018 analysis [13].
The running of the spectral indexαs is a powerful discriminant between different
inflationary scenarios. Table 2 summarizes the predictions of several models beyond
standard slow-roll inflation, illustrating the wide range ofαs values predicted by different
theories; we refer the reader to the references listed in the table for more details on each
model. Although two of these models predict values ofαs that lie outside the constraints
from Planck 2018 analysis, we include them here for completeness. The cosmic Dark
Ages 21-cm signal offers a new and independent probe ofα s, which can serve as a
– 22 –

complementary test of these inflationary models, with the potential to break degeneracies
that may arise in current CMB surveys.
Table 2: Various beyond-single-scalar-field inflationary theories’ predictions of the run-
ning of the spectral indexαs.
Model Constraints Reference
Scale-invariantR 2 inflationα s(kpivot)∼10 −2 [58]
Multi-natural inflation −0.06≲α s ≲0.08 [59]with sinusoidal functions
Multi-natural inflation αs =−0.013±0.009[60]with Dedekind eta function
Linear potential αs ∼0.05[61]with periodic oscillations
Power-law (quadratic) potential αs ∼0.10[61]with periodic oscillations
Multifield natural inflationα s ∼ −5×10 −3 [62]
In this section, we assess the ability of a lunar far-side array using 21-cm signals from
the cosmic Dark Ages to distinguish between these inflationary models and constrainαs
through the Fisher information matrix formalism. In a single redshift bin, the Fisher
matrix is given by
Fij(z) =
X
k⊥
X
k∥
∂P21(k⊥, k∥, z)
∂pi
∂P21(k⊥, k∥, z)
∂pj
1
δP 2
21(k⊥, k∥, z) ,(5.1)
wherep i andp j denote the parameters of interest while the power spectrum error
δP21(k⊥, k∥, z)is given in Eq. 3.8. We then perform a joint analysis ofα s (assuming
a fiducial valueαs = 0) alongside the relevant cosmological parameters:Ωbh2,Ω ch2,H 0,
As, andn s.
5.1 Single-Array Constraints
We first consider the single-array scenario. The fiducial array configuration used in the
previous section is sufficient for detecting the power spectrum. However, it falls short of
what is needed to constrain inflationary models, yielding a weak marginalized constraint
ofσ(α s)∼ O(1). Therefore, we now adopt a larger and more capable array comprising
106 antennas as the basis of the discussion in this section. All other aspects of the setup
are kept identical to the fiducial design in Table 1, unless otherwise specified. In Fig. 12,
we present the joint constraints onαs andn s5 for this configuration consisting of106
antennas randomly distributed within a circular array of diameter5100m, with 100,000
hours of integration time and covering the redshift range30≤z≤100. This setup
5For anon-zeroα s, thespectralindex isparameterziedasn s(k) =n (0)
s +αs ln (k/k0). Inthe discussion
that follows, we refer tons as the constant termn(0)
s for simplicity.
– 23 –

represents the minimal configuration required to achieve a constraint onαs compara-
ble to that of the latest Planck analysis [13] and to effectively distinguish between the
inflationary models presented in Table 2.
In Fig. 12, we show1σto3σcontours from the 21-cm measurement alone alongside
thoseobtainedafterincorporatingPlanck2018results(TT,TE,EE+lowE+lensing+BAO)
onΩ bh2,Ω ch2,H 0, andAs as priors. Adding priors on the matter-density parameters can
break their degeneracy withαs, as they all affect the turnover shape of the matter power
spectrum. For the Hubble constant, expansion at high redshift is matter-dominated, so
we need external information to pin downH0. Furthermore, since the CMB has already
provided precise measurements of the amplitude of primordial fluctuationsAs, we incor-
porate this constraint as a prior to lift degeneracies between inflationary parameters as
well. Without the CMB priors, the marginalized constraint onαs is 0.091 at 68% CL.
Incorporating these priors tightens this constraint to 0.034, an improvement by nearly
a factor of two. For completeness, we also report the marginalized constraint onα s
using only modes outside the foreground wedge:σ(α s) = 0.22, which underscores the
importance of accessing smaller angular scales in the transverse direction.
Table 3 summarizes the constraints onα s for several other single-array configu-
rations, exploring variations in array size, number of antennas and models of baseline
density distribution. The first three entries compare different baseline distribution mod-
els and show that the choice of distribution has little impact onσ(αs). In the fourth
entry, we increase the array diameter from5.1km to10km while keeping the number
of antennas fixed, reducing the antenna density by a factor of5; the constraint onαs
worsens by a factor of∼2. The final entry corresponds to the FarView/FarSide Stage-III
design. With fewer antennas and a far less compact configuration, this setup yields the
weakest constraint.
Table 3: Marginalized constraints onα s for various single-array configurations. The
other aspects of the array configuration follow those used in Fig. 12.
Diameter[m] Nant Density of Ant.[m−2] Baseline Dist. Type σ(αs)
5,100 106 0.05 Circular 0.034
5,100 106 0.05 FarView (-1000m, 3100m) 0.041
5,100 106 0.05 FarView (-1500m, 3100m) 0.038
10,000 106 0.01 Circular 0.057
10,000 105 0.001 FarView (-2100m, 6200m) 9.4
5.2 Multi-Array Constraints
Wenowconsiderconfigurationsofmultipleidenticalcirculararraysconnectedviainterferometry—
a scenario that fits future international collaboration plans for cosmology from the lunar
far side.
– 24 –

Figure 12: Constraints on the spectral indexn s and its runningα s at68%to98%
confidence levels. Blue contours show the constraints from a single circular array with
diameter 5,100 m,106 randomly distributed antennas, and 100,000 hours of integration
time, observing the redshift range30≤z≤100. Red contours include priors from Planck
2018 on the marginalized cosmological parametersΩbh2,Ω ch2,H 0, andA s. The grey
band indicates the Planck 2018 constraint onαs for reference.
Fig. 13 compares the 68% confidence contours onns andα s (after incorporating
Planck 2018 priors) for array configurations with1to4separate stations. For visual
clarity, we show only the68%contours rather than the conventional three nested ones.
In all cases, the total number of antennas is fixed at106, the integration time is 100,000
hours, and each station is placed at the vertices of a regular polygon with side length
10km. Separating the available antennas into multiple stations does not have a major
impact on the constraint onαs. The constraint progressively worsens as the total col-
lecting area is split into more stations, indicating that it is most advisable to consolidate
all available antennas into a single compact array.
InTable4, wepresenttheconstraintsonα s forconfigurationswithdifferentnumbers
of stations and for varying separation distancesLbetween stations. The latter proves
to be a very minor factor, though smaller separations yield slightly tighter constraints
because such a configuration more closely resembles a single circular array.
– 25 –

Figure 13:68%confidence contours after incorporating priors from Planck 2018 for
the spectral indexn s and its runningα s, derived from interferometer configurations
consisting of 1 to 4 stations. The total number of antennas is fixed at106 across all four
scenarios; the integration time is 100,000 hours; and the side length of then-gon formed
by the arrays is set to 10 km.
Table 4: Marginalized constraintsσ(α s)(including Planck 2018 priors) for configura-
tions with1to4stations and varying separationL. The setup is the same as in Fig. 13.
L[km] 1 Station 2 Stations 3 Stations 4 Stations
5
0.034
0.039 0.041 0.044
10 0.041 0.045 0.049
20 0.041 0.047 0.051
100 0.041 0.047 0.052
5.3 Discussion
The 21-cm signal from the Dark Ages has long been considered a probe with huge poten-
tial for studying inflation throughαs because, in principle, the immense survey volume
at high redshift allows access to up to∼1012 Fourier modes, far exceeding the∼10 6
modes used in the latest Planck analysis [4, 13]. In practice, however, thermal noise
– 26 –

Figure 14: The number of effective Fourier modes probed in each redshift bin in the
range30< z <100, assuming an effective bandwidth of 10% and 30%, respectively. The
rest of the array configuration parameters are the same as those used in Fig. 12.
greatly reduces the effective number of accessible modes. Inspired by the Planck es-
timatorN XY
modes(ℓ)≡2 Pℓ
ℓ′=2
 
CXY
ℓ′ /δC XY
ℓ′
2 (where XY can be TT, EE, TE, etc.), we
define theeffective number of independent Fourier modesmeasured in a 21-cm
observation weighted by signal-to-noise as
Nmodes =
X
z
X
k⊥,k∥
 P21(k⊥, k∥, z)
δP21(k⊥, k∥, z)
2
.(5.2)
We first quantitatively examine why the large survey volume during the Dark Ages
does not automatically translate into a much improved constraint onαs. Using the same
setup as the single-array design that produced the contour plot in Fig. 12, we trace the
number of accessible modes per redshift bin in Fig. 14, assuming effective bandwidths
of either30%or10%. In both cases, the number of modes drops rapidly from∼10 4
around redshift 40 to just a few byz∼100. Thus, the advantage of surveying a wide
redshift range quickly diminishes at higher redshifts. The total number of independent
modes accessed isN modes = 1.54×10 4 for the 10% bandwidth and2.83×10 4 for the
30% bandwidth.
Another advantage of measuring primordial fluctuations during the Dark Ages is
that structure growth remains linear down to very small scales, promising more accessible
Fourier modes. However, as Fig. 15 shows, for a fixed number of antennas,N modes
decreases rapidly as we increase the array size to reach smaller angular scales. Increasing
the array diameter from 5 to 15 km raiseskmax
⊥ from 0.4 to 1.2 Mpc−1 but reduces the
total number of accessible modes by a factor of 100. Consequently, when the number of
antennas is limited, a smaller but more compact array is more suitable for cosmological
constraints despite its inability to access smaller scales.
– 27 –

Figure 15: Total number of accessible Fourier modes in the redshift range30< z <100
plotted against array diameter, with the number of antennas fixed at105 (orange) and
106 (green). The rest of the array configuration parameters are the same as those used
in Fig. 12.
In summary, the effective number of Fourier modes accessible by a lunar far-side
array during the Dark Ages falls far short of the∼10 6 modes probed by Planck, let
alone the often-cited∼10 12 modes. This limitation imposed by thermal noise has been
noted in previous works as well. For example, [57] forecast the detection significance of
the 21-cm power spectrum for various array configurations and find a maximum of26σ
for their best design, corresponding to roughly 700 independent Fourier modes. Perhaps
sufficient for a detection, this mode count is far from meeting the needs for competitive
constraints on cosmological parameters. Similarly, [16] estimated the signal-to-noise ratio
of the power spectrum based on the CoDEX configuration and concluded that high S/N
is difficult to achieve. Recognizing this challenge, some forecast studies choose to work
in the limit where thermal noise is subdominant to cosmic variance. [51], for instance,
demonstrated that with the Stage-III FarView/FarSide design, the 21-cm signal would
be below the detection threshold, and their forecasts for primordial non-GaussianityfNL
are effectively upper limits under ideal assumptions of no instrumental noise.
Thermal noise is indeed the primary bottleneck in unlocking the full potential of
observations in the Dark Ages. The 21-cm line is redshifted to low frequencies where
the sky temperature is very high, giving rise to large thermal noise and the necessity for
extremely long integration. Even when the underlying survey volume is large, thermal
noise erodes the number of Fourier modes when one attempts to reach higher redshift or
smaller angular scales. As a result, we find it imperative that this difficulty be carefully
quantified, as done in this work, because doing so lays the foundation for mitigating its
impact in the future design of lunar missions.
Nevertheless, what is remarkable about this probe is that with only∼29,000 ef-
– 28 –

fective modes (for the configurations in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13), the constraint onαs is
already comparable to that of the CMB, implying immense potential yet to be exploited.
Although its signal-to-noise ratio remains a major limitation, the Dark Ages signal can
access scales that are smaller and larger than the CMB (if not as highkas originally
hoped) and is able to trace the full shape of the power spectrum with better capacity.
In this sense, it still provides a new and independent lever for constraining primordial
fluctuations. Knowing that the number of effective modes decays rapidly at high redshift,
one promising future direction is to observe at lower redshifts during the Cosmic Dawn,
where thermal noise naturally declines. The trade-off is that the onset of radiation intro-
duces additional physical complexity and small-scale effects such as minihalos will play a
more significant role. Despite these challenges, the improved signal-to-noise ratio could
bring us closer to the full∼1012 modes available in the cosmic variance limit.
6 Conclusion
The 21-cm signal from the cosmic Dark Ages offers a unique possibility to address fun-
damental questions in cosmology. In this work, we examined the physical processes
governing neutral hydrogen during this epoch and assessed the ability of a future lu-
nar far-side array to measure the two-dimensional 21-cm power spectrum and constrain
inflationary parameters.
We first quantified the contribution from neutral hydrogen residing in minihalos,
using the truncated isothermal spherical model for the kinetic temperature of the gas
inside minihalos to calculate its 21-cm emission. Testing both the Press-Schechter and
the Sheth-Tormen mass functions, we found that while they predict different halo number
densities, the minihalo contribution to the overall 21-cm signal remains negligible up to
the Jeans scale (kJ ∼1000hMpc −1) throughout the observable window of the Dark
Ages.
Building on this, we introduced several possible configurations for future lunar far-
side arrays and derived a generalized analytical framework for the baseline density distri-
bution of an interferometer comprising an arbitrary number of identical circular stations
or sub-arrays. We then forecast their capability to measure the 21-cm power spectrum.
We found that for a single array with randomly distributed antennas, observing for
60,000 hours, at least10 5 antennas in a circular area of diameter3.6km are required
to achieve a signal-to-noise ratio≳1atz= 40and reach the detection threshold. If
one desires to reach smaller angular scales (∼0.7Mpc−1), a more ambitious and costly
design of2×10 5 antennas integrated over 100,000 hours is necessary. As a more eco-
nomical alternative, a multi-array configuration (e.g., three stations at the vertices of an
equilateral triangle) can improve sensitivity at tunable small scales by up to two orders
of magnitude compared to a single array. Adjusting station separations adds versatility
in small-scale coverage, which is especially valuable for testing dark matter models that
predict suppressed small-scale power.
We then forecast constraints on the running of the spectral indexα s using re-
alistic thermal noise modeling—often optimistically estimated or ignored in previous
– 29 –

works. Considering both a single circular array, with baseline distributions following
either random antenna distributions or the approximate fitting formula for FarView, and
multi-array configurations which may be constructed in the framework of international
collaboration of several countries or organizations on the Moon, we also explored how
design parameters, including array diameter, number of antennas, integration time, and
baseline density distribution, affect the resulting constraints. Our results show that for
a single circular array with106 antennas, a diameter of 5,100 km reaching a maximum
angular scale ofk max
⊥ ∼0.4, and 100,000 hours of integration, the constraint onαs can
reachO(−2)after surveying the redshift range30< z <100. After incorporating priors
from the Planck 2018 analysis to pin downH0 and break degeneracy with matter density,
the constraint becomesσ(αs) = 0.03, sufficient to distinguish between standard slow-roll
and other exotic inflationary models.
A key insight from our work is that the accessible Fourier modes from the Dark
Ages are limited by the large thermal noise in practice. The effective number of modes
measured by the array configurations discussed in this work is only on the order of104.
Thermal noise grows rapidly as one goes to longer baselines or higher redshift, drastically
reducing the effectiveN mode. For a fixed number of antennas, expanding the array
diameter to reach smaller scales actually reduces the total number of detectable modes,
making a compact design preferable for cosmological constraints. Despite the ability of
multi-array configurations to greatly improve sensitivity on specific small scales, they
cannot tighten the constraints onαs significantly over a single compact array. In fact,
for a given number of total antennas, the constraining power of a single-array design is
slightly better because its compactness maximizes the number of Fourier modes available
in the analysis.
Despite these limitations, the 21-cm signal from the cosmic Dark Ages remains a
powerful probe of the precious information on the primordial Universe. We have released
the accompanying code,DarkAgesCosmology, which enables flexible testing of cosmo-
logical constraints and power spectrum measurement, and we welcome its use by the
community.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by China’s Space Origins Exploration Program Nos. GJ11010405
andGJ11010401, theNationalNaturalScienceFoundation(NSFC)grants(No.12361141814,
12533001, 12421003), the National Key R&D Program of China No. 2022YFF0504300,
and by the Specialized Research Fund for the State Key Laboratory of Radio Astronomy
and Technology.
A Calculating the 21-cm Power Spectrum of Minihalos
For quantities in Eqs. 2.11 to 2.13:
•δ ¯Tb: the global 21-cm signal is calculated by runningCAMBtwice with the same
cosmology to obtain one power spectrum in units of mK2 and one that is dimen-
– 30 –

sionless. The global signal is the square root of the ratio of these two 21-cm power
spectra.
•M max andM min: The minimum mass of minihalos considered in this work is set
to the Jeans mass, while the largest minihalo allowed under the TIS model has a
virial temperature around∼10 4 K. We use the empirical formulas provided in [10]:
Mmin = 5.7×10 3
Ωmh2
0.15
−1/2Ωbh2
0.02
−3/51 +z
10
3/2
M⊙ (A.1)
Mmax = 3.95×10 7
Ωmh2
0.15
−1/21 +z
10
−3/2
M⊙.(A.2)
•¯ρis the mean density of the Universe at redshiftz:¯ρ=ρcrit,0Ωm,0(1 +z) 3, where
ρcrit,0 = 3H2
0 /8πGis the present critical density.
•u(k|m)is the normalized Fourier transform of the Navarro-Frenk-White (NFW)
density profile. In real space, the density profile is [1]
ρ(r, z|M) =ρ crit(z) δc
cN x(1 +c N x)2 ,(A.3)
wherex=r/r vir, the concentrationc N(M, z) =
 
M/109M⊙
−0.1 (25/1 +z), the
characteristic densityδ c = (1/3)∆cc3
N /(ln (1 +cN)−c N /(1 +c N)), and the virial
radius
rvir = 0.784
 m
108 h−1M⊙
(1/3) Ωm,0
Ωm(z)
∆c
18π2
−1/31 +z
10
−1
h−1kpc.(A.4)
After Fourier transform, [63]
u(k|M) =
Z rvir
0
4πr2
M
sinkr
kr ρ(r|M)dr.(A.5)
•The linear matter power spectrumP lin(k)is computed usingCAMB.
•The linear halo bias factor [64]
b(M, z) = 1 + ν2(z)−1
δ(z) ,(A.6)
whereδ(z) =δ cD(z)andν(z) =δ(z)/σ(M).
– 31 –

B Baseline Density Distribution
B.1 Circular Random Array
For a circular array of radiusRand diameterD= 2Rconsisting ofNrandomly dis-
tributed antennas, the probability that the distance between two pointsAandBin the
array is less than or equal to an arbitrary distancedis
P(| ⃗A− ⃗B| ≤d) =
ZZ
s
ZZ
s
P(A)P(B)1| ⃗A− ⃗B|≤ddAdB
=
ZZ
s
ZZ
s
 1
πR2
 1
πR2

1| ⃗A− ⃗B|≤ddAdB,(B.1)
whereP(A) =P(B) = 1/πR 2 is the probability density of finding an antenna at position
AorB. The integral contains a 2D step function1 | ⃗A− ⃗B|≤d that returns 1 when the
distancebetweenthetwopointsislessthandand0otherwise;dAanddBareinfinitesimal
area elements aroundAandB.
Fixing pointAand considering the inner integral
RR
s1| ⃗A− ⃗B|≤ddB, this is equivalent
to the intersection areaS(⃗A, d) =S(r, d)between the array and the small circle of radius
dcentered atA. This area function is isotropic and depends only onr, the radial distance
fromAto the center of the array. Thus, the cumulative probability distribution becomes
P(| ⃗A− ⃗B| ≤d) =
 1
πR2
2ZZ
s
S(rA, d)dA= 2
πR4
Z R
0
rS(r, d)dr.(B.2)
The area functionS(r, d)depends on the relationship betweenr,d, andR. When
d≤R−r,S(r, d) =πd 2; whend≥R+r,S(r, d) =πR 2; and whenR−r < d < R+r,
S(r, d) =r2 arccos
 r2 +R 2 −d 2
2rR

+d 2 arccos
 r2 +d 2 −R 2
2rd

− 1
2
p
(−r+R+D)(r+R−D)(r−R+d)(r+R+d).(B.3)
The probability density distribution for a baseline of lengthdis the derivative of
this CDF with respect tod:
P(d) = ∂P(| ⃗A− ⃗B| ≤d)
∂d = 2
πR4
Z R
0
r ∂S(r, d)
∂d dr
= 4d
πR2

arccos
 d
2R

− d
2R
s
1−
 d
2R
2


= 16d
πD2max

arccos
 d
Dmax

− d
Dmax
s
1−
 d
Dmax
2

 .(B.4)
Therefore, the expected number of baselines of lengthdper area in theuv-plane is
nb(d) = NtotP(d)
2πd = Nant(Nant −1)
4πd P(d).(B.5)
– 32 –

B.2 Two Circular Arrays Separated by a Distance
Suppose there are two circular arrays separated by a distanceL, each with diameter
DandNantennas. We derive the baseline density distribution for baselines formed
between antennas from different arrays.
Let ⃗Lbe the vector from the center of the first arrayAto the center of the second
arrayB. For simplicity, we place the first array at the origin(0,0)and the second at
(L,0), so ⃗L= (L,0). Consider a point in arrayAat position⃗ rA and a point in arrayB
at position ⃗L+⃗ rB, where⃗ ri are relative to their respective array centers. The baseline
formed by these two antennas is⃗b= ⃗L+ (⃗ rB −⃗ rA) = ⃗L+⃗ rwith⃗ r≡⃗ rB −⃗ rA.
Since ⃗bis only a shift of⃗ r, the probability distribution of⃗bfollows Eq. B.4, denoted
here asP intra(d).
Pcross(⃗b) = 1
2π|⃗b− ⃗L|
Pintra(|⃗b− ⃗L|).(B.6)
Assuming isotropy of the baseline distribution function, we integrate over all angles and
convert the vector⃗bto its physical lengthd:
Pcross(d≡ | ⃗b|) =
Z 2π
0
|⃗b| 1
2π|⃗b− ⃗L|
Pintra(|⃗b− ⃗L|)dϕ.(B.7)
Note that only| ⃗b− ⃗L|depends onϕand| ⃗b− ⃗L|=
p
d2 +L 2 −2dLcosϕ. Thus, the
probability distribution function becomes
Pcross(d) =d
Z 2π
0
1
2π
p
d2 +L 2 −2dLcosϕ
Pintra(
p
d2 +L 2 −2dLcosϕ)dϕ.(B.8)
Therefore, the number density of baselines formed by antennas from different arrays is
ncross(d) =N 2d
Z 2π
0
Pintra(
p
d2 +L 2 −2dLcosϕ)
2π
p
d2 +L 2 −2dLcosϕ
dϕ.(B.9)
References
[1] R. Barkana and A. Loeb,In the beginning: The First sources of light and the reionization
of the Universe,Phys. Rept.349(2001) 125 [astro-ph/0010468].
[2] J.R. Pritchard and A. Loeb,Evolution of the 21 cm signal throughout cosmic history,
Phys. Rev. D78(2008) 103511 [0802.2102].
[3] J.R. Pritchard and A. Loeb,21 cm cosmology in the 21st century,Reports on Progress in
Physics75(2012) 086901.
[4] J. Silk,The limits of cosmology: role of the Moon,Phil. Trans. A. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci.
379(2021) 20190561 [2011.04671].
[5] R. Barkana and A. Loeb,A Method for separating the physics from the astrophysics of
high-redshift 21 cm fluctuations,Astrophys. J. Lett.624(2005) L65 [astro-ph/0409572].
– 33 –

[6] B. Carr and J. Silk,Primordial Black Holes as Generators of Cosmic Structures,Mon.
Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.478(2018) 3756 [1801.00672].
[7] M.A. Latif and A. Ferrara,Formation of supermassive black hole seeds,Publ. Astron. Soc.
Austral.33(2016) e051 [1605.07391].
[8] J.L. Bernal, A. Raccanelli, L. Verde and J. Silk,Signatures of primordial black holes as
seeds of supermassive black holes,JCAP05(2018) 017 [1712.01311].
[9]DEScollaboration,Dark Energy Survey Year 3 results: Cosmology from cosmic shear and
robustness to data calibration,Phys. Rev. D105(2022) 023514 [2105.13543].
[10] I.T. Iliev, P.R. Shapiro, A. Ferrara and H. Martel,On the direct detectability of the cosmic
dark ages: 21-cm emission from minihalos,Astrophys. J.572(2002) 123
[astro-ph/0202410].
[11] S. Furlanetto and S.P. Oh,Redshifted 21 centimeter emission from minihalos before
reionization,Astrophys. J.652(2006) 849 [astro-ph/0604080].
[12] A. Loeb and M. Zaldarriaga,Measuring the small - scale power spectrum of cosmic density
fluctuations through 21 cm tomography prior to the epoch of structure formation,Phys.
Rev. Lett.92(2004) 211301 [astro-ph/0312134].
[13]Planckcollaboration,Planck 2018 results. X. Constraints on inflation,Astron.
Astrophys.641(2020) A10 [1807.06211].
[14] S. Gorgolewski,Lunar Radio Astronomy Observatory, inLIL Symposium on Research in
Geosciences and Astronomy, F.J. Malina, ed., p. 78, Jan., 1966.
[15] X. Chen, J. Burns, L. Koopmans, H. Rothkaehi, J. Silk, J. Wu et al.,Discovering the Sky
at the Longest Wavelengths with Small Satellite Constellations,arXiv e-prints(2019)
arXiv:1907.10853 [1907.10853].
[16] L.V.E. Koopmans, R. Barkana, M. Bentum, G. Bernardi, A.-J. Boonstra, J. Bowman
et al.,Peering into the dark (ages) with low-frequency space interferometers,Experimental
Astronomy51(2021) 1641 [1908.04296].
[17] X.-Y. Zhu, Y. Su, Y.-C. Ji, H.-B. Zhang, B. Zhao, J.-d. Li et al.,Ground experiments and
performance evaluation of the Low-Frequency Radio Spectrometer onboard the lander of
Chang’e-4 mission,Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics21(2021) 116 [2012.04347].
[18] J. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Cao and J. An,Formation flying around lunar for ultra-long wave
radio interferometer mission,Journal of Deep Space Expolaration4(2017) 158.
[19] J. Yan, J. Wu, L.I. Gurvits, L. Wu, L. Deng, F. Zhao et al.,Ultra-low-frequency radio
astronomy observations from a Seleno-centric orbit,Experimental Astronomy56(2023)
333 [2212.09590].
[20] L. Chen, H. Falcke, J. Ping and M. Klein Wolt,Development of the Netherlands - China
Low Frequency Explorer (NCLE), in42nd COSPAR Scientific Assembly, vol. 42,
pp. B3.1–26–18, July, 2018.
[21] J.J. Hibbard et al.,Results from NASA’s First Radio Telescope on the Moon: Terrestrial
Technosignatures and the Low-Frequency Galactic Background Observed by ROLSES-1
Onboard the Odysseus Lander,2503.09842.
[22] S.D. Bale, N. Bassett, J.O. Burns, J. Dorigo Jones, K. Goetz, C. Hellum-Bye et al.,
– 34 –

LuSEE ’Night’: The Lunar Surface Electromagnetics Experiment,arXiv e-prints(2023)
arXiv:2301.10345 [2301.10345].
[23] J.O. Burns, J. Lazio, S. Bale, J. Bowman, R. Bradley, C. Carilli et al.,Probing the first
stars and black holes in the early universe with the dark ages radio explorer (dare),
Advances in Space Research49(2012) 433.
[24] J. Burns et al.,A Lunar Farside Low Radio Frequency Array for Dark Ages 21-cm
Cosmology,2103.08623.
[25] X. Chen, J. Yan, L. Deng, F. Wu, L. Wu, Y. Xu et al.,Discovering the sky at the longest
wavelengths with a lunar orbit array,Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A
379(2021) 20190566.
[26] X. Chen, J. Yan, Y. Xu, L. Deng, F. Wu, L. Wu et al.,Discovering the sky at the longest
wavelength mission−a pathfinder for exploring the cosmic dark ages,Chinese Journal of
Space Science43(2023) 43.
[27] K. Artuc and E. de Lera Acedo,The spectrometer development of cosmocube, lunar
orbiting satellite to detect 21-cm hydrogen signal from cosmic dark ages,RAS Techniques
and Instruments4(2024) rzae061
[https://academic.oup.com/rasti/article-pdf/doi/10.1093/rasti/rzae061/61272840/rzae061.pdf].
[28] J. Zhu, E.d.L. Acedo, K. Artuc and X. Chen,Rfsoc receiver calibration system for 21-cm
global spectrum experiments from space: the cosmocube case,RAS Techniques and
Instruments4(2025) rzae064
[https://academic.oup.com/rasti/article-pdf/doi/10.1093/rasti/rzae064/61743811/rzae064.pdf].
[29] M. Sathyanarayana Rao, S. Singh, S. KS, G. BS, K. Sathish, R. Agaram et al.,Pratush
experiment concept and design overview,Experimental Astronomy56(2023) 741.
[30] R. Borade, G.N. George and D.C. Gharpure,FPGA based data acquisition and processing
system for space electric and magnetic sensors (SEAMS), inAmerican Institute of Physics
Conference Series, vol. 2335 ofAmerican Institute of Physics Conference Series,
p. 030005, AIP, Mar., 2021, DOI.
[31] S.e.a. Bandyopadhyay,Conceptual design of the lunar crater radio telescope (lcrt) on the
far side of the moon, in2021 IEEE Aerospace Conference (50100), pp. 1–25, 2021, DOI.
[32] T.J.W. Lazio, J. Burns, D. Jones, J. Kasper, S. Neff, R. MacDowall et al.,The Dark Ages
Lunar Interferometer (DALI) and the Radio Observatory for Lunar Sortie Science
(ROLSS), inAmerican Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts #213, vol. 213 of
American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, p. 451.02, Jan., 2009.
[33] M. Klein Wolt, H. Falcke and L. Koopmans,The Astronomical Lunar Observatory (ALO)
- Probing the cosmological Dark Ages and Cosmic Dawn with a distributed low-frequency
radio array on the Lunar Far Side, inAmerican Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts,
vol. 243 ofAmerican Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, p. 264.01, Feb., 2024.
[34] X. Chen et al.,Large-scale Array for Radio Astronomy on the Farside,Phil. Trans. Roy.
Soc. Lond. A382(2024) 20230094 [2403.16409].
[35] J. Burns, G. Hallinan, J. Lux, A. Romero-Wolf, L. Teitelbaum, T.-C. Chang et al.,
FARSIDE: A Low Radio Frequency Interferometric Array on the Lunar Farside, in
Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, vol. 51, p. 178, Sept., 2019, DOI
[1907.05407].
– 35 –

[36] R.S. Polidan, J.O. Burns, A. Ignatiev, A. Hegedus, J. Pober, N. Mahesh et al.,FarView:
An in-situ manufactured lunar far side radio array concept for 21-cm Dark Ages
cosmology,Adv. Space Res.74(2024) 528 [2404.03840].
[37]Planckcollaboration,Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters,Astron.
Astrophys.641(2020) A6 [1807.06209].
[38] A. Lewis and A. Challinor,The 21cm angular-power spectrum from the dark ages,Phys.
Rev. D76(2007) 083005 [astro-ph/0702600].
[39] D. Tseliakhovich and C. Hirata,Relative velocity of dark matter and baryonic fluids and
the formation of the first structures, Phys. Rev. D82(2010) 083520 [1005.2416].
[40] C. Alcock and B. Paczynski,An evolution free test for non-zero cosmological constant,
Nature281(1979) 358.
[41] R. Barkana,Separating out the Alcock-Paczynski effect on 21cm fluctuations,Mon. Not.
Roy. Astron. Soc.372(2006) 259 [astro-ph/0508341].
[42] K. Ahn, P.R. Shapiro, M.A. Alvarez, I.T. Iliev, H. Martel and D. Ryu,The 21-cm
background from the cosmic dark ages: minihalos and the intergalactic medium before
reionization,New Astron. Rev.50(2006) 179 [astro-ph/0509651].
[43] B. Yue, B. Ciardi, E. Scannapieco and X. Chen,The contribution of the IGM and
minihaloes to the 21-cm signal of reionization, MNRAS398(2009) 2122 [0906.3105].
[44] A. Cooray and R.K. Sheth,Halo Models of Large Scale Structure,Phys. Rept.372(2002)
1 [astro-ph/0206508].
[45] U.-L. Pen,Heating of the Intergalactic Medium, ApJS510(1999) L1.
[46] J. Kim and U.-L. Pen,Redshifted 21-cm Signals in the Dark Ages,arXiv e-prints(2009)
arXiv:0908.1973 [0908.1973].
[47] B. Zygelman,Hyperfine level-changing collisions of hydrogen atoms and tomography of the
dark age universe,Astrophys J.622(2005) .
[48] W.H. Press and P. Schechter,Formation of galaxies and clusters of galaxies by selfsimilar
gravitational condensation,Astrophys. J.187(1974) 425.
[49] D. Huterer,A course in cosmology: from theory to practice, Cambridge University Press
(2023).
[50] Y. Xu, X. Wang and X. Chen,Forecasts on the Dark Energy and Primordial
Non-Gaussianity Observations with the Tianlai Cylinder Array,Astrophys. J.798(2015)
40 [1410.7794].
[51] P. Bull, C. Guandalin and C. Addis,Modes of the Dark Ages 21cm field accessible to a
lunar radio interferometer,Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A382(2024) 20230072
[2403.16955].
[52]Cosmic Visions 21 cmcollaboration,Inflation and Early Dark Energy with a Stage II
Hydrogen Intensity Mapping experiment,1810.09572.
[53] M.P. van Haarlem et al.,LOFAR: The LOw-Frequency ARray, A&A556(2013) A2
[1305.3550].
[54] R. Braun, A. Bonaldi, T. Bourke, E. Keane and J. Wagg,Anticipated Performance of the
Square Kilometre Array – Phase 1 (SKA1),arXiv e-prints(2019) arXiv:1912.12699
[1912.12699].
– 36 –

[55] A. Obuljen, E. Castorina, F. Villaescusa-Navarro and M. Viel,High-redshift
post-reionization cosmology with 21cm intensity mapping,JCAP05(2018) 004
[1709.07893].
[56] J.C. Pober and W. Smith,The Impact of Foregrounds on Dark Ages Measurements with
the Highly Redshifted 21 cm Line,Astrophys. J.990(2025) 34 [2507.22993].
[57] W. Smith and J.C. Pober,Detecting the 21 cm Signal from the Cosmic Dark Ages,
Astrophys. J.984(2025) 116 [2504.08965].
[58] C. van de Bruck and R. Daniel,Inflation and scale-invariant R2 gravity,Phys. Rev. D
103(2021) 123506 [2102.11719].
[59] M. Czerny, T. Kobayashi and F. Takahashi,Running Spectral Index from Large-field
Inflation with Modulations Revisited,Phys. Lett. B735(2014) 176 [1403.4589].
[60] T. Higaki and F. Takahashi,Elliptic inflation: interpolating from natural inflation to
R2-inflation,JHEP03(2015) 129 [1501.02354].
[61] T. Kobayashi and F. Takahashi,Running Spectral Index from Inflation with Modulations,
JCAP01(2011) 026 [1011.3988].
[62] D.L. Lorenzoni, D.I. Kaiser and E. McDonough,Natural inflation with exponentially small
tensor-to-scalar ratio,Phys. Rev. D110(2024) L061302 [2405.13881].
[63] C. Giocoli, M. Bartelmann, R.K. Sheth and M. Cacciato,Halo model description of the
non-linear dark matter power spectrum at k » 1 mpc-1,Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society408(2010) 300–313.
[64] H.J. Mo and S.D.M. White,An Analytic model for the spatial clustering of dark matter
halos,Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.282(1996) 347 [astro-ph/9512127].
– 37 –