Title: Cosmic web stripping and starvation of low-mass filament galaxies in TNG50
Authors: Daria Zakharova, Gabriella De Lucia, Benedetta Vulcani, Lizhi Xie, Stefania Barsanti, Sean McGee
Published: 2026-05-22
Categories: astro-ph.GA

Astronomy & Astrophysicsmanuscript no. main©ESO 2026
May 25, 2026
Cosmic web stripping and starvation of low-mass filament galaxies
in TNG50
Daria Zakharova1 ID , Gabriella De Lucia1,2 ID , Benedetta Vulcani3 ID , Lizhi Xie1,4 ID , Stefania Barsanti5 ID , Sean
McGee6 ID ,
1 INAF – Osservatorio Astronomico di Trieste, Via Tiepolo 11, I-34131 Trieste, Italy
e-mail:dzakharovaa@gmail.com
2 IFPU – Institute for Fundamental Physics of the Universe, Via Beirut 2, I-34151 Trieste, Italy
3 INAF – Osservatorio Astronomico di Padova, Vicolo dell’Osservatorio 5, I-35122 Padova, Italy
4 Tianjin Normal University, Binshuixidao 393, 300387 Tianjin, China
5 Sydney Institute for Astronomy (SIfA), School of Physics, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
6 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK
Received September 30, 20XX
ABSTRACT
Galaxy properties are known to correlate with their location within the cosmic web. However, the role of filaments remains poorly
understood, particularly for low-mass galaxies, which are expected to be more sensitive to environmental effects. In this work, we
use the TNG50-1 simulation to investigate the properties of low-mass8≤log(𝑀𝑠𝑡 𝑎𝑟 /𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 ) ≤10galaxies in filaments and in the
field,whencontrollingforstellarandhalomassandexcludingtheroleofgroupsandclusters.Wefindthattheirintegratedproperties,
including stellar, halo mass assembly and quenched fractions, are similar between the two environments. However, we demonstrate
thatfilamentgalaxiesexhibitsmallerandmoreasymmetriccoldgasdiscswithrespecttotheirfieldcounterparts.Weidentifytwomain
mechanisms driving these differences. For galaxies that entered filaments in the early Universe, during the phase of active accretion,
cosmic web tidal fields modify the accretion of gas and dark matter. In some systems, accretion proceeds at rates comparable to the
field but with a different geometry, leading to more tangential motions in the dark matter halo and, consequently, smaller gas discs.
In others, the tidal field significantly suppresses both gas and dark matter accretion, leading to a starvation-like evolution, in which
galaxies gradually exhaust their gas through star formation and can eventually quench. In contrast, galaxies that fall into filaments at
late times can undergo cosmic web stripping, a rapid hydrodynamical removal of gas analogous to ram-pressure stripping in clusters.
Our results suggest that spatially resolved gas properties are sensitive to several filament-driven environmental mechanisms.
Key words.galaxies: evolution – galaxies: formation – galaxies: structure – galaxies: ISM – large-scale structure of Universe –
methods: numerical
1. Introduction
Galaxies populate a wide range of cosmic web environ-
ments, from voids and walls to filaments, groups, and clus-
ters, and their properties correlate strongly with environment.
Both observations and theoretical models show that galaxies
inside filaments tend to be more massive, less star-forming,
more elliptical, and exhibiting a mass-dependent alignment
of their spin with the filament axis (e.g. Aragón-Calvo et al.
2010;Tempel et al.2014b;Laigle et al.2018;Kraljic et al.2017;
Hasan et al. 2023; Zakharova et al. 2023; Barsanti et al. 2025;
Galárraga-Espinosa et al. 2026). From an observational per-
spective, the cold gas properties of filament galaxies remain
debated. Some studies find that galaxies closer to filaments
contain less cold gas (Kuutma et al. 2017; Crone Odekon et al.
2018; Luber et al. 2019; Castignani et al. 2022a), while oth-
ers report higher gas content in filament galaxies compared to
the field (Kleiner et al. 2017). More recent work shows that
filament galaxies, when excluding group and cluster mem-
bers, exhibit no significant differences from their field counter-
parts (Hoosain et al. 2024; Zakharova et al. 2024; Vulcani et al.
2026).
From a theoretical perspective, the formation of dark matter
haloes and of their galaxies is closely connected to the geometry
and dynamics of the cosmic web (Bond et al. 1996; Katz et al.
2003; Kereš et al. 2005; Dekel et al. 2009; Pichon et al. 2011).
In this framework, galaxy growth proceeds through anisotropic
accretion of matter along filaments, while the large-scale tidal
field regulates and redirects these flows. This anisotropic accre-
tion is reflected in mass-dependent correlations between galaxy
angular momentum and the surrounding filamentary structure.
In particular, galaxy spins are observed to align with fila-
ments(Dubois et al.2014;Welker et al.2014;Codis et al.2018;
Ganeshaiah Veena et al. 2018; Kraljic et al. 2021; Barsanti et al.
2022), indicating that gas and dark matter are accreted pref-
erentially along directions defined by the cosmic web. Haloes
embedded in filaments experience anisotropic tidal forces that
cansuppressthegrowthoflow-masshaloeswhilepromotingthe
growth of more massive systems (Lemson & Kauffmann 1999;
Mo & White1996;Hahn et al.2007;Wang et al.2011;Lee et al.
2017; Borzyszkowski et al. 2017; Musso et al. 2018). As a re-
sult, the cosmic web can reduce or even halt the accretion of
not only dark matter but also cold gas onto low-mass galax-
ies (e.g. Aragon Calvo et al. 2019). Observational support for
this scenario has recently been reported by Zarattini & Aguerri
Article number, page 1
arXiv:2605.23457v1  [astro-ph.GA]  22 May 2026

A&A proofs:manuscript no. main
(2025) and Galárraga-Espinosa et al. (2026), who find that fil-
ament galaxies are redder and less star-forming than their field
counterparts at fixed stellar mass and local density.
Processes operating in filaments may also affect the cold gas
present in galaxies. For instance, cosmic web stripping, driven
by interactions between galaxies and the intra-filament medium,
canefficientlyremovegasfromgalaxies(Benítez-Llambay et al.
2013; Vulcani et al. 2021; Pasha et al. 2023; Luber et al. 2025).
At the same time, filaments are expected to contain a signif-
icant fraction of the cold gas in the Universe and may there-
fore act as reservoirs of accreting material, enhancing gas ac-
cretion onto galaxies (Kleiner et al. 2017; Jego et al. 2025), or
supportstarformation(Vulcani et al.2019).Thedominantmech-
anismmaydependonthecosmicepoch,asfilamentsthemselves
evolve. Theoretical studies show that, depending on the adopted
definition, filaments become progressively thicker, denser, and
more massive as initially thin structures merge into the promi-
nent filaments observed at late times (Cautun et al. 2014;
Cadiou et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021; Galárraga-Espinosa et al.
2024;Bahé & Jablonka2025).Astheirdarkmatterandgascon-
tent increase, the conditions within filaments evolve, potentially
changing the balance between processes that regulate gas inside
galaxies. Also, galaxies spend different amounts of time within
filaments, ranging from a few to several Gyr (Zakharova et al.
2025),andtherelativeimportanceofdifferentprocessesmayde-
pendontimespentinsidefilaments.Finally,filamentsarenotho-
mogeneous environments, and contain a mixture of galaxies, in-
cludingthoseassociatedwithgroupsaswellasmoreisolatedsys-
tems (Tempel et al. 2014a; Sarron et al. 2019; Castignani et al.
2022b; Zakharova et al. 2024).
Inarecentwork(Zakharova et al.2025),weusedpredictions
from the semi-analytic model GAlaxy Evolution and Assem-
bly (GAEA; De Lucia et al. 2024) and the hydrodynamical sim-
ulationIllustrisTNG100-1(Pillepich et al.2018b),toreconstruct
the environmental histories of galaxies in filaments at z=0. We
showed that up to 80% of filament members experienced group
processing during their evolution, highlighting the importance
of group-driven evolution in shaping the observed properties of
filament galaxies. Even when explicitly excluding group-related
processing, both models predict that filaments affect galaxies.
Massive galaxies that entered filaments at early times tend to
gain more stellar mass through mergers than their field counter-
parts, consistent with expectations from enhanced accretion on
massive haloes, with the effect being more pronounced for ear-
lier infall into filaments. In contrast, low-mass galaxies show no
detectabledifferencesinstellarmassassemblyorquenchedfrac-
tioncomparedtothefieldinbothTNG100-1andGAEA,despite
theoretical expectations of suppressed growth at the low-mass
end due to the tidal field of the cosmic web.
Inthiswork,weaimtobettercharacterisethephysicalmech-
anisms through which filaments can affect low-mass galaxies.
We focus on the cold gas component, which relates to gas
accretion onto galaxies and is sensitive to environmental pro-
cesses such as gas removal through cosmic web stripping. At
the same time, cold gas is observationally accessible, enabling
a direct comparison between predictions of current work and
future surveys. We restrict our analysis to low-mass galaxies,
8≤log(𝑀 𝑠𝑡 𝑎𝑟/𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 ) ≤10, as these systems are expected to
be more sensitive to environmental effects due to their shallow
potential wells. For our analysis, we use the high-resolution hy-
drodynamicalsimulationTNG50-1.Wereconstructthefullenvi-
ronmental histories of z=0 galaxies and exclude all systems that
experienced group processing at any point in their evolution, in
order to isolate the impact of the cosmic web.
This paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we describe
the model TNG50-1 and the sample selection for the analysis.
In Section 3, we compare filament and field galaxies at z=0 as a
function of filament infall time, and analyse the mass–size rela-
tion to characterise the differences between the populations and
identify the dominant mechanisms (gas accretion, starvation, or
stripping). In Section 4, we investigate the physical origin and
epochs of these mechanisms and present an additional observa-
tional prediction based on cold-gas asymmetry. In Section 5, we
summarise our findings.
2. Data
2.1. The magnetohydrodynamical simulation IllustrisTNG-50
TNG50-1 (hereafter TNG50; Nelson et al. 2018; Springel et al.
2018;Pillepich et al.2018a;Naiman et al.2018;Marinacci et al.
2018) is a magnetohydrodynamical (MHD) simulation corre-
sponding to a comoving volume of353 ℎ−3 Mpc3, dark matter
particle mass of𝑚𝑑𝑚 ∼4.5·10 5 Msun. The baryonic mass res-
olution (𝑚𝑏 ∼8.5·10 4 Msun) corresponds to a typical spatial
resolution of∼70–140 pc in the star-forming regions of galax-
ies (Pillepich et al. 2019), which is sufficient to robustly resolve
the cold gas distribution and disc sizes analysed in this work.
The model adopts aΛCDM cosmology with parameters con-
sistent with Planck Collaboration et al. (2016):ΩΛ =0.6911,
Ω𝑚 =0.3089,Ω 𝑏 =0.0486,𝐻 0 =67.74km sec −1 Mpc−1,
𝜎8 =0.8159,𝑛 𝑠 = 0.9667.
TNG50 follows the formation and evolution of galaxies, in-
cludingallrelevantphysicalprocessessuchasradiativegascool-
ing and heating, star formation in the dense interstellar medium,
chemical enrichment from stellar evolution, galactic winds from
stellar feedback, and feedback from supermassive black holes.
Theevolutionofdarkmatter,cosmicgas,stars,andsupermassive
black holes is followed from redshift z=127 to z=0, with model
outputs stored at 100 snapshots. The model parameters are cal-
ibrated to reproduce the cosmic star formation rate density, the
galaxy stellar mass function and the stellar-to-halo mass relation
atz=0.InIllustrisTNG,thegascomponentisevolvedasahydro-
dynamic fluid using the moving-mesh code AREPO, spanning
a wide range of temperatures and densities. Star-forming gas is
modelledwithasubgridmultiphaseprescriptionandformsonce
thehydrogennumberdensityexceeds𝑛 H ∼0.13 cm −3.Including
anexplicittreatmentofgasdynamics,TNG50accountsautomat-
ically for the interaction between galaxies and the surrounding
medium. In particular, it includes explicit gas stripping (such
as cosmic web stripping), tidal interactions, harassment, and the
effects of large-scale cosmic web tidal fields.
2.2. Sample selection
We follow the environmental history reconstruction framework
developed in Zakharova et al. (2025). First, we identify robust
filamentarystructuresateachsnapshotwithin0<z<4usingthe
DisPerSE filament finder (Sousbie et al. 2011; Sousbie 2011).
Filament identification is performed at each snapshot, adopt-
ing a stellar-mass threshold so that each snapshot contains the
same number of galaxies. We then generate ten realisations per
snapshot, by randomly sampling 85% of the galaxies, and run-
ning DisPerSE on each subsample with a 5𝜎persistence level.
We define the distance to the filament as the median 3D dis-
tance to the nearest filament spine across the ten realisations.
We trace the main (most massive) progenitors of all low-mass
8≤log(𝑀 𝑠𝑡 𝑎𝑟/𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 ) ≤10z=0 galaxies back to z∼4, retaining
Article number, page 2

D. Zakharova et al.: Cosmic web stripping and starvation of low-mass filament galaxies in TNG50
only progenitors withlog(𝑀𝑠𝑡 𝑎𝑟/𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 )>7. At each snapshot,
we use the progenitor positions and the reconstructed filament
spines to define infall into filaments𝜏fils as the first time a pro-
genitor crosses a distance of 1 Mpc/h from a filament. We also
trace the central/satellite status of each progenitor at all epochs,
and retain only galaxies that remain centrals throughout their
history,therebyavoidingcontaminationfromsatellite-processed
and backsplash systems (this removes approximately 65% of the
low-massgalaxies atz=0).Wedefine satellitesasgalaxies resid-
inginhaloesofmassaroundlog(𝑀 ℎ𝑎𝑙𝑜 /𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 ) ≥10wherethey
are not the central, and we require this condition to be satisfied
for at least two consecutive snapshots to ensure a robust identifi-
cationofinfall.Ifagalaxymeetsthiscriterionatanypointalong
its history, it is excluded from the sample. We focus exclusively
ontwopopulations:(i)Field->Filaments(FF)galaxies(hereafter
referred to as filament galaxies), defined as systems that fall into
filamentsfromthefieldandremaincentralthroughouttheirevo-
lution (avoided group processing). This population is expected
to experience only filament impact. (ii) Field galaxies: centrals
that remain farther than1 Mpc/hfrom any filament at z=0 and
haveneverbeeninsidefilamentsorotherhaloes.Weassumethis
population as our control sample. Out of the 7342 low-mass z=0
galaxies in TNG50-1, our final selections identify 431 filament
galaxiesand2147fieldgalaxies,whiletheremainingsystemsare
excluded because they experienced group processing. The rela-
tivefractionsofgalaxieswithotherenvironmentalhistories(e.g.
satellites and backsplash systems) are similar to those found in
TNG100andwerediscussedindetailinZakharova et al.(2025).
For each galaxy and all its progenitors, we extract positions
and velocities, gas mass (all gas particles associated with the
subhalo), stellar mass, dark matter mass and instantaneous star-
formation rate associated with each subhalo. Moreover, we also
extract the spatial distribution of gas and dark matter particles
gravitationally bound to each galaxy. We identify cold gas as
gas particles with temperatures𝑇 <10 5 K, and star-forming
gas as gas particles withStarFormationRate>0. Using gas or
dark matter particles, we compute the three-dimensional radii
enclosing 90 per cent of the cold gas mass (or dark matter) and
ofthestar-forminggasmass,denotedas𝑅 90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 (𝑅90%,𝑑𝑚)
and𝑅 90%,𝑆𝐹, respectively.
We divide filament galaxies into four bins according to their
infalltimeintofilaments:𝜏 fils ≤3,3< 𝜏 fils ≤6,6< 𝜏 fils ≤9,and
𝜏fils >9Gyr ago. For each bin, we construct a control sample of
field galaxies matched in stellar and halo mass at z=0, in order
toisolateenvironmentaleffectsbeyondmass-driventrends.This
procedure is repeated 100 times to account for uncertainties in
the mass-matching procedure. The matching is performed inde-
pendently within each𝜏fils bin. Enforcing a consistent matching
across all bins would ensure identical mass distributions, but re-
duce the sample size. We therefore adopt independent matching
tomaximisestatistics,andverifiedthatthischoicedoesnotaffect
our results.
WeconfirminAppendixAthattheresultsofZakharova et al.
(2025)alsoholdforlow-massgalaxiesinTNG50-1,thatfilament
andfieldgalaxiesexhibitindistinguishablestellarmassassembly
historiesandquenchedfractions.Thesimilarityinstellarandhalo
mass assembly histories allows us to compare filament and field
galaxies at any epoch over 0 < z < 4, even though the matching
is performed at z=0.
3. Results
Figure1showsthemediandeviationdx SFMRfromthestarforma-
tionrate–stellarmassmainsequence,computedindependentlyat
Fig. 1: DeviationdxSFMR from star-formation rate - stellar mass
relation (estimated for each snapshot separately) as a function
of cosmic time for present-day low-mass galaxies. Each panel
referstodifferentinfalltimesintofilaments;differentcoloursare
for field and filament galaxies (for the field, we show the 100
stellar-mass–matchedrealisations).Thelower-leftcornerofeach
panelindicatesthenumberoffilamentgalaxiesand𝑍 off,defined
as the offset between filament and field galaxies in units of the
field scatter.
eachsnapshotforallstar-forminglow-massgalaxieswithspecific
star-formationrate𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅 >10 −11year−1.Itshowsthatregardless
of the infall time, filament galaxies and their field counterparts
havedx SFMR >−1, i.e., they remain within one scatter of the
star-forming main sequence at all epochs.
However, galaxies that entered filaments6< 𝜏 fils ≤9and
𝜏fils >9Gyr ago lie below the fielddxSFMR. The suppression in
dxSFMR for galaxies with6< 𝜏 fils ≤9emerges around∼4Gyr
ago, while for𝜏fils >9it appears earlier, at∼5Gyr ago. We
quantify this difference at𝑡lb =0in units of the field scatter as
𝑍off = 𝑑 𝑥fil−𝑑 𝑥field
𝜎field
,where𝑑𝑥 filand𝑑𝑥 fieldarethemediandeviations
forfilamentandfieldgalaxies,respectively,and𝜎 fieldisthescatter
of the field population. These values are indicated in the lower-
left corner of each panel. For𝜏fils >9, we find|𝑍 off|>4𝜎,
indicating a highly statistically significant difference between
filament and field galaxies. For6< 𝜏fils ≤9,|𝑍 off|lies between
1and2𝜎;althoughformallylesssignificant,aclearvisualoffset
is apparent. In contrast, galaxies with3< 𝜏fils ≤6and𝜏 fils <3
show no significant deviation from the field with|𝑍off|<1,
maintaining similardxSFMR values over their entire evolution.
TNG50-1 reveals a mild but statistically significant suppres-
sion of star formation in filament galaxies that have resided in
filamentsformorethan∼6Gyr,suggestingasubtleenvironmen-
tal effect likely acting on the gas component without producing
strong signatures such as quenching or gas deficiency.
Article number, page 3

A&A proofs:manuscript no. main
3.1. Mass-size relations for galaxies in filaments at z=0
The sizes of gas discs are sensitive to environmental pro-
cesses (e.g., Conger et al. 2025; Vulcani et al. 2026). In the case
ofenhancedgasaccretioninsidefilaments,weexpectlargerdisc
sizes for the filament population. On the other hand, if the tidal
fieldofthecosmicwebdisturbsorsuppressescoldgasaccretion,
thisshouldlimitthesubsequentradialgrowth,potentiallyleading
tosmallergasdiscsatfixedstellarmass.Finally,instripping-like
mechanisms, gas removal leads to truncated gas discs and thus
smaller discs.
Figure 2 shows the stellar mass–𝑅90%,cold gas relation for
galaxies in filaments and in the field at z=0, split into four bins
of infall time into filaments. Individual galaxies are shown as
points. The cold gas extends over a wide range, from∼50to
150kpc, and shows a dependence on stellar mass. Fig. 2 shows
that filament galaxies systematically lie below field galaxies in
all four panels.
To quantify this difference, we use an analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA), which tests whether a single relation can describe
both environments, or whether additional terms accounting for
the environment are required. This method fits a linear relation
of the form𝑅90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 =𝑎·log(𝑀 𝑠𝑡 𝑎𝑟/𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 ) +𝑏simulta-
neously for both environments, treating stellar mass as a con-
tinuous covariate and environment as a categorical factor. The
statistical significance of these differences is quantified through
the𝑝-value,whichmeasurestheprobabilitythatthefilamentand
field galaxies can be described by the same mass-size relation.
Low𝑝-valuesindicatethatseparaterelationsarerequiredforthe
two environments. For each panel of Figure 2, we fit the rela-
tion separately for the 100 mass-matched realisations. For each
realisation, we compute the difference between the best-fitting
parameters of the two relations, defined asΔ =𝑏filaments −𝑏 field,
anddSlope=𝑎 filaments −𝑎 field.Thecorrespondingp-valuesquan-
tifythesignificanceofthesedifferences.Fig.2showstheresults
of the linear fit as lines. The bottom left corner of each panel
presents the median difference between interceptsΔ50 with 1𝜎
confidence intervals and fraction of the 100 field realisations for
which the difference with respect to the filament fit is statisti-
cally significant𝑓(𝑝 Δ <0.05). The right top corner represents
the same, but for median slopedSlope50 and its significance
𝑓(𝑝 𝑆 <0.05).
The ANCOVA confirms that filament galaxies have smaller
coldgasdiscs,sincetheoffsetinthemass–sizerelationisalways
statistically significant, with𝑓(𝑝 Δ <0.05)=1in all panels and
the magnitude of this offset isΔ50 ≈ −16−18kpc. Also, the
panel with𝜏 fils <3Gyr shows a large fraction of realisations
that have a statistically significant difference𝑓(𝑝𝑆 <0.05)=
0.72in the slope of the mass-size relation. The size difference
between filament and field galaxies becomes less significant for
log10 (𝑀 𝑠𝑡 𝑎𝑟/𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 )>9.5. This indicates that the mechanism
driving the detected differences for galaxies that only recently
came close to a filament is stellar-mass dependent. In contrast,
forearlierinfalltimes,thefractionofrealisationwithstatistically
significant difference of slope is low (𝑓(𝑝𝑆 <0.05)<0.5),
suggesting that the processes responsible for the size differences
are independent of stellar mass.
In Appendix B, we show that𝑅50%,cold gas follows the same
trends.Thissuggeststhattheimpactofthefilamentsisnotlimited
tothetruncationoftheoutergas,butalsoinvolveschangesinthe
internal gas distribution, consistent with either suppressed disc
growth or redistribution of gas within the disc.
We repeat the same analysis for the size of star-forming
regions𝑅90,sfr in Figure 3. We find that the star-forming gas is
Fig. 2: The mass-size𝑅 90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 relation for filament low-
massgalaxiesandtheirstellarandhalomassmatchedatz=0field
counterparts in bins of filament infall time𝜏fils. Points indicate
individual galaxies. Solid lines show the best-fit linear relation
forfilamentgalaxies,andforthe100fieldrealisations.Thetextin
eachpanelreportsthemediandifferencesinthelinearregression
coefficients(interceptΔ 50,andslopedSlope 50)betweenfilament
and field samples. The second line gives the fraction of the 100
realisations for which a statistically significant difference (𝑝 <
0.05) between filament and field galaxies is found (see text).
located in the very centre of galaxies, rarely exceeding the inner
20 kpc, both for galaxies in the field and filaments. There is no
significantdifferencebetweenfilamentandfieldgalaxies,regard-
lessofthetimeofinfallintofilaments.Thisisconsistentwiththe
absence of differences in integrated properties, indicating that
star formation proceeds similarly in filament and field galaxies.
Therefore, the impact of filaments is confined to regions beyond
the star-forming core, primarily affecting the outer gas reservoir
rather than the central star-forming regions. This finding is con-
sistentwithrecentobservationalstudiesthatfoundnosignificant
difference in the star formation concentration index in filaments
and voids (Barsanti et al. 2026).
Taken together, we find no evidence for enhanced gas accre-
tioninfilaments,whichwouldproducelargerandmoreextended
discs. Rather, filament galaxies exhibit systematically smaller
gas discs across all infall-time bins, indicating that their radial
growth is suppressed or truncated. This behaviour is consistent
eitherwithreducedgasaccretion,forexample,duetotidalinter-
actions with the cosmic web, or with direct truncation of the gas
disc via cosmic web stripping. We explore these possibilities in
more detail below.
Article number, page 4

D. Zakharova et al.: Cosmic web stripping and starvation of low-mass filament galaxies in TNG50
Fig. 3: The same as Fig. 2 but for 90% of star-forming gas.
3.2. Growth of gas disc size inside filaments
To establish which processes lead to smaller gas disc sizes of
filament galaxies, we examine the evolution of𝑅90,cold gas for
filamentgalaxiesbeforeandafterinfallintofilaments.Thisallows
us to determine whether galaxies initially grow their gas discs
and subsequently experience rapid truncation, consistent with
stripping-likeprocesses(cosmicwebstripping),orwhethertheir
disc growth is gradually suppressed due to reduced cold gas
accretion driven by tidal fields of the cosmic web.
We compare the growth rate of the cold gas disc size,
𝑅90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 , for galaxies residing in filaments before and af-
tertheirinfall,tracingthemainprogenitor,andcontrastingthese
trends with their field counterparts to which we assign "mock
infall times" (see below). An illustrative example is shown in
Fig. 4. The grey line shows the𝑅90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 of the example
galaxymeasuredateachsnapshot.Toavoidspuriousfluctuations
in𝑅 90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 arisingfromsnapshot-to-snapshotvariations,we
applyaLOESS(locallyestimatedscatterplotsmoothing)regres-
siontoobtainasmoothedrepresentationofthetrend(blackline).
Then, we estimate the growth rate of the disc radius by calcu-
lating the meand𝑅/d𝑡separately before infall and after infall.
A positived𝑅/d𝑡indicates the growth of the disc sizes, while a
negative value corresponds to a truncation of the gas disc.
Weapplythesameproceduretofilamentandfieldgalaxiesby
assigningtothelatteramockinfalltimetomatchthedistribution
of filament infall times. This allows us to have pre- and after-
infall phases also for field galaxies, and to compute their growth
ratesusinganidenticalmethodologytothatadoptedforfilament
galaxies.Werecallthatfieldandfilamentgalaxiesareconstructed
tohavethesamestellarandhalomassdistribution,ensuringafair
comparison between the two populations within each𝜏fils bins.
TheoutcomeofthisprocedureisshowninFig.5.Thefirstrow
presentsthedistributionofmeand𝑅/d𝑡beforeinfallforfilament
Fig. 4: Example of the growth rate of the cold-gas disc size
𝑅90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 forasinglefilamentgalaxyasafunctionofcosmic
time.Thethickgreycurveshows𝑅 90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 estimatedateach
snapshot, while the black line shows its locally smoothed trend.
The evolution is analysed separately before (white region) and
after(blueregion)thegalaxy’sinfallintothefilamentbycomput-
ing the meand𝑅/d𝑡(kpc/Gyr −1) in each region. For this galaxy,
the pre-infall phase exhibits rapid disc growth, while the galaxy
undergoes disc truncation after entering the filament, consistent
with stripping inside the filament.
andfieldgalaxies.WeperformaKolmogorov-Smirnov(KS)test
100timestoassesswhetherthegrowthrateforfilamentgalaxies
differs statistically from that measured in the field. Almost all
galaxiesbeforeinfallexhibitpositived𝑅/d𝑡,indicatingthattheir
gas discs grow in size before entering filaments, with a median
growthrateof∼4–6kpcGyr −1.Filamentgalaxiesandtheirfield
counterparts exhibit similar distributions, and the KS test does
not reveal any significant difference for the disc growth rate be-
foreinfall:lessthan30%oftherealisationshave𝑝-valuesbelow
0.05, except for the𝜏fils <3 Gyrbin. The difference between
𝜏fils <3 Gyrand the field galaxies may reflect environmental
effects prior to filament infall. One possible explanation is that
recentlyaccretedfilamentgalaxieswereinfluencedbyothercos-
micwebenvironments,suchaswallsorlower-densityfilamentary
structures, whose tidal fields could have affected their properties
before entering filaments.
The bottom panels of Fig. 5 show the evolution of disc sizes
after infall into filaments, compared to the field. The KS test
reveals that galaxies inside filaments are statistically different
from their field counterparts independently of the accretion time
(𝑓(𝑝 <0.05)=1). Filament galaxies exhibit a shift ofd𝑅/d𝑡
towardslowerandnegativevalues,relativetothefield,withade-
pendence on the𝜏fils bin. For filament galaxies with𝜏fils >9the
medianvalueis2.7±1.9 kpc Gyr −1 against4.3±2.2 kpc Gyr −1
for the field sample. However, the fraction of galaxies with neg-
atived𝑅/d𝑡remains small (9±3%for filament galaxies and
0+0.5
−0 %for the field), indicating that filament galaxies primarily
experience a slowdown in size growth rather than disk trunca-
tion. We interpret this as evidence of a starvation-like process
affecting early infallers into filaments.
Forgalaxiesthatbecomepartofafilamentatlatertimes,the
fraction of galaxies withd𝑅/d𝑡 <0after infall increases from
9±3%to20±3%,33±4%, and40±4%from the right to
the left, bottom panels of Fig. 5. The corresponding fractions
for mass-matched field galaxies are1.9±1.5%,5±2%, and
16±3%,respectively.Thisexcessoffilamentgalaxieswithneg-
atived𝑅/d𝑡indicates the presence of gas disc truncation inside
Article number, page 5

A&A proofs:manuscript no. main
Fig. 5: Growth rate of the cold gas disc radius𝑅90%,cold gas for filament galaxies compared to field galaxies, shown separately before
infall (top row) and after infall (bottom row) into filaments. For field galaxies, a mock infall time is assigned (see text), allowing
the same before/after segmentation and a consistent estimate of the growth rates. All 100 stellar- and halo-mass–matched field
realisations are shown in every panel. The vertical lines indicate the median growth rate and the corresponding1𝜎spread. The
top-left corner of each panel reports the fraction of field realisations that show a statistically significant difference with respect to
filament galaxies, according to the KS test (𝑝 <0.05).
filaments, becoming more pronounced for more recent infallers.
This indicates a transition in the dominant physical mechanism
with infall time, from suppressed growth in early infallers to
increasingly important truncation.
To summarise, we find that the smaller gas disc sizes of
filament galaxies at z=0 arise after infall and depend on the time
spent within filaments. Galaxies that entered filaments at early
times (𝜏fils >9 Gyr) exhibit a suppression of disc growth that is
consistent with reduced gas accretion. An increasing fraction of
more recent infallers suffer from a truncation of the gas disc.
3.3. Cold gas content within filament galaxies
In this section, we examine the evolution of the cold gas reser-
voir. In particular, we measure the cold gas mass𝑀90%,cold gas
enclosed within𝑅 90%,cold gas to complement the size evolution
analysis discussed in the previous section. We classify filament
galaxies according to the evolution of their cold gas mass af-
ter infall, in order to determine whether they continue to grow
their cold gas reservoir or instead exhibit a decrease in cold gas
mass over time. The rate of gas loss provides a key diagnostic to
distinguish between a gradual decline of the cold gas reservoir
expectedinstarvation-likescenarios,andamorerapiddepletion
that corresponds to a stripping-like process.
We classify galaxies based on the evolution of their cold gas
reservoir after infall into filaments as illustrated in Fig. 6. For
each galaxy, we measure the mass of cold gas𝑀90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠
tracing its main progenitor up to𝑧≃4(grey line) and smooth
over time using a LOESS regression (black line). For each
galaxy, we compute the change in cold gas mass after infall
asΔ𝑀 obs =𝑀 𝑧=0 −𝑀 𝑖𝑛 𝑓 𝑎𝑙𝑙. Galaxies whose cold gas reser-
voir remains approximately unchanged or increases after in-
fallΔ𝑀 obs/𝑀 𝜏infall ≥ −0.1, are classified as gas-accreting (blue
zone in Fig. 6). If the cold gas reservoir decreases by more
than 10%, we compare the observed gas loss with the deple-
tionexpectedfromstarformation.ThereferencedepletionΔ𝑀 ref
is estimated by integrating the median star formation rate of
field galaxies (stellar and halo mass matched samples) over
the same time interval after infall. We then compute the ratio
𝑅=|Δ𝑀 obs|/|Δ𝑀 ref |.If𝑅≲3,thegasdeclineisconsistentwith
consumption by star formation alone and the galaxy is classified
as starvation-like (red zone in Fig. 6). The threshold𝑅=3is
motivated by previous studies showing that stellar feedback in
low-mass galaxies can drive gas outflows with mass loading fac-
Article number, page 6

D. Zakharova et al.: Cosmic web stripping and starvation of low-mass filament galaxies in TNG50
Fig. 6: Example illustrating the method used to classify the evo-
lutionofthecoldgasmass𝑀 90%,cold gas afterinfallintofilaments.
The classification is based on the comparison between the cold
gas mass at the time of infall and its final value at z=0. We con-
sider three possible phases: gas-accreting corresponds to cases
where the cold gas mass grows or does not decrease by more
than10%(blueregion).Astarvation-likephaseoccurswhenthe
galaxy does not accrete cold gas and gradually consumes its gas
throughstarformation(redregion).Astripping-likephasecorre-
sponds to cases where the cold gas mass decreases more rapidly
than expected from star formation alone, indicating direct gas
removal (purple region). The upper panel shows a galaxy domi-
natedbygasstripping(samegalaxyasinFig.4),whilethelower
panel shows a starvation-like evolution.
tors of∼2–3(e.g., Muratov et al. 2015). Therefore, values of
𝑅 >3indicate gas loss significantly faster than can be explained
bystarformationalone,pointingtoadditionalenvironmentalgas
removal, and the galaxy is classified as stripping-like (purple
zone in Fig. 6).
Weapplythisproceduretoallfilamentgalaxiesandestimate
the relative occurrence of different cold gas evolution scenarios
in bins of infall time in Fig. 7. The dominant phase for low-
mass filament galaxies is gas accretion, independent of the infall
time. However, a non-negligible fraction of galaxies exhibit a
reduction of their cold gas mass after infall. Both the fraction
of such systems and the dominant mechanism responsible for
the gas depletion depend on the time of infall into the filament.
For approximately one quarter of early infallers (𝜏fils >9 Gyr),
the evolution of the cold gas reservoir is consistent with gas
consumptionbystarformation,withoutevidenceforongoinggas
accretionoradditionalgasremoval.InAppendixC,weshowthat
∼90% of field galaxies classified in the same way are consistent
with continued gas accretion. The significantly larger fraction
of filament galaxies with declining gas reservoirs indicates the
presence of suppressed gas accretion. We argue that this can be
explained by a starvation-like scenario driven by the tidal field
of the cosmic web, which also leads to the cessation of gas disc
growth, as shown in the previous section.
Fig. 7: Classification of gas evolution scenarios for filament
galaxies, in four bins of filament-infall time. Each bar shows
the fractional contribution with binomial uncertainties indicated
inside each segment.
In addition, we identify a population of galaxies whose gas
evolution cannot be explained by star formation alone. The frac-
tion of these systems increases towards later infall times, indi-
cating that stripping-like processes become progressively more
important. These systems exhibit a stripping-like behaviour, ac-
counting for16±4%and20±4%in the intermediate bins, and
reaching37±5%for the most recent infallers (𝜏 fils <3 Gyr).
Thistrendisconsistentwiththeresultspresentedintheprevious
section.Thesimultaneouspresenceofrapidgasremovalandgas
disc truncation points to cosmic web stripping.
4. Discussion
We investigate the impact of the filaments on galaxy evolution
using the TNG50-1 simulation, focusing on galaxies’ gaseous
component.Severalpreviousstudiesreportlittleornodifference
between filament and field galaxy populations once stellar or
halomassiscontrolledfor,intermsoftheirintegratedproperties
such as colours, luminosities, morphologies and star-formation
rate(e.g.,Alpaslan et al.2015;O’Kane et al.2024;Navdha et al.
2025).TNG50-1predictsthatfilamentgalaxieshavesmallergas
discs than stellar- and halo-mass-matched field galaxies, despite
exhibiting similar integrated properties. In Appendix D, we also
show that the morphology of their disc is more asymmetrical
than that of field galaxies. We show that several mechanisms
operate within filaments, affecting the gas evolution of galaxies
after infall onto a filament. To fully understand this behaviour,
it is necessary to consider also the accretion of their host dark
matter haloes.
To quantify changes in dark matter and gas accretion, we
apply the same methodology as in Section 3.2. For each galaxy,
wemeasurethemeanrateofchangeofdarkmattermass(alldark
matter particles that are gravitationally bound to the subhalo)
and cold gas mass, and their dark matter𝑅90%,𝑑𝑚 and gas sizes
𝑅90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 , after infall into filaments. We focus on two infall
bins,𝜏 fils <3 Gyrand𝜏 fils >9 Gyr. Fig. 8 shows the median
growth rates of dark matter and cold gas masses and sizes for
Article number, page 7

A&A proofs:manuscript no. main
Fig. 8: Growth rates of dark matter halo and cold gas disc mass
(left) and size (right) for low-mass filament galaxies after infall.
For each identified gas evolution mechanism after infall, median
values with1𝜎uncertainties (16th–84th percentiles) are shown
for galaxies with𝜏fils >9 Gyr(top) and𝜏 fils <3 Gyr(bottom).
Filament galaxies are compared to their field counterparts, with
shadedregionsindicatingtherangeofvaluescoveredbythefield
population.
thesepopulations,comparedtotheirfieldcounterparts.Recently
accreted galaxies have already been shown to exhibit signatures
ofcosmicwebstripping,whileforearlyinfallers,themechanism
responsible for the suppression of gas accretion remains less
clear.Bycomparingtheevolutionofgasanddarkmatterinthese
tworegimes,weaimtobetterconstrainthephysicalmechanisms
driving this behaviour.
We complement the analysis of mass growth with additional
diagnosticsofhalodynamicsandstructure.Inparticular,weaim
to assess whether the suppression of gas accretion in filament
galaxies is linked to changes in the dynamical state and assem-
bly of their host dark matter haloes. Borzyszkowski et al. (2017)
showed that low-mass haloes affected by tidal fields of cosmic
webexhibitvelocitydistributionswithanenhancedcontribution
of tangential motions. Motivated by this, we consider the dark
matter velocity anisotropy parameter,𝛽DM =1− 𝜎2
𝑡
2𝜎 2𝑟
, which
traces the relative importance of radial and tangential motions.
We also quantify halo shape using the minor-to-major axis ratio,
𝑐/𝑎, as an indicator of anisotropic mass accretion. Values close
to 1 correspond to nearly spherical systems, typically associated
with dynamically relaxed haloes, whereas lower values of𝑐/𝑎
indicate increasingly elongated, triaxial structures. Finally, we
examine the baryon-to-dark matter mass ratio (𝑀bar/𝑀DM) and
the offsetdxSFMR from the star formation rate–stellar mass rela-
tion at z=0, to link halo assembly to the present-day gas content
and star formation activity of galaxies.
4.1. Cosmic web tidal fields
In this section, we focus on galaxies that entered filaments at
early cosmic times𝜏 fils >9 Gyrago. Fig. 8 shows that gas-
accreting galaxies continue to grow in both dark matter and gas
mass at rates comparable to the field, but exhibit suppressed
growth of their cold gas discs. Their dark matter and cold gas
massgrowthratesare0.032and0.034dex Gyr −1,consistentwith
the field values within uncertainties, with statistically significant
differences found in only 0% and 1% of the field realisations. At
thesametime,theirdarkmattersizesalsogrowatratessimilarto
those in the field (∼4.3 kpc Gyr−1), with significant differences
in only 1% of realisations. However, the growth of their cold gas
discs is suppressed relative to the field (3.1 vs. 4.3kpc Gyr−1,
although still within uncertainties), with statistically significant
differences in 100% of realisations.
We explain lower rates of cold gas disc growth by the pres-
ence of tidal fields of the cosmic web that affect the geometry of
accretion on subhaloes. Fig. 9 shows the velocity anisotropy pa-
rameterofdarkmatterhaloandtheirshapeinthetoprow.These
systems exhibit a shift of𝛽DM towards negative values, indicat-
ing a larger contribution of tangential motions compared to field
galaxies, which are characterised by more radially biased orbits.
The increased contribution of tangential motions suggests that
accretionisnolongerdominatedbyradialinfall.Suchaconfigu-
ration can lead to a more centrally concentrated gas distribution
andlimittheradialgrowthofthegasdisc,evenwhenthetotalgas
mass and halo growth remain comparable to those of galaxies in
thefield.Inthissense,thesmallergasdiscsizesarenotdrivenby
alackofaccretion,butbythewayinwhichtheaccretedmaterial
isredistributedwithinthehalopotential(Mo et al.1998).Lastly,
we note these galaxies retain halo growth rates, shapes, baryon
fractions, and sSFR comparable to their field counterparts.
Fig. 9: Properties at z=0 of low-mass gas-accreting filament
galaxies with𝜏 fils >9 Gyr. Distributions of the dark matter
velocityanisotropyparameter𝛽 DM (topleft),haloshape𝑐/𝑎(top
right), baryon-to-dark matter ratio𝑀bar/𝑀DM (bottom left), and
offset to the star-formation rate-stellar mass main sequence dx
(bottom right) for galaxies that exhibit starvation-like evolution,
compared to stellar- and halo-mass-matched field galaxies. Ver-
tical dashed lines indicate median values, while shaded regions
show the 16th–84th percentiles. The bottom-left corner of each
panelreportsthemedianKSstatistic𝐷 50 andthefractionof100
realisations with𝑝 <0.05.
In contrast, starvation-like systems show reduced growth
of both dark matter mass (0.018dex Gyr −1) and size (∼
2.6 kpc Gyr−1), together with a depletion of their cold gas reser-
voir driven by star formation (−0.020 dex Gyr−1), and almost
no growth of the cold gas disc after infall (∼1.1 kpc Gyr−1),
with all these differences being statistically significant in 100%
of realisations.
Article number, page 8

D. Zakharova et al.: Cosmic web stripping and starvation of low-mass filament galaxies in TNG50
Fig.10:SameasFig.9butforgas-accreting𝜏 fils >9 Gyrfilament
galaxies.
The top-left panel of Fig. 10 shows that starved filament
galaxies and the field have𝛽 DM ≈0. The KS test indicates
the difference is not statistically significant. The top-right panel
shows that starved galaxies reside in more spherical haloes than
field galaxies, indicating a lack of elongation due to diffuse ac-
cretion in recent times. Taken together, these results imply that
starved galaxies tend to live in more relaxed haloes, consistent
with a lower growth rate of the dark matter component.
In addition, starved galaxies exhibit systematically lower
baryon-to-dark matter ratios at z=0. We checked that this ratio
decreases with time after infall, in contrast to field galaxies, for
which it remains approximately constant over time. To quantify
this effect, we compare the average growth rates of the baryon
mass (stellar and gas) and dark matter components after infall
intofilaments,definingΔ𝑔=
D
𝑑log𝑀 𝑏𝑎𝑟
𝑑𝑡
E
−
D
𝑑log𝑀 DM
𝑑𝑡
E
.Wefind
that starvation-like galaxies are systematically shifted towards
lower values ofΔ𝑔compared to their field counterparts, with a
medianΔ𝑔=−0.029 +0.010
−0.030, while the field distribution is cen-
tred aroundΔ𝑔=0.006 +0.003
−0.004. The KS test confirms that these
distributions are statistically distinct:100%of field realisations
have𝑝 <0.05.Thisdemonstratesthat,afterinfallintofilaments,
the growth of baryon mass is more strongly suppressed than that
of the dark matter halo, consistent with the expectation that gas
is more susceptible to environmental disturbances. This differ-
ential impact on baryonic and dark matter components provides
evidence that filaments create a disbalance in accretion, prefer-
entially suppressing gas accretion.
Starved filament galaxies show systematically lowerdxSFMR
compared to field systems, and include a population of quies-
centgalaxiesresidinginfilamentswithoutanygroupprocessing,
consistent with a long-term lack of gas supply. We find that the
offset reported in Fig. 1 is entirely driven by the starvation-like
population: the difference between filament and field galaxies
largely disappears once starved galaxies are excluded (in both
6< 𝜏 fils ≤9and𝜏 fils >9bins). This demonstrates that the
suppression of star formation in filaments is not a feature of all
filament populations, but is instead associated with systems that
have ceased to accrete gas.
Finally,wesuggestthatstarvedandgas-accretingpopulations
areaffectedbythesameunderlyingmechanism,inwhichthetidal
field of the cosmic web modulates the geometry of accretion
onto galaxies. The same process acts on both populations but
with different efficiency: in some galaxies, it leads to a partial
suppression of gas accretion and alters its spatial distribution,
primarilyaffectingtheradialgrowthofgasdiscs,whileinothers
itresultsinamorecompleteshutdownofbothgasanddarkmatter
accretion, producing a starvation-like evolution. We note that
galaxies with𝜏fils >9 Gyrentered filaments close to the peak of
cosmic accretion activity. Therefore, any disruption of accretion
attheseepochsisexpectedtohavelong-lastingconsequencesfor
both baryonic and dark matter components.
Wespeculatethatthedivergencebetweenstarvation-likeand
gas-accreting systems is determined by a combination of the
tidal field of the host filament and the pre-infall accretion state
of the galaxy. Firstly, filaments span a wide range of masses,
densities, and tidal field strengths, so their impact on accretion
is likely not uniform. Secondly, galaxies with weaker or less
coherent accretion flows before infall may be more susceptible
to disruption by the filament tidal field, leading to suppressed
gas inflow and subsequent starvation. In contrast, galaxies with
strongeraccretionflowsmaybeabletosustaintheirinflowdespite
the influence of the cosmic web, remaining gas-accreting.
4.2. Cosmic web stripping
Galaxiesthatenteredfilamentsatlatercosmictimes(𝜏 fils <3 Gyr
ago) are expected to be less affected by the tidal field of the cos-
mic web. This is due to two main reasons. First, these galaxies
enter filaments at epochs when accretion is no longer the domi-
nant driver of their growth. Second, these galaxies have spent a
relativelyshorttimeinsidefilaments.However,Fig.7showsthat
the relative importance of hydrodynamical stripping increases
towards z=0, reaching a maximum for𝜏fils <3 Gyr. This trend
canbenaturallyunderstoodiftheefficiencyofstrippingdepends
on the density of the intra-filament medium encountered by in-
falling galaxies. As filaments evolve, they become progressively
denser in proper coordinates (Cautun et al. 2014; Martizzi et al.
2019; Bahé & Jablonka 2025), enhancing the effectiveness of
hydrodynamical gas removal processes. For low-mass galaxies,
which are characterised by shallower potential wells, this might
lead to efficient gas stripping. In fact, Fig. 2 shows that the sup-
pression of cold gas disc sizes is strongest at the low-mass end.
Weidentifytwomainpopulationsfor𝜏 fils <3 Gyr:gas-accreting
andstripping-likegalaxies.Thegas-accretingpopulationexhibits
propertiesverysimilartothoseoffieldgalaxies,appearinglargely
unaffectedbythefilaments,asshowninthebottomrowofFig.8.
Weinterpretthisasaconsequenceofboththeshorttimespentin
filaments and the fact that these galaxies do not satisfy the con-
ditions (filament density or infall velocity) required for efficient
stripping. Consistently, their𝛽DM, halo shape (𝑐/𝑎), baryon-to-
dark matter ratio, anddxSFMR are indistinguishable from those
of field galaxies.
Fig. 8 shows that galaxies identified as the stripped popula-
tionexhibitasignificantreductionincoldgasmassanddiscsize,
whiletheirdarkmattercomponentremainsunaffected,revealing
the hydrodynamical nature expected for cosmic web stripping.
Fig. 11 further demonstrates that the dynamical state and shape
of the dark matter halo are preserved, with the main effect being
a reduction in the baryon-to-dark matter fraction bound to the
galaxy. This behaviour is consistent with a stripping–like mech-
anism operating within filaments, where the interaction between
galaxies and the intra-filament medium removes loosely bound
cold gas from the outer regions, leading to a truncation of the
discs as shown in Fig. 5. The fact that star-forming regions re-
Article number, page 9

A&A proofs:manuscript no. main
Fig.11:SameasFig.9,butforfilamentgalaxieswith𝜏 fils <3 Gyr
that exhibit stripping-like mechanism after infall.
mainunaffected(Fig.3)whiletheoutercoldgasdiscistruncated
indicates that stripping proceeds in an outside-in fashion, pref-
erentially removing low-density gas at large radii, while leaving
unaffected the denser gas where star formation takes place. The
enhanced asymmetry of stripped galaxies (Fig. 7) further sup-
ports this interpretation, as asymmetric gas removal naturally
produces lopsided gas morphologies.
4.3. Geometry of infall
The geometry of infall, and in particular the orientation of the
galaxywithrespecttothefilamentatthetimeofaccretion,might
play a role in determining which mechanism operates within fil-
aments. In fact, the orientation of infall may alter or partially
suppress the inflow of material along the filament, potentially
leadingtostarvation-likeevolution.Similarly,stripping-likepro-
cesses are expected to depend on the relative velocity and ori-
entation of a galaxy with respect to the surrounding medium,
as established in the context of ram-pressure stripping in groups
and clusters (e.g., Roediger & Brüggen 2006; Bahé et al. 2013;
Steinhauser et al. 2016).
Tocharacterisethegeometryofinfall,wedefinethefollowing
quantities for each galaxy at the moment of infall:
–the infall velocity,v infall =v· ˆrfil (km s−1), defined as the
radial component of the galaxy velocity with respect to the
filament axis (top row of Fig. 12);
–the orientation of the infall trajectory, defined as
|cos𝜃 vinfall,fil|=⟨| ˆv· ˆrfil|⟩,whichmeasurestheanglebetween
the galaxy velocity vector and the radial direction toward
the filament axis.cos𝜃 𝑣 =1corresponds to radial motion,
andcos𝜃 𝑣 =0to motion along the filament (second row of
Fig. 12);
–the orientation of the gas angular momentum with respect to
the filament,|cos𝜃 Jgas,fil|=⟨| ˆJgas ·ˆtfil|⟩, which describes the
alignment between the gas angular momentum and the fila-
mentaxis.cos𝜃 𝐽gas =1indicatesalignment,andcos𝜃 𝐽gas =0
indicatesaperpendicularconfiguration(thirdrowofFig.12);
–the relative orientation between the gas and dark matter an-
gularmomentum,|cos𝜃 JDM,Jgas |=⟨| ˆJDM ·ˆJgas|⟩,whichquan-
Fig. 12: Geometry of infall into filaments for low-mass galax-
ies with𝜏 fils <3Gyrago and𝜏 fils >9Gyrago. Distributions
are shown for the dominant channels of gas evolution identified
in Fig. 7. The different rows display the distributions of infall
velocity (top), the orientation of the infall trajectory relative to
the filament (second row), the alignment of the gas angular mo-
mentumwiththefilament(thirdrow),andtherelativealignment
betweenthegasanddarkmatterangularmomenta(bottom).The
bottom-left corner of each panel shows the results of the KS test
between the compared groups (D statistic and p-value).
tifies the alignment between the gas and dark matter compo-
nents (bottom row of Fig. 12);
Each panel in Fig. 12 shows the distribution of these quan-
tities for the dominant mechanism of evolution inside filaments
(gas-accreting, stripping-like, and starvation-like populations),
separated by infall time. All listed quantities are computed for
each of the 10 filament realisations at a given snapshot, and the
median value is reported for each galaxy.
The first column of Fig. 12 shows the infall geometry of
galaxies that entered filaments recently,𝜏fils <3Gyrago. Galax-
ies that remain gas-accreting after infall and those that exhibit
stripping-likeevolutionshowdifferentdistributionsofv infall (top
left panel), both visually and according to the KS test. In par-
ticular, stripping-like galaxies have systematically higher infall
velocities than gas-accreting systems: the median infall velocity
is115±158,km s −1 for the gas-accreting population, compared
to259±194,km s −1 for stripping-like galaxies. This suggests
that infall velocity, in combination with the density of the intra-
filament medium, is a key factor governing whether a galaxy
undergoes gas stripping inside filaments, and that this becomes
effective only for sufficiently large velocities. The orientation of
the infall trajectory (second row of Fig. 12) also appears to play
Article number, page 10

D. Zakharova et al.: Cosmic web stripping and starvation of low-mass filament galaxies in TNG50
a role. At infall, stripping-like galaxies show a distribution of
|cos𝜃 vinfall,fil|that is shifted towards more radial infall with re-
spect to gas-accreting galaxies, which exhibit a more isotropic
distribution. However, the KS test does not reveal a statistically
significant difference between these distributions. Therefore, the
orientationoftheinfalltrajectoryappearstohaveasecond-order
effect. The last two rows for𝜏fils <3Gyrago do not reveal any
significant differences between the gas-accreting and stripping-
like populations: neither the orientation of the gas disc nor the
coherence between gas motion and dark matter play a role in
determining the fate of galaxies after infall. This behaviour is
consistent with a picture in which gas stripping inside filaments
operates analogously to ram-pressure stripping in clusters and
groups, with the controlling parameters being the relative veloc-
ity and ambient density, rather than the internal geometry of the
galaxy.
The second column of Fig. 12 shows the infall geometry of
early infallers (𝜏fils >9 Gyrago). We find that gas-accreting
and starvation-like galaxies have similar distributions of infall
velocities, with no evidence that higher infall velocities lead to
enhanceddisruptionofaccretionflows.Similarly,neithertheori-
entationoftheinfalltrajectorynortheorientationofthegasdisc
showsanysignificantdifferencebetweenthetwopopulations.In
contrast, the last row of Fig. 12 shows that galaxies that undergo
starvation already exhibit a misalignment between the angular
momentum of dark matter and gas at the time of infall. Such
a misalignment may indicate less coherent gas accretion, mak-
ing it more susceptible to disruption by tidal fields, which may
then suppress further accretion. This misalignment could itself
be a consequence of tidal interactions rather than the cause of
already started suppression of gas accretion. We note that by
z=0 both populations exhibit aligned dark matter and gas angu-
lar momenta, as starvation-like systems relax over time, while
gas-accreting galaxies do not develop significant misalignment.
4.4. Caveats
Wehavearguedthattheresultspresentedabovepointtoaconsis-
tentpictureoftheimpactofthecosmicwebtidalfieldandcosmic
webstripping.However,itisimportanttoconsiderafewcaveats
and modelling limitations that may influence our measurements
and interpretation.
We verified that these differences are not driven by thermal
effects.Inparticular,galaxiesinfilamentsdonotexhibitsystem-
aticallydifferentgastemperatureprofilescomparedtotheirfield
counterparts (see Appendix E).
We note that the classification adopted in Sec. 3.3 is model-
dependent and relies on the assumed reference star-formation
rates of field galaxies. While we adopt the median field rela-
tion, the field population spans a broad range of star-formation
rates, and adopting a higher reference level would shift most
galaxiesintothestarvation-likeregime,effectivelyremovingthe
stripping-likecategory.Despitethis,wearguethatthestripping-
like population is physically well motivated. Compared to star-
vation, these systems exhibit faster gas removal than expected
from star formation alone, truncated gas discs rather than halted
growth, and no corresponding changes in dark matter halo prop-
erties. In contrast, starvation-like galaxies show suppressed ac-
cretion in both gas and dark matter.
Our classification is based on the net change in cold gas
mass between infall and𝑧=0, and therefore does not capture
morecomplexevolutionarypathways.Forexample,agalaxymay
initially accrete gas after infall and later experience stripping.
In such cases, the system may be classified as starvation-like
despite having undergone stripping at later times. While more
sophisticatedclassificationsbasedonthetimethatgalaxiesspend
in a type of gas loss or accretion could be adopted, they are less
straightforward to interpret. Nevertheless, we have verified that
all conclusions presented beyond Sec. 3.3 remain robust under
alternativeclassificationschemes,withdifferencesaffectingonly
the relative fractions shown in Fig. 7.
We note that our analysis is subject to the limited resolution
and volume of TNG50. In particular, the sample size is modest,
with of order∼100galaxies in each𝜏 fils bin, and significantly
fewer in some subsamples (e.g. only22starvation-like galaxies
for𝜏 fils >9 Gyr).
Finally, throughout the paper, we argue that we detect sig-
natures of cosmic web stripping and starvation acting on galax-
ies within filaments beyond classical group pre-processing. In
our main analysis, we exclude galaxies identified as non-central
members of a halo for at least two consecutive snapshots. How-
ever, environmental effects from massive haloes can extend well
beyond the virial radius, out to∼2–3𝑅 vir (Behroozi et al.
2014). Moreover, filaments are populated by groups and mas-
sive haloes (Tempel et al. 2014a), and galaxies in filaments are
morelikelythanfieldgalaxiestoexperienceprocessingbynearby
haloes(Zakharova et al.2025).Toassesstheextenttowhichour
stripping-like galaxies are affected by neighbouring haloes em-
bedded within filaments, we run the following test. We measure
their distance, at each snapshot, to the nearest dark matter halo
withlog(𝑀 halo/𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 )>10, roughly corresponding to a sys-
tem capable of hosting a galaxy withlog(𝑀★/𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 ) ≈8. We
then determine how many galaxies that exhibit stripping-like
or starvation-like evolution have ever approached such a halo
within3𝑅 vir over their lifetime. This criterion is very conserva-
tive: we do not expect every halo withlog(𝑀halo/𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 )>10
to influence galaxies out to3𝑅 vir with the same efficiency as
clusters in Behroozi et al. (2014), but it provides a stringent up-
per limit on the possible role of halo-driven processing. We
find that about50%of our stripping-like and starvation-like
filament galaxies have ever come within3𝑅vir of a halo with
log(𝑀 halo/𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 )>10. Therefore, at least half (but likely more
than this) of the filament galaxies that experienced stripping-
like evolution were not affected by neighbouring haloes. If we
adopt a less stringent distance threshold of2𝑅vir, the fraction of
galaxies that are affected by filament-driven mechanism but not
by halo rises to∼70%. We stress that this estimate is approxi-
mate. Galaxies inside filaments tend to flow toward groups and
clusters, especially at late times, so close passages near massive
haloes are expected even if the physical mechanism driving gas
evolution operated earlier and was primarily filamentary in ori-
gin. Our simple test does not explicitly account for this timing
information.
5. Summary and conclusions
In this paper, we use the TNG50 hydrodynamical simulation to
studytheimpactoffilamentsontheevolutionoflow-massgalax-
ies (8≤log(𝑀 𝑠𝑡 𝑎𝑟/𝑀𝑠𝑢𝑛 ) ≤10) compared to field galaxies.
No significant difference is found between the two populations
in terms of stellar mass growth and quenched fraction. On the
otherhand,wedemonstratefilamentgalaxiesexhibitconsistently
smallercoldgasdiscsatboth𝑅 90%,cold gas and𝑅 50%,cold gas radii,
enhancedasymmetriesintheircoldgasdiscs,and,insomecases,
reduced star formation within filaments. In addition, we demon-
strate that this is complemented by distinct dark matter halo
properties, including differences in velocity anisotropy and halo
shape.Weidentifyseveralmechanismsoperatinginsidefilaments
Article number, page 11

A&A proofs:manuscript no. main
beyond group preprocessing that affect filament galaxies, whose
relative importance depends on the time of infall into filaments.
The infall time determines both the duration of the filamentary
influence on a galaxy and the physical conditions it encounters,
which evolve over cosmic time. Early infallers (𝜏fils >9 Gyr)
enter filaments during a phase of active dark matter and gas
accretion, while late infallers (𝜏fils <3 Gyr) encounter a more
evolved cosmic web, characterised by denser filaments and a
more assembled galaxy population. Below, we summarise the
key mechanisms identified in this work:
–Galaxies that fall into filaments at early cosmic times,𝜏fils >
9 Gyrago,areaffectedbycosmicwebtidalfields,whichdis-
rupttheaccretionofbothgasanddarkmatter.Thesegalaxies
enterfilamentswhengalaxiesareactivelyaccretingmass,and
subsequentlyspendmostoftheirlifetimewithinfilaments.As
a result, their dark matter and gas evolution differ from their
field counterparts, modified by the tidal field of the cosmic
web. We identify two populations of early infallers affected
bythetidalfieldofthecosmicweb.Inthefirstcase,galaxies
continue gas and dark matter accretion at rates comparable
to those in the field. However, filament galaxies exhibit a
tangentially biased velocity anisotropy in their dark matter
haloes, indicating that accretion has proceeded along more
tangentialtrajectoriesratherthanviapredominantlyradialin-
fall. This leads to a more centrally concentrated dark matter
distributionand,consequently,amorecentrallyconcentrated
gas distribution and systematically smaller gas discs. In the
second case, galaxies experience a stronger interaction with
thefilamenttidalfield,whichsignificantlysuppressesthein-
flow of both gas and dark matter, leading to the starvation of
galaxies inside filaments. Over time, this leads to a decline
in the cold gas reservoir and can result in quenching. This
demonstratesthatfilamentsthemselves,throughtheactionof
the cosmic web tidal field, can drive galaxy quenching even
in the absence of group or cluster processing.
–In contrast, galaxies that entered filaments more recently
(𝜏fils <3 Gyr) show evidence of rapid gas loss, truncation of
their gas discs, and enhanced asymmetries, while their dark
matterhaloesremainlargelyunaffected.Thesesignaturesare
consistentwithhydrodynamicalcosmicwebstripping.Akey
factor regulating this mechanism is the infall velocity into
the filament, which determines the strength of the interac-
tion with the intra-filament medium. Its increasing impor-
tance towards later times further suggests a dependence on
theevolvingpropertiesoffilaments,becomingmoreefficient
indenserenvironments.Thisprocessisalsomass-dependent
andpredominantlyaffectslow-massgalaxies,whicharemore
susceptible to gas removal due to their shallower potential
wells.
Our results demonstrate that filaments play a non-negligible
role in shaping the evolution of low-mass galaxies. Within the
TNG50-1 model, there is no evidence of enhanced gas accretion
in filaments for galaxies in the mass bin considered. Rather,
our results point to a systematic suppression or redistribution of
cold gas, leading to statistically smaller and more asymmetric
gas discs across the filament population, while the star-forming
regions remain largely unaffected.
Acknowledgements.We thank Simon White for the constructive feedback that
improved this work.
References
Alpaslan, M., Driver, S., Robotham, A. S. G., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 451, 3249
Aragon Calvo, M. A., Neyrinck, M. C., & Silk, J. 2019, The Open Journal of
Astrophysics, 2, 7
Aragón-Calvo,M.A.,vandeWeygaert,R.,&Jones,B.J.T.2010,MNRAS,408,
2163
Bahé, Y. M. & Jablonka, P. 2025, A&A, 702, A145
Bahé,Y.M.,McCarthy,I.G.,Balogh,M.L.,&Font,A.S.2013,MNRAS,430,
3017
Barsanti,S.,Colless,M.,Welker,C.,etal.2022,arXive-prints,arXiv:2208.10767
Barsanti, S., Croom, S. M., Colless, M., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 538, 2660
Barsanti,S.,Wang,D.,Colless,M.,etal.2026,arXive-prints,arXiv:2602.14628
Behroozi, P. S., Wechsler, R. H., Lu, Y., et al. 2014, ApJ, 787, 156
Benítez-Llambay, A., Navarro, J. F., Abadi, M. G., et al. 2013, ApJ, 763, L41
Bilimogga,P.V.,Busekool,E.,Verheijen,M.A.W.,&vanderHulst,J.M.2025,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2508.01425
Bond, J. R., Kofman, L., & Pogosyan, D. 1996, Nature, 380, 603
Borzyszkowski,M.,Porciani,C.,Romano-Díaz,E.,&Garaldi,E.2017,MNRAS,
469, 594
Bournaud, F., Combes, F., Jog, C. J., & Puerari, I. 2005, A&A, 438, 507
Cadiou, C., Pichon, C., Codis, S., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 496, 4787
Castignani, G., Combes, F., Jablonka, P., et al. 2022a, A&A, 657, A9
Castignani, G., Vulcani, B., Finn, R. A., et al. 2022b, ApJS, 259, 43
Cautun, M., van de Weygaert, R., Jones, B. J. T., & Frenk, C. S. 2014, MNRAS,
441, 2923
Codis, S., Jindal, A., Chisari, N. E., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 481, 4753
Conger, K., Rudnick, G., Finn, R. A., et al. 2025, ApJ, 978, 113
Crone Odekon, M., Hallenbeck, G., Haynes, M. P., et al. 2018, ApJ, 852, 142
De Lucia, G., Fontanot, F., Xie, L., & Hirschmann, M. 2024, A&A, 687, A68
Dekel, A., Sari, R., & Ceverino, D. 2009, ApJ, 703, 785
Donnari, M., Pillepich, A., Joshi, G. D., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 500, 4004
Dubois, Y., Pichon, C., Welker, C., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 444, 1453
Galárraga-Espinosa, D., Cadiou, C., Gouin, C., et al. 2024, A&A, 684, A63
Galárraga-Espinosa, D., Kauffmann, G., Bonoli, S., et al. 2026, A&A, 706, A21
Ganeshaiah Veena, P., Cautun, M., van de Weygaert, R., et al. 2018, MNRAS,
481, 414
Hahn, O., Carollo, C. M., Porciani, C., & Dekel, A. 2007, MNRAS, 381, 41
Hasan, F., Burchett, J. N., Abeyta, A., et al. 2023, ApJ, 950, 114
Hoosain, M., Blyth, S.-L., Skelton, R. E., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 528, 4139
Jego, B., Kraljic, K., Béthermin, M., & Davé, R. 2025, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2509.18077
Katz,N.,Keres,D.,Dave,R.,&Weinberg,D.H.2003,inAstrophysicsandSpace
Science Library, Vol. 281, The IGM/Galaxy Connection. The Distribution of
Baryons at z=0, ed. J. L. Rosenberg & M. E. Putman, 185
Kereš, D., Katz, N., Weinberg, D. H., & Davé, R. 2005, MNRAS, 363, 2
Kleiner, D., Pimbblet, K. A., Jones, D. H., Koribalski, B. S., & Serra, P. 2017,
MNRAS, 466, 4692
Kraljic, K., Arnouts, S., Pichon, C., et al. 2017, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 474, 547
Kraljic, K., Duckworth, C., Tojeiro, R., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 504, 4626
Kuutma, T., Tamm, A., & Tempel, E. 2017, A&A, 600, L6
Laigle, C., Pichon, C., Arnouts, S., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 474, 5437
Lee, C. T., Primack, J. R., Behroozi, P., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 466, 3834
Lemson, G. & Kauffmann, G. 1999, MNRAS, 302, 111
Luber, N., Stierwalt, S., Privon, G. C., et al. 2025, ApJ, 993, L14
Luber, N., van Gorkom, J. H., Hess, K. M., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 254
Marinacci, F., Vogelsberger, M., Pakmor, R., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 480, 5113
Martizzi, D., Vogelsberger, M., Artale, M. C., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 486, 3766
Mo, H. J., Mao, S., & White, S. D. M. 1998, MNRAS, 295, 319
Mo, H. J. & White, S. D. M. 1996, MNRAS, 282, 347
Muratov, A. L., Kereš, D., Faucher-Giguère, C.-A., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 454,
2691
Musso, M., Cadiou, C., Pichon, C., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 476, 4877
Naiman, J. P., Pillepich, A., Springel, V., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 477, 1206
Navdha, Busch, P., & White, S. D. M. 2025, MNRAS, 539, 1248
Nelson, D., Pillepich, A., Springel, V., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 475, 624
O’Kane, C. J., Kuchner, U., Gray, M. E., & Aragón-Salamanca, A. 2024, MN-
RAS, 534, 1682
Pasha, I., Mandelker, N., van den Bosch, F. C., Springel, V., & van de Voort, F.
2023, MNRAS, 520, 2692
Pichon, C., Pogosyan, D., Kimm, T., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 418, 2493
Pillepich, A., Nelson, D., Hernquist, L., et al. 2018a, MNRAS, 475, 648
Pillepich, A., Nelson, D., Springel, V., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 490, 3196
Pillepich, A., Springel, V., Nelson, D., et al. 2018b, MNRAS, 473, 4077
Planck Collaboration, Ade, P. A. R., Aghanim, N., et al. 2016, A&A, 594, A13
Proshina, I. S. & Oparin, D. V. 2025, ApJ, 980, 118
Reshetnikov, V. & Combes, F. 1998, A&A, 337, 9
Roberts, I. D., Brown, T., Zabel, N., et al. 2023, A&A, 675, A78
Roediger, E. & Brüggen, M. 2006, MNRAS, 369, 567
Article number, page 12

D. Zakharova et al.: Cosmic web stripping and starvation of low-mass filament galaxies in TNG50
Sarron, F., Adami, C., Durret, F., & Laigle, C. 2019, A&A, 632, A49
Sousbie, T. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 350
Sousbie, T., Pichon, C., & Kawahara, H. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 384
Springel, V., Pakmor, R., Pillepich, A., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 475, 676
Steinhauser, D., Schindler, S., & Springel, V. 2016, A&A, 591, A51
Tempel, E., Kipper, R., Saar, E., et al. 2014a, A&A, 572, A8
Tempel, E., Stoica, R. S., Martínez, V. J., et al. 2014b, MNRAS, 438, 3465
Vulcani, B., De Lucia, G., Zakharova, D., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2602.15142
Vulcani, B., Poggianti, B. M., Moretti, A., et al. 2021, ApJ, 914, 27
Vulcani, B., Poggianti, B. M., Moretti, A., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 487, 2278
Vulcani, B., Poggianti, B. M., Moretti, A., et al. 2018, ApJ, 852, 94
Wang,H.,Mo,H.J.,Jing,Y.P.,Yang,X.,&Wang,Y.2011,MNRAS,413,1973
Welker, C., Devriendt, J., Dubois, Y., Pichon, C., & Peirani, S. 2014, MNRAS,
445, L46
Xie,L.,DeLucia,G.,Hirschmann,M.,&Fontanot,F.2020,MNRAS,498,4327
Zakharova, D., De Lucia, G., Vulcani, B., Fontanot, F., & Xie, L. 2025, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2509.17697
Zakharova, D., Vulcani, B., De Lucia, G., et al. 2024, A&A, 690, A300
Zakharova, D., Vulcani, B., De Lucia, G., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 525, 4079
Zarattini, S. & Aguerri, J. A. L. 2025, A&A, 698, A196
Zaritsky, D., Salo, H., Laurikainen, E., et al. 2013, ApJ, 772, 135
Zhu, W., Zhang, F., & Feng, L.-L. 2021, ApJ, 920, 2
Article number, page 13

A&A proofs:manuscript no. main
Appendix A: Stellar mass assembly and
star-formation
To avoid repeating the detailed analysis presented in
Zakharova et al. (2025), we briefly verify here that their results
are reproduced in TNG50 when extending the sample to lower-
mass galaxies8≤log(M star/Msun) ≤10.
Fig.A.1:Stellarmassassemblyhistoriesofpresent-daylow-mass
filamentgalaxiesasafunctionofinfalltime,comparedtostellar
and mass–matched field galaxies (100 realisations).
Fig. A.2: Same as Fig. A.1 but for halo assembly.
Figures A.1 and A.2 show the evolution of stellar and halo
mass assembly for filament and field galaxies, matched in both
stellar and halo mass at z=0. In all panels, filament galaxies ex-
hibit mass growth consistent with the spread of the field popula-
tion.Thisindicatesthatlow-massfilamentandfieldgalaxieshave
similarstellarandhalomassassemblyhistories,regardlessofin-
fall time. This result is consistent with Zakharova et al. (2025),
whofoundthesamebehaviourinbothTNG100andGAEAwhen
controlling for stellar and halo mass at z=0.
Therefore, TNG50-1 predicts no significant difference in the
stellar or halo mass assembly of galaxies in filaments compared
to those in the field, consistent with Zakharova et al. (2025).
Appendix B: Mass𝑹 50%,𝒄𝒐𝒍𝒅 𝒈𝒂𝒔 size relations
In Section 3.1, we found that the size of the cold gas component
𝑅90%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 is smaller for galaxies inside filaments compared
to the field. Here, we provide an analysis of the inner parts of
galaxies and investigate, in the same manner,𝑅50%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠 as a
function of stellar mass at z=0. Fig. B.1 is an analogue of the
original Fig. 2. It again shows that all filament points lie below
the 100 field realisations, with support from the ANCOVA test,
which demonstrates the statistical significance of the difference
in interceptΔin 99–100% of cases. The median difference in
interceptisaround7kpcwithinuncertaintiesforfilamentgalaxies
with different𝜏 fils. Therefore, we conclude that galaxies have
smaller cold disc sizes not only on the periphery but also in the
central 30-50 kpc.
Fig. B.1: Same as Fig. 2 but for𝑅50%,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑠
Appendix C: Cold gas content of field galaxies
To assess whether the trends identified for filament galaxies are
driven by the filaments, we apply the same classification scheme
Article number, page 14

D. Zakharova et al.: Cosmic web stripping and starvation of low-mass filament galaxies in TNG50
described in Section 3.3 to a control sample of field galaxies.
Fig. C.1 shows that the vast majority of field galaxies, matched
in stellar and halo mass, are consistent with continued gas ac-
cretion. Only∼5–10% of the field population exhibits signa-
tures of starvation-like or stripping-like evolution. In the field,
the small fraction of stripping-like cases may be associated with
galaxy–galaxyinteractions,whichcaninducegasremovalduring
closepassages.Asmallfractionofgalaxiesalsoshowsstarvation-
like evolution without an obvious environmental driver. Never-
theless, the fraction of both starvation-like and stripping-like
systemsinthefieldremainssignificantlylowerthaninfilaments.
This demonstrates that the diversity of gas evolution scenarios
identified in the main analysis is not an intrinsic feature of low-
mass galaxy evolution, but is instead driven by environmental
processes operating within filaments.
Fig. C.1: Same as Fig. 7, but for field galaxies. Each bar repre-
sents100stellar-andhalo-mass–matchedrealisationsofthefield
sample,constructedtomatchthefilamentpopulation,withmock
infall times assigned to reproduce the corresponding𝜏fils bins.
Appendix D: Gas morphology
The mechanisms discussed above not only affect the amount or
extent of cold gas but can also leave imprints on the morphol-
ogy of the gas discs. Several environmental processes have been
shown to induce lopsided gas and stellar discs, like stripping
(see, e.g., Reshetnikov & Combes 1998; Zaritsky et al. 2013;
Roberts et al. 2023; Bilimogga et al. 2025; Proshina & Oparin
2025) and gas accretion from the cosmic web (Bournaud et al.
2005; Vulcani et al. 2018). The asymmetry of gas discs can also
be estimated in observations, allowing a direct comparison of
model predictions with observations. In this section, we exam-
ine the morphology of gas discs at z=0 for galaxies residing in
filaments.
Weestimatetheasymmetryofthecold-gasdiscbyprojecting
thethree-dimensionalgasdistributionontoaplaneandconstruct-
ingatwo-dimensionalmapofthecold-gassurfacedensity,𝐼.We
then compare this map with the same map rotated by180◦,𝐼 180.
Fig. D.1: The rotational asymmetry parameter for field and fila-
ment galaxies with𝜏fils <3 Gyrand𝜏 fils >9 Gyr. The samples
are matched to have the same stellar mass and halo mass distri-
bution at z=0.
The rotational asymmetry parameter is defined as
𝐴Σ =
Í |𝐼−𝐼 180|
2 Í |𝐼| .(D.1)
We estimate this parameter within a radial ring between
𝑅67%,cold gas and𝑅 90%,cold gas, in order to exclude the typically
symmetric central regions and the highly noisy outermost gas.
However, we have also tested the same analysis in the rings0–
𝑅67%,cold gas and𝑅 90%,cold gas–𝑅99%,cold gas, and found that the
results do not affect our conclusions.
Article number, page 15

A&A proofs:manuscript no. main
Fig. D.1 shows the asymmetry parameter of the cold-gas
surface density,𝐴 Σ, as a function of stellar mass for filament
galaxies that experienced different gas evolution. The top panel
shows𝐴 Σ for recent infallers into filaments (𝜏fils <3 Gyr) and
for a stellar and halo mass-matched sample of field galaxies.
𝐴Σ depends on stellar mass for all three galaxy populations.
However, field galaxies exhibit the lowest asymmetry, while the
stripped population shows the highest values, with a particularly
large scatter at the low-mass end. The high lopsidedness of the
strippedpopulationisexpected,sincestrippingistypicallymore
efficientononesideofthegalaxy,producingstrongasymmetries.
In addition, low-mass galaxies are expected to be more strongly
affected by ram-pressure stripping in groups and clusters due
to their shallower gravitational potentials (Donnari et al. 2021;
Xie et al. 2020). Finally, as shown in Fig. 2, low-mass galaxies
tend to have smaller gas discs. Therefore, the behaviour shown
in Fig. D.1 for filament galaxies experiencing a stripping-like
evolution is consistent with the cosmic web stripping.
Filament galaxies𝜏 fils <3 Gyrthat are still accreting gas
exhibit slightly higher median values of𝐴Σ than field galaxies,
although the difference remains within the uncertainties. There-
fore, while the tidal field of the cosmic web may affect the gas
morphology of these galaxies, the impact is relatively modest.
The bottom panel of Fig. D.1 shows𝐴Σ for galaxies with
𝜏fils >9 Gyrand for their stellar-mass-matched field counter-
parts.Again,fieldgalaxiesexhibitthelowestvaluesof𝐴 Σ across
allstellarmassbins,whilethestarvedpopulationshowsthehigh-
est asymmetry, with gas-accreting galaxies lying at intermediate
values. Galaxies that experienced a starvation-like process af-
ter infall exhibit higher𝐴Σ even than the stripped population.
Although this seems counterintuitive, galaxies that entered fila-
ments more than9 Gyrago did so at a time when all galaxies
displayedlargergas-discasymmetries.Afterinfall,thesegalaxies
becameunabletoaccretenewgasandbecamea"stalled"popula-
tion, effectively preserving their more prominent asymmetry. In
contrast, both gas-accreting filament galaxies and field galaxies
continue accreting gas. This ongoing inflow can replenish the
gas disc and promote azimuthal redistribution of the cold gas,
leading to a smoother and more regular gas distribution. How-
ever, as we show in Sec. 3.3, the gas-accreting population does
not redistribute its gas efficiently to larger radii. It is therefore
possible that the same mechanism is responsible for preventing
these galaxies from developing gas discs as symmetric as those
of field galaxies.
Taken together, these results indicate that the morphology
of cold-gas discs at z=0 retains signatures of the environmen-
tal processes associated with filaments. Filament galaxies show
systematically larger gas-disc asymmetries than field galaxies of
thesamestellarmass,consistentwiththeinfluenceofthecosmic
web tidal field even in systems that continue to accrete gas. At
thesametime,galaxiesthatexperiencedstarvationdonotsimply
stop accreting gas, but also retain the high level of asymmetry
characteristic of earlier cosmic epochs. Finally, stripped galax-
ies display strongly enhanced asymmetries, as expected, further
supporting the presence of cosmic web stripping.
Appendix E: Gas temperature profile of filament
galaxies
To test whether the smaller sizes of cold gas discs in filament
galaxies could arise because their gas is systematically hotter,
we examine the gas temperature distribution at z=0 for galaxies
that demonstrate different gas evolution scenarios in filaments
and for their stellar- and halo-mass-matched field counterparts.
For each galaxy, we compute the mass-weighted temperature
profile,(1/𝑀)d𝑀/d log(𝑇/K), using all gas cells bound to the
subhalo, and then derive the median profile and the16th–84th
percentile range for each subsample. As shown in Fig. E.1, the
temperatureprofilesoffilamentandfieldgalaxiesareverysimilar
in all panels, indicating that filament galaxies do not exhibit a
systematic excess of hot gas; therefore, the smaller𝑅90,cold gas in
filamentscannotbeexplainedsimplybyanoverallheatingofthe
gas. Also, the fraction of cold gas (𝑇 <105 K) is very similar
between filament and field galaxies in all subsamples. For𝜏fils >
9 Gyrstarvation-like galaxies, we find97.4 +1.8
−4.7%compared to
97.5+1.8
−13.7%inthefield,andforgas-accretinggalaxies94.6 +4.3
−16.5%
comparedto94.7 +4.1
−23.2%.For𝜏 fils <3 Gyr,stripping-likegalaxies
have91.7 +5.1
−24.7%comparedto94.4 +4.3
−20.3%inthefield,whilegas-
accreting galaxies show91.3 +7.2
−21.0%compared to94.3 +4.4
−23.2%.
Overall, the cold gas fractions are consistent between filament
and field galaxies within the uncertainties in all cases.
Fig.E.1:Normalisedgastemperaturedistributionsatz=0forfila-
mentgalaxies,splitbygas-evolutionscenario,comparedtotheir
stellar- and halo-mass-matched field counterparts. Curves show
themedianmass-weightedprofiles,(1/𝑀)d𝑀/d log(𝑇/K),with
shadedregionsindicatingthe16th–84thpercentiles.Thevertical
dashed line marks𝑇=10 5 K.
Article number, page 16