Title: Modeling the Effect of the Heliospheric Magnetic Field on Cosmic Ray Muon Shadows
Authors: MINOS+ Collaboration,  :, P. Adamson, I. Anghel, A. Aurisano, G. Barr, A. Blake, S. V. Cao, T. J. Carroll, C. M. Castromonte, R. Chen, S. Childress, J. A. B. Coelho, S. De Rijck, J. J. Evans, G. J. Feldman, W. Flanagan, S. Fogarty, M. Gabrielyan, H. R. Gallagher, S. Germani, R. A. Gomes, M. C. Goodman, P. Gouffon, N. Graf, N. Grossman, K. Grzelak, A. Habig, S. R. Hahn, J. Hartnell, R. Hatcher, A. Holin, J. Huang, L. W. Koerner, M. Kordosky, A. Kreymer, J. Krueger, K. Lang, P. Lucas, W. A. Mann, M. L. Marshak, N. Mayer, R. Mehdiyev, J. Meier, W. H. Miller, G. Mills, D. Naples, J. K. Nelson, R. Nichol, J. OConnor, R. B. Pahlka, Ž. Pavlović, G. Pawloski, A. Perch, M. M. Pfützner, D. D. Phan, R. K. Plunkett, N. Poonthottathil, X. Qiu, A. Radovic, P. Sail, M. C. Sanchez, A. Schreckenberger, R. Sharma, N. Skuza, A. Sousa, N. Tagg, J. Thomas, M. A. Thomson, A. Timmons, J. Todd, S. C. Tognini, R. Toner, D. Torretta, P. Vahle, A. Weber, L. H. Whitehead, S. G. Wojcicki
Published: 2026-05-28
Categories: astro-ph.SR, astro-ph.HE

Prepared for submission to JCAP
Modeling the Effect of the
Heliospheric Magnetic Field on
Cosmic Ray Muon Shadows
The MINOS+ Collaboration
P. Adamson6 I. Anghel10 A. Aurisano3 G. Barr18 A. Blake2,11
S. V. Cao24 T. J. Carroll24,29 C. M. Castromonte7 R. Chen13
S. Childress6 J. A. B. Coelho25 S. De Rijck24 J. J. Evans13
G. J. Feldman8 W. Flanagan5 S. Fogarty14,4 M. Gabrielyan15
H. R. Gallagher25 S. Germani26 R. A. Gomes7 M. C. Goodman1
P. Gouffon21 N. Graf19 N. Grossman6 K. Grzelak27 A. Habig14
S. R. Hahn6 J. Hartnell23 R. Hatcher6 A. Holin26 J. Huang24
L. W. Koerner9 M. Kordosky28 A. Kreymer6 J. Krueger14
K. Lang24 P. Lucas6 W. A. Mann25 M. L. Marshak15,30
N. Mayer25 R. Mehdiyev24 J. Meier15 W. H. Miller15 G. Mills12,30
D. Naples19 J. K. Nelson28 R. Nichol26 J. O’Connor26
R. B. Pahlka6 Ž. Pavlović6 G. Pawloski15 A. Perch26
M. M. Pfützner26 D. D. Phan24 R. K. Plunkett6
N. Poonthottathil6 X. Qiu22 A. Radovic28 P. Sail24
M. C. Sanchez10,1 A. Schreckenberger24 R. Sharma6 N. Skuza14,∗
A. Sousa3 N. Tagg17 J. Thomas26 M. A. Thomson2
A. Timmons13 J. Todd3 S. C. Tognini7,16 R. Toner8 D. Torretta6
P. Vahle28 A. Weber18,20 L. H. Whitehead26 S. G. Wojcicki22,30
1Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA
2Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, United Kingdom
3Department of Physics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45221, USA
4Department of Physics, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1875, USA
5University of Dallas, 1845 E Northgate Drive, Irving, Texas 75062 USA
6Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois 60510, USA
7Instituto de Física, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, Goiás, 74690-900, Brazil
8Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA
9Department of Physics, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204, USA
10Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA
11Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YB, UK
arXiv:2605.29306v1  [astro-ph.SR]  28 May 2026

12Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA
13Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL,
United Kingdom
14Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota Duluth, Duluth, Minnesota
55812, USA
15School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Min-
nesota 55455, USA
16Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA
17Otterbein University, Westerville, Ohio 43081, USA
18Subdepartment of Particle Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3RH, United King-
dom
19Department of Physics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, USA
20Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Science and Technology Facilities Council, Didcot, OX11
0QX, United Kingdom
21Instituto de Física, Universidade de São Paulo, CP 66318, 05315-970, São Paulo, SP, Brazil
22Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA
23Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QH,
United Kingdom
24Department of Physics, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA
25Department of Physics and Astronomy, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts 02155,
USA
26Physics and Astronomy Dept., University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E
6BT, United Kingdom
27Department of Physics, University of Warsaw, PL-02-093 Warsaw, Poland
28Department of Physics, William & Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia 23187, USA
29Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA
30Deceased.
∗Corresponding Author: nicholasskuza@gmail.com
Abstract.Shadows cast in the cosmic ray (CR) muon sky by the Sun were located using
muon data from the MINOS far detector in Northern Minnesota. The shadows were observed
independently across three time periods; near solar minimum, near solar maximum, and over
the entire 13 year span of the data. A distribution of muon positions for each shadow was
then sampled to simulate CR motions near the Sun using the Parker spiral model of the
Heliospheric Magnetic Field (HMF) and a dipole model of the Geomagnetic Field (GMF).
The resulting particle distributions were then compared to their position with respect to the
Sun. Results show that the Parker spiral model is most consistent with the solar minimum
shadow and least consistent with the solar maximum shadow, as expected. The simple Parker
spiral is more consistent with the data for a harder CR spectrum than is actually present,
indicating the need for a more detailed HMF model. Plausible modifications to the Parker
spiral model which would affect the overall shift of the Sun’s CR shadow are discussed.

Contents
1 Introduction 2
1.1 Cosmic Rays and Cosmic Ray Muons 2
1.2 MINOS Far Detector 2
1.3 Solar and Lunar Muon Shadows 2
2 Data and Preliminary Analysis 3
2.1 Data Selection and Time Frames 3
2.2 Sky Simulations and Shadow Templates 3
2.3 Locating the Shadows 5
2.4 Confidence in the Shadow Locations 5
3 Magnetic Field Models and Computational Model Building 8
3.1 The Parker Spiral Model 8
3.2 The Geomagnetic Field 9
3.3 Modeling Particle Motion 11
3.4 Simulation Strategy 11
3.5 Varied Parameters 13
4 Simulation Results and Analysis 13
4.1 Full Field Analysis 13
4.2 Residual Shadow Analysis 15
4.3 Initial Findings 17
4.4 Extended Analysis 18
5 Extensions and Conclusions 20
5.1 Zenith Corrected Energy Distribution 20
5.2 Possible Additional Parameters 22
5.3 Conclusions 24
– 1 –

1 Introduction
1.1 Cosmic Rays and Cosmic Ray Muons
Cosmic rays (CRs) are relativistic charged particles which emanate from multiple extraterres-
trial sources. They are composed of protons (≈87 %), alpha particles (≈12 %) and heavier
ions (≈1 %) [1]. Their energies follow a power law distribution of the form∝Eγ whereγis
negative in most regimes. Lower energy CRs are more likely to come from sources within the
solar system such as the Sun, while Galactic Cosmic Rays (GCRs) are generally higher energy
and originate from outside the solar system [2]. Like all charged particles, CRs and GCRs are
influenced by electromagnetic fields. In our solar system the dominant electromagnetic fields
are the heliospheric magnetic field (HMF) and the planetary fields. Once GCRs strike the
upper atmosphere of the Earth, with a flux of approximately1000 m−2s−1, they produce a
shower of secondary particles. Among these secondary particles are muons, charged particles
which are prime candidates to penetrate rock layers and interact with underground detectors
[3]. The higher the energy of the primary CR, the more likely the secondary muon is to reach
an underground detector [2].
1.2 MINOS Far Detector
The Main Injector Neutrino Oscillator Search (MINOS) far detector is a magnetized scin-
tillator and steel tracking calorimeter located underground at a depth of 2070 meters water
equivalent (mwe) in the Soudan Mine (47°49’ 13.3” N, 92°14’ 28.5” W) in Northern Min-
nesota. Its primary purpose was to detect neutrinos, but its great depth and wide acceptance
combined with the flat overburden of the Soudan site allows it to function as a CR muon
detector [4]. The 5.4kton detector is composed of 486 octagonal planes, each 8m wide con-
sisting of a 2.54cm thick steel plate and a 1.0cm thick scintillator plane. Adjacent planes are
separated by a 2.4cm air gap. It is 30m long and has a total aperture of6.91×106 cm2sr
[2] for the GCRs selected in this analysis [5]. The detector observes muons with a minimum
surface energy of 0.7TeV and a mean value of approximately 1.0TeV [6].
The MINOS far detector detected more than 108 candidate muons over a 13 year period
from July 2003 to July 2016. With knowledge of the angles of incidence and timing of these
detections, the trajectories of GCRs can be mapped back onto the sky [5]. With only a few
months of data it is possible to locate features of interest in an otherwise uniform distribution
of GCRs [2]. These features of interest are caused by objects within the solar system impeding
incident GCRs en route to Earth. Objects such as the Sun and the Moon subtend a large
enough portion of the sky to produce observable shadows. Once located and characterized,
the Sun shadow can be used to probe the structure of the HMF.
1.3 Solar and Lunar Muon Shadows
Most of the muons observed underground in the 1.0TeV energy regime originate from particle
showers caused by GCRs striking the upper atmosphere. These muon energies correspond
to a primary CR energy of approximately 10TeV [2]. Using the muon data from the far
detector, typical trajectories of incident GCRs can be reconstructed to look for features in
the CR distribution. Shadows that subtend an angle of0.52◦ are produced by the Sun and
Moon absorbing incident GCRs. These shadows are characterized by regions of little to no
particle density [2]. The shadows are not easily distinguished from the background because of
muon deflections. There is also a shift produced by the HMF and Earth’s geomagnetic field
(GMF).
– 2 –

The GMF is well-mapped and understood, however the much larger HMF is complex
and difficult to model. [7]. Using the location of the Sun’s muon shadow, its measured shift,
and the reconstructed trajectories of primary GCRs, the behavior of the HMF can be inferred
using Monte Carlo simulations. The goal of these simulations is to determine whether the
general behavior of the shadows is consistent with theory and, by testing differing models of
the HMF, to determine which version of the magnetic field is most consistent with data.
2 Data and Preliminary Analysis
2.1 Data Selection and Time Frames
Only single muon events are used to infer the GCR shadows. In some instances, higher energy
GCRs will produce more than one muon visible in the detector, but these events only make
up3.1%of all events. The exclusion of multiple muon events is done for the convenience
of having only one apparent GCR trajectory per event, however multiple muon events are
useful for the purpose of characterizing muon deflections in the rock overburden that are
incurred by single-muon trajectories [5]. Muons must intercept enough planes and travel a
significant distance within the detector to reconstruct their trajectories with confidence. For
this analysis, only particles that travel at least 1.55m within the detector and intercept at
least 9 of the 486 planes that make up the detector were selected. Only particles with incident
zenith angles less than 80°were kept to ensure that only muons sourced from the sky were
included. Some interaction vertices exist outside the detector due to badly reconstructed
trajectories; these particles have also been excluded. Upon applying these criteria,84.8%of
the1.3987×10 8 muonsinitially selected, are retained for analysis.
The Sun’s magnetic field and therefore the HMF vary throughout the 11-year solar cycle
[8]. Periods known as solar minimum and solar maximum are included within the data set.
The time frame of the data allows for the study of the differences between the solar CR
shadows during different magnetic conditions near the Sun. The solar minimum data set
contains3.4888×10 7 muonsfrom January 2007 to December 2009. The solar maximum data
set contains2.8178×10 7 muonsfrom January 2012 to December 2014.
These particle counts are across the whole sky, but only particles with reconstructed
trajectories that pass near the Sun can be used to locate the Sun shadow. The histograms in
Fig. 1 show the distribution of near-Sun particles. Of all particles within4◦ of the Sun that
were selected, there were fewer than 20 particles in most bins. This number is proportionally
less for the solar maximum and solar minimum data because the time periods are only 3
years instead of 13. The Sun shadows are not immediately recognizable due to the CR muon
scattering, as the distributions are generally flat. Statistical techniques must be used to locate
and characterize the shadows.
2.2 Sky Simulations and Shadow Templates
The first step to understand the effect of the HMF is to locate the shadows. The shadow is
hidden by several factors, but can still be found using aΛprobability test. It is a log scale
probability where positive values indicate that a certain collection of bins fits a theoretical
shadow template better than a flat background of particles. The formula for such a test is
shown in Eq. 2.1. This is a modified form of the same equation provided by [9]:
Λ =λ(x s, ys,0)−λ(x s, ys, Is) = 2
niX
i=1
[N back −N th +N obs ln N th
N back
].(2.1)
– 3 –

Figure 1: Particles detected near the Sun for the whole time range (left) and the 3 year
period near solar max (right). The left plot has less than 20 particles per bin while the
right plot has less than 5 particles per bin. Solar min data appears similar to the solar max
data.∆RA and∆DEC refer to the angular distance in terms of right ascension (∆RA) and
declination (∆DEC) on the sky relative to the Sun’s known location in degrees. The Sun’s
shadow is not discernible in these particle count maps.
The valueΛrepresents the likelihood that the shadow is located at a particular point. The
λ(xs, ys,0)term refers to a source location on the sky(x s, ys)with no shadow present as
indicated by the 3rd argument, 0. Theλ(xs, ys, Is)term refers to the same location with a
fractional decrease in the background intensity caused by the shadow, represented byIs.I s
is determined from a shadow template and(xs, ys)refers to a particular bin location in a 2D
histogram. The larger the positiveΛvalues, the more probable the pattern was produced from
a shadow distribution rather than a flat one. A singleΛvalue is generated for a particular
central bin by summing over an entire shadow pattern centered on that bin. The observed
bin counts,N obs, are compared to a set of bins that represent a theoretical shadow,Nth, and
a theoretical flat background distribution,Nback.
The background histograms should be as smooth as possible and sample the whole
sky rather than simply particles near the Sun. To do this, a muon is generated with a
random position (zenith, azimuth) using a Julian date (i.e., the date of “observation”) from
the data set to reflect actual live time distributions. Since the date and position are generated
independently, any shadow features that may be present will not appear in the background
histogram. The uncertainty on the number of particles in any particular bin is Poissonian,
which implies that increasing the number of skies to average over reduces the fractional
uncertainty.
TheN th values referenced in Eq. 2.1 can be represented by a theoretical shadow tem-
plate. It is assumed that the GCRs pass by the Sun and all particles that strike the Sun
are absorbed. This would leave a0.52◦ hole from the perspective of an observer on Earth.
The particles would then traverse the atmosphere and penetrate the 1070mwe of rock lay-
ers between the atmosphere and the detector. The template starts as a flat distribution of
particles with a0.52 ◦ diameter hole. The observed scattering of di-muon events in the rock
layers above the detector are then applied to those points to produce the template. Details
– 4 –

concerning the template construction are described in Ref. [2].
The template represents what the solar shadow should look like after it has penetrated
the rock layers and reached the detector. The minimum of the Sun shadow template is≈80 %
of the background field, so a fractional uncertainty of significantly less thanσfrac = 0.2is
required to provide statistically significant results for any particular binnij. A fractional
uncertainty ofσ frac ≈0.01requires the average value ofn ij be approximately10 4. This
average bin count was selected as the goal for each background histogram. There were 600
skies of particles simulated for the full data set and 3000 skies worth for solar max/min. Once
the histograms were produced, the bins were divided by the number of skies to determine the
average bins per sky quantity throughout the background template.
2.3 Locating the Shadows
According to Eq. 2.1, three histograms are required to calculateΛ. TheNobs values come from
the raw data histograms. TheNback values come from the shadow-free averaged background
histograms. Those histograms show backgrounds near the Sun, averaged over 600 skies for
the whole data set and 3000 skies for the min/max data sets. In each case, the Sun is not
present, and therefore no shadow is evident. There is a distinct decrease in particle density
for higher∆DEC due to the detector’s position at a relatively high latitude, but otherwise the
distributions appear flat. TheN th values come from the shadow template multiplied by the
N back values. The most likely location of the shadow is whereverΛis maximized,Λmax. This
corresponds to the location where the data histogram agrees best with the shadow template.
The results are shown in Fig. 2 along with the Moon shadow located by the same methods.
The positions of the shadows are unique from one another, and distorted in various
ways. The bin sizes in the histograms are all0.08◦ so the only possible shadow locations are
the bin centers. The full data set seems to be a combination of the solar max and solar min
shifts, and the solar max/min are shifted in distinctly different directions. This may be due
to a different polarity ratio in the field as is discussed in Section 3.6. The primary goal of
the magnetic field simulations is to see if their differences can be reproduced by varying the
Parker spiral model. To determine confidence in the shadow locations, probabilities must be
simulated using Monte Carlo techniques.
2.4 Confidence in the Shadow Locations
Λmax values were determined from data files being compared to background histograms. Each
simulated sky is subject to Poissonian fluctuations as mentioned in Section 2.2. This means
it is possible that a particular section of the sky mimics the appearance of the shadow. To
determine how likely random fluctuations are to create a shadow-likeΛ, off-source regions of
the data are examined using the likelihood’sχ2 distribution [9]. Simulated data sets were
producedbysamplingtherespectivebackgroundhistogramsforeachofthethreedataperiods.
The number of muons in each data period was equal to the number of particles within4◦ of
the Sun in the real data. Each time a histogram was generated, nineΛmax values were located;
one each in 20 by 20 bin gridded sections of the histogram. These1.6◦ ×1.6 ◦ sections are
slightly smaller than the shadow template providing theNth values which is approximately
2.0◦ in diameter. This allows for multiple maximum values to be located within each data set
while also permitting minimal overlap between gridded sections. A total of2×104 random
histograms were generated for each scenario which produces1.8×105 Λmax values per data
period. These values were plotted as distributions to show whatΛmax values are expected to
– 5 –

Figure 2:Λmax-likelihood probability histograms for the Moon shadow (top left) and
for the Sun shadow (top right); the Sun shadow during solar min (bottom right); and
the Sun shadow during solar max (bottom left). LargerΛvalues correspond to loca-
tions where the CR muon shadow is likely to be. The maximum values (Λmax) are 62.76,
33.57, 14.01, and 16.44 going clockwise from the top left. Note that theΛ-scale for
each histogram is different. TheΛ max locations relative to center are (∆RA,∆DEC) =
(0.04◦,0.12 ◦); (0.12◦,0.12 ◦); (0.04◦,0.28 ◦); (0.28◦,0.04 ◦)once again clockwise from top left.
– 6 –

occur due to random fluctuations alone. The histogram for the whole dataset, max dataset,
and min dataset are shown in Fig. 3.
Figure 3:Λ max distribution over the full data range (left), the solar max range (center), and
the solar min range (right) for the Sun shadow. The red lines mark theΛmax value from the
real data set. No randomly generated values were greater than the observedΛmax = 33.57
in the full data distribution, the observedΛmax = 16.44in the solar max distribution, or
the observedΛ max = 14.01in the solar min distribution. There were no events greater than
the observedΛ max = 33.57in the full data distribution. There were, however, 67 randomly
generated values were greater than the observedΛmax = 16.44in the solar max distribution
and 401 randomly generated values were greater than the observedΛmax = 14.01in the
solar min distribution. These correspond to probabilities of3.7×10−4 and2.2×10 −3. The
probability for occurrence of such rare events can also be estimated by using the distributions’
means and standard deviations. The full data range event is6.01σto the right of the mean,
the solar max event is3.59σto the right of the mean, and the solar min event is3.06σto the
right of the mean.
The fact that the observedΛmax value for the full dataset is6.01σaway from the mean
can be used to generate a probability of random occurrence. Using the error function one can
estimate the probability with the following formula
P(x) = 1−erf( x√
2),(2.2)
wherexis the number of sigma away from the mean of the observed value anderfis the
error function. This gives a result ofP(6.01) = 1.86×10−9. This probability can be further
reduced by considering that half of the values outside of6.01σare on the opposite side of the
distribution so dividing by 2 gives the resultP= 9.3×10−10.
In addition, the observed shadow occurs in the central section of the nine-section division
of theΛprobability histogram. This is its expected location. Since the distribution was
produced from nine square sections per histogram, 8
9 of these instances occur outside the
central section. Therefore dividing by 9 reaches the final probability value of1.0×10 −10.
This corresponds to an expectation of1.86×10−5 events for every1.8×10 5 simulated skies
so it is no surprise that there were no values of that magnitude randomly generated.
For the solar min and max datasets, histograms were generated that containedΛmax
values greater than the observed values, as is evident in Fig. 3. They show that the solar
maxΛ max value has a fractional probabilityPs-max = 3.7×10 −4 and the solar min value has
a fractional probabilityPs-min = 2.2×10 −3 of occurring randomly in the absence of a source.
– 7 –

These probabilities are determined only byΛmax values greater than the observedΛmax so
dividing by 2 is redundant. Dividing by 9 possible sections further reduces the fractional
probabilities toP s-max = 4.1×10 −5 andP s-min = 2.4×10 −4. The same method can be
employed usingσand the error function as was used for the full data set on solar max and
min. The results for all three data sets are shown in Table 1.
Data Period Fractional Probability σ-Probability Dev. of Obs. from Mean
Full Data N A 1.0×10 −10 6.01σ
Solar Max 4.1×10 −5 1.8×10 −5 3.59σ
Solar Min 2.4×10 −4 1.2×10 −4 3.06σ
Table 1: Probability of eachΛmax value occurring randomly. Probabilities are determined
two ways; by the distribution ofΛmax values and by way of standard deviationσand the
error function. Note that there is no fractional probability for the full data set because no
simulated distributions had largerΛmax values than the observed distribution.
Given that the full dataset has a probability on the order of10-10 and that the min and
max datasets are part of the full dataset, it is almost certain that the shadow is present. That
said, the precise position of the shadow is less certain at solar min and solar max.
3 Magnetic Field Models and Computational Model Building
3.1 The Parker Spiral Model
The solar wind is a plasma that has many properties relevant to the nature of the magnetic
field within the heliosphere, including the “frozen-in” condition. The wind has a high conduc-
tivity which causes magnetic fluxdΦ
dt within the plasma to go to zero [7]. The consequence
is that the magnetic field is carried by the solar wind as it propagates away from the Sun.
The heliosphere is defined by the field carried with the solar wind, therefore the structure
and strength of the heliosphere’s magnetic field is primarily dependent on the properties of
the solar wind and, by extension, the Sun itself.
The solar wind carries plasma away from the Sun at what is assumed to be a constant
velocityu sowi, which will be referred to as the solar wind velocity. In reality the solar wind
is not constant, but rather it has fast and slow components. The fast solar wind has a
density of approximately3 ions/cm3 and velocities ranging from400 km/sto800 km/s, while
the slow solar wind has a density of approximately8 ions/cm3 and velocities ranging from
250 km/sto400 km/s. The intersection of these two velocity ranges is used as the constant
velocity:u sowi = 400 km/s. The Sun also rotates with a sidereal period of27 days[7]. This
is represented as an angular frequencyω⊙. Therefore a plasma “parcel” moves with a radial
velocityu sowi and has an angular velocity ofω⊙. Its position can be represented with the
position vector
⃗ r= [r(t), ϕ(t)] = [usowit+r 0, ω⊙t+ϕ 0],(3.1)
where the origin is the center of the Sun and the position of the parcel att= 0is(r, ϕ) =
(r0, ϕ0)[7]. By implementing the frozen-in condition of the solar wind and reconfiguring the
position equation as time independent, Gauss’s Law can be used to determine the magnetic
field ⃗Bin the equatorial plane, ⃗B= (B r, Bϕ). For sufficiently large radiirω⊙ > u ϕ whereu ϕ
is theϕcomponent of the solar wind velocity, the magnetic field can be represented as
– 8 –

⃗B= r02
r2 B0ˆr−ω⊙r
ur
B0 ˆϕ.(3.2)
Here ur is the radial component of the solar wind velocity andB0 is the magnetic field mag-
nitude in the Sun’s photosphere. This field, along with the superposition of the geomagnetic
field, can be used to calculate the Lorentz force on a particle at any position⃗ r= [r, ϕ]near
the equatorial plane.
3.2 The Geomagnetic Field
The interplanetary magnetic field will dominate the geomagnetic field in most regions of the
solar system except for those near the Earth. The geomagnetic field can be modeled as a
dipole with momentME = 8×10 22 Am2 [7] and can be expressed in geomagnetic coordinates
as
⃗Bm = µ0M E
4πρ3 (−2 sin Φˆρ+ cos ΦˆΦ).(3.3)
In Eq. 3.2 the Sun-centered spherical coordinate system is expressed in vector form as
⃗ r= (r, θ, ϕ). The geomagnetic coordinates introduced by Eq. 3.3 define an Earth centered
spherical coordinate system where the magnetic latitudeΦis 0 at Earth’s magnetic equator.
This coordinate system can be expressed as⃗ ρm = (ρ,Φ,Λ)whereρis the radial,Φis the
polar, andΛis the azimuthal coordinate. Note thatΛin this case refers to a magnetic lon-
gitude, not the probability factor from earlier. For the purposes of putting the geomagnetic
field into a Sun-centered coordinate system, a second set of geographic coordinates must also
be defined in which the polar axis is aligned with the Earth’s rotation axis. Its position vector
is expressed as⃗ ρg = (ρ, φ, λ), whereρis the radial coordinate for both geocentric coordinate
systems as one is simply a rotation of the other. BothΛandλrefer to longitude in the ge-
omagnetic and geographic coordinate systems respectively. Since longitude can be measured
counter-clockwise from a top down perspective, it is equivalent to the azimuthal angle under
the condition thatΛ, λ= 0 ◦ E is in the same position asϕm, ϕg = 0. In a similar way, polar
angles must be defined for each geocentric coordinate system asθm = π
2 −Φandθ g = π
2 −φ
sinceΦandϕare latitudes rather than true polar angles.
The location of the Earth is established in Sun-centered coordinates as⃗ rE = (xE, yE, zE).
This allows for the convenient vector relation⃗ r=⃗ ρm, g +⃗ rE for a particle in the sun-centered
coordinate system. The Earth orbits on an elliptical path with the Sun at one focal point [7].
Therefore, its position vector in Sun centered coordinates can be represented by the vector
equation
⃗ rE(T) = (a·cos 2πT
P +c)ˆx+b·sin 2πT
P ˆy,(3.4)
whereTis the number of days after aphelion. Aphelion occurs on day 185.5833 (July 5, 8:00
AM GMT) on average each year. The various orbital parameters of the Sun/Earth system
are shown in Table 2 below.
Using several geometric transformations and the location of the boreal magnetic pole as
(φ0, λ0) = (78.3 ◦N,291 ◦E)[7], the definition of the geomagnetic field in geographic coordi-
nates can be represented as:
– 9 –

P(period) a(semi-major axis) b(semi-minor axis) c(focal distance)
365.25 days 1.49598×10 11 m 1.49577×10 11 m 2.49957×10 9 m
Table 2: Values of the various orbital parameters of the Earth-Sun system. The Sun is
located at one focal point while the Earth orbits periodically along this path.
⃗Bg =B xmˆxg + [Bym cos(11.7◦) +B zm sin(11.7◦)]ˆyg +
[−Bym sin(11.7◦) +B zm cos(11.7◦)]ˆzg.
(3.5)
The values(Bxm, Bym, Bzm)refer to the cartesian components in the geomagnetic coordinate
system for the magnetic field ⃗B. Several factors including the precession of the Earth and
the day of the year that the summer solstice occurs leads to the definition of geographic
coordinates(x g, yg, zg)in terms of the solar center coordinates(x, y, z)as follows:
ˆxg = [cosβcosαsin( π
2 +δ max) + sinβcos(α+ π
2 )]ˆx
+ [cosβsinαsin( π
2 +δ max) + sinβsin(α+ π
2 )]ˆy
+ cosβcos( π
2 +δ max)ˆz,
(3.6)
ˆyg = [−sinβcosαsin( π
2 +δ max) + cosβcos(α+ π
2 )]ˆx
+ [−sinβsinαsin( π
2 +δ max) + cosβsin(α+ π
2 )]ˆy
−sinβcos( π
2 +δ max)ˆz,
(3.7)
ˆzg = cosαsinδ maxˆx+ sinδsinδ maxˆy+ cosδmaxˆz,(3.8)
whereβis the Earth’s angle of rotation based on the time of day,αis the projection vector
of the Earth’szg axis in its orbital plane, andδmax is its maximum declination. The last set
of equations necessary to determine the local geomagnetic field are the following equations to
convert from geographic coordinates to geomagnetic coordinates [7].
sin Φ = sinφsinφ 0 + cosφcosφ 0 cos(λ−λ 0),(3.9)
sin Λ = cosφsin(λ−λ 0)
cos Φ .(3.10)
The dot product in terms of cosine along with the typical arctan calculation of the
azimuthal angle(φ, λ)can be determined as
φ= π
2 −arccos ⃗ ρ·ˆzg
|ρ| ,(3.11)
λ= (λ 0 − π
2 ) + arctan ⃗ ρ·ˆyg
⃗ ρ·ˆxg
.(3.12)
With these equations, it is possible to determine the theoretical strength of the geomagnetic
field in solar coordinates.
– 10 –

3.3 Modeling Particle Motion
As is the case with solid conductors, plasma also has the convenient property of internally
flattening potential gradients[ ∂V
∂r = 0]. This implies that the ⃗Efield goes to 0 on length
scales where its effect would be significant on a10 TeVcosmic ray [7]. The fact that these
GCRs are in the relativistic energy regime must also be considered. Under the condition that
⃗E= 0, the Lorentz force can be expressed as the derivative of the momentum vector⃗ pin the
following manner:
d⃗ p
dt =q(⃗ v· ⃗B).(3.13)
The momentum of a relativistic particle in terms of the energy of the particleEis
⃗ p=
 E
mc2 + 1

m⃗ v=γm⃗ v.(3.14)
Eis time-dependent if work is being done on the particle. In the case of CRs moving through
the HMF, the only significant force acting is the magnetic force which does no work on charged
particles. This meansEis effectively time-independent. Substituting Eq. 3.14 into Eq. 3.13
and simplifying the result is
d⃗ v
dt = d2⃗ r
dt = q
γm (⃗ v·⃗B).(3.15)
This expression will serve as the differential equation for the computational techniques dis-
cussed in Section 3.4. Note that the⃗Bin this equation is the superposition of the fields from
Section 3.1 and Section 3.2.
3.4 Simulation Strategy
Each simulation set will be referred to as “scenario”, and each scenario will have a corre-
sponding “shadow sampling template”. The shadow sampling templates provide a way to
generate particles in a particular distribution and walk them backward in time using the time
reversal techniques described earlier. The scenarios are divided by data periods and shadow
structures. The data periods are: 1. Full Data (July 2003 - July 2016); 2. Solar Max Data
(January 2012 - January 2014); 3. Solar Min Data (January 2007 - January 2009).
The shadow structure determines which type of template is used. The shadow template
used earlier to determine theΛprobability histograms shows a shadow that is circularly
symmetric and partially filled in. The most likely location of the shadow is known, so a round
shadow will be centered at the appropriate (∆RA,∆DEC) coordinates with respect to the
Sun’s position on the sky. The shadow is not necessarily a perfect circle when it reaches the
rock layers. This is because the magnetic fields that deflect the GCRs could distort the round
shape if certain boundaries are influenced more than others, so a distorted shadow template
is also used. There is also a null hypothesis template, which is appropriate for the scenario in
which theΛ max values determined earlier are statistical fluctuations. Thus, the three shadow
structures are: A. Round shadow,0.52◦ in diameter, centered at theΛmax bin; B. Distorted
shadow, created from theΛprobability histogram, includesΛ max bin; C. Flat, no shadow at
all, null hypothesis.
For options A and B, the shadow will have full depth, which implies that the templates
will be completely flat backgrounds with holes in them. They are holes in the sense that
there would ideally be a0%chance that a particle is sampled from within that region. In the
– 11 –

round shadow templates, this is true for any bins containedentirelywithin the appropriate
radius. Since the bins are square and the shadow border is curved, the bins on the boundary
will have a probability proportional to how much of their area is enclosed by the circle. The
flat backgrounds will be truly flat with equal probability.
The distorted shadow templates use the appropriate SunΛprobability histograms to
estimate the structure of the shadows. A glance at Fig. 2 reveals that theΛvalues do not
decrease evenly from their maximum. A bin closer to the shadow center should incorporate a
larger portion of the shadow than a distant bin. This means that the larger theΛvalue, the
more likely that bin is part of the shadow. This base premise has four conditions to impose
upon it for creating distorted shadow templates: 1. TheΛmax bin should have a sampling
probability of 0.0, the same as the center of the rounded shadow; 2. The “volume” of a
distorted shadow should be the same as that of its corresponding round shadow; 3. OnlyΛ
values above a certain cutoff will be included in the shadow; The shadow must be a continuous
distribution. The entire shadow can be represented by a single collection of neighboring bins.
The volume is simplyΣ(1.0−p ij)wherep ij is the probability of sampling bin ij. The
cutoffΛvalue is determined by progressively selecting the largest remaining bin, setting the
sampling probability equal to1−Λ/Λmax , and stopping once the(1.0−pij)values sum to the
area of the round shadows. It follows that only one bin will be equal to 0.0 probability (the
maximum) but all of them will be relatively close to 0.0. The circular and distorted shadow
sampling templates for the whole data set are shown in Fig. 4.
Figure 4: Near Earth shadow sampling templates for the full data period (2003-2016). Each
shadow has similar depth and is close to 0.0 probability across most bins. AllΛgreater than
26.79 were included to create the distorted shadow.
The templates for solar min and max look similar but with different shifts and distortion
patterns. All three distorted shadow sampling templates required 37 bins to reach a similar
shadow volume as the round shadows. The simulations will determine whether the distorted
sampling templates are better models than the perfectly round templates.
– 12 –

3.5 Varied Parameters
A number of quantities relevant to the GCR motion are not constant and therefore must
be varied in the time reversal simulations. They are lumped into two distinct categories:
GCR parameters and solar parameters. The CR parameters have well-defined probability
distributions and can be implemented by random sampling. The solar parameters are char-
acteristically more dynamic and therefore more difficult to accurately represent.
According to Eq. 3.15, charge, mass, and kinetic energy are all relevant to GCR deflec-
tion. Prior study has shown that GCR populations have a distribution of≈87%protons,
≈12%alpha particles, and1%heavier ions [10]. This distribution provides the charge and
mass of the GCRs. The1%contribution from the heavier ions has been neglected. Therefore,
the CRs generated in the simulations were87.9%with chargeeand massmp while the other
12.1%had a charge of2eand massm α whereeis the elemental charge,m p is the proton
mass andm α is the mass of an alpha particle.
Detected muons have a well-defined spectrum and can be extracted directly from the
data. Prior study has shown that the MINOS far detector observes muons in a distribution
with a minimum surface energy of0.73 TeVand a peak detected value near0.8 TeV[6]. Any
observed muon corresponds to a range of primary energies characterized by a sharply peaked
response curve, which makes it impossible to simply sample the energy distribution measured
by the detector [3]. It follows that the true primary GCR energy spectrum is a continuous
superposition of response curves upon a sharply peaked muon energy curve. The energy
distribution of CR muons can be modeled with a power law relation [1]. The0.8 TeVmean
of the muon curve corresponds to a mean energy of8 TeVin the primary GCR curve [6]. In
that energy regime the cosmic ray distribution follows a power law relationE−2.75 which is
enough to build a model to sample.
The HMF is also subject to some variation. Its various parameters have already been
characterized, namely angular rotation frequencyω⊙,u sowi, andB 0. All of these parameters
are treated as constants throughout the simulations. Their chosen values have already been
motivated earlier. The HMF generally contains 2 or 4 separate polarity regions depending on
magnetic field conditions in the photosphere marked by co-rotating regions at the boundaries
[7]. Over a period of several years that the Earth spends passing through either polarity
HMF is approximately equal, but over shorter time spans one polarity may dominate. For
these reasons, every scenario is initially carried out with 50/50 probability for each polarity.
To then compare to other polarity distributions, the ratios 33/67 and 67/33 were also used.
From there, certain simulations were varied further to approach the optimum polarity ratio.
An example of how each type of polarity affects GCRs in their journey between the Sun and
Earth is shown in Fig. 5.
4 Simulation Results and Analysis
4.1 Full Field Analysis
A 4th order Runge-Kutta scheme was used to simulate the equation of motion over time. The
step size for all simulations was -0.1 sand the average travel time per particle in physical
time was≈500 s. Particle motions are simulated until they reach the plane that bisects the
Sun and is perpendicular to the Earth’s position vector. They are plotted in the coordinates
(∆RA,∆DEC) from the perspective of an observer on Earth. Any particles that traveled
for 600s were considered “rogue”, which means they were deflected away from the plane of
– 13 –

Figure 5: Plots of GCR deflections due to positive (left) and negative (right) polarity. All
GCRs in this test were assumed to have chargeeand massm p. The smallest blue dots
indicate the apparent position of particles as seen in the far detector. The larger red dots the
indicate simulated original sky position when the particle was near the Sun. Intermediate
green and yellow dots are transitory. Note the motions of the particles in the positive polarity
field are opposite the motions in the negative polarity field. This indicates that over a period
of time where neither field dominates, the effect of one field may partially mask the other.
interception and counted separately from those plotted. Any particles that entered the Sun’s
photospheric radius of6.96×10 8 mwere considered absorbed and also removed and counted
separately. Since the simulation is time-reversed, a particle striking the Sun would indicate
that it originated from it.
To understand what the GCR distribution looks like near the Sun a two-stage simulation
was implemented. The goal of the simulation is to map any and all particles that cross
the plane of intersection and then proceed toward Earth. In the first stage, particles were
generated on a28 R⊙ sphere with the Sun at its center. The particle density was uniformly
randomized on the entire surface of the sphere because incident GCR trajectories to the
solar system are a random and uniform distribution [3]. The particles were given velocity
vectors within90 ◦ of being directed toward the Sun. Once the particles were initialized they
were stepped backward in time until they either left the28 R⊙ sphere or crossed a plane
perpendicular to their initial position and bisecting Earth. The particles were then mapped
using two projections, a Mollweide projection (with respect to distance) and a Mercator
projection (with respect to angular distance). The result of1.8×10 8 particlesis shown in
Fig. 6 below. This result is also the motivation for the earlier assertion that initial shadow
should be a nearly circular disk.
Imposter particles are particles that are present in the distribution but will not make it
to Earth. If it was reasonable to assume that particles across this distribution had equal odds
of being directed toward Earth, then this distribution could be used. The issue is that the field
varies drastically in the region of space surrounding the Sun, as do the angles of the particles
as they crossed the plane of interception. To remove imposters from this simulation a second
– 14 –

Figure 6: Distribution of particles near the Sun as they cross the plane of the Sun from
the perspective of Earth. Left plot is true distance in units of solar radius. Right plot is
angular distance in terms of right ascension (∆RA) and declination (∆DEC). All particles
with trajectories within90◦ of Earth’s position are included.
stage was devised. In the first stage, the particles velocity vector relative to Earth’s position
was determined and stored in a 3D histogram along with the (∆RA,∆DEC) coordinates.
This allows the histogram to be sampled with considerations toward the typical trajectories of
the particles in particular regions of space. In the second stage,5×107 particles were sampled
and walked 150s forward in time. This gives them enough time to escape the stronger regions
of the HMF and settle into a relatively stable trajectory as they move away from the center
of the solar system. At the end of their journey, their velocity vector is again measured with
respect to Earth. Only particles with trajectories within10◦ of Earth’s position vector are
included. The particles that survive this filtering process then have theiroriginalangular
position recorded, to show where Earth bound particles should originate from. Their angular
position at the end of the simulation was also recorded as a sanity check. The results are in
Fig. 7.
As is clear from this distribution, particles near the orbital plane are much less likely to
end up directed toward Earth. The sanity check in Fig. 7 shows the expected distribution.
Particles are less dense at the edges because there are no particles outside the histogram to
fill in at the edges as the distribution contracts. Otherwise, it appears to be the expected flat
distribution but without the telltale signs of being measured by a high latitude underground
detector.
4.2 Residual Shadow Analysis
Residual shadow templates are created in two steps. First, apparent trajectory histograms
are generated by sampling108 particles from the shadow templates like the one in Fig. 4,
along with a flat template. The flat distribution then had each of the 6 shadow templates
subtracted from it to create the residual shadows. Negative values were all small relative to
the shadow feature and removed so the resulting histogram could be sampled. The results of
this process for the solar min shadow are shown in Fig. 8.
– 15 –

Figure 7: Figures show the result of sampling the distribution in Fig. 6 and walking them
forward 150 s in time. Particles are simulated long enough to leave the strongest parts of the
HMF. The left figure shows the sampled start point of all particles with a trajectory within
10◦ of Earth. The right figure shows where those same particles were when they crossed the
plane that bisects the Sun.
Figure 8: Residual sampling template produced from the sampling templates and the flat
background template. The process highlights the shadow particles that are missing from the
flat distribution. Each can be sampled to determine whether a particular field model could
have produced them.
These templates allow for the shadow to be sampled directly. Recall that the shadow is
a section of an otherwise flat distribution that is devoid of particles. The goal of simulating
these samples is to see what the shadow particles would do if they existed. Since they were
removed by striking the Sun, their “origin” point is the Sun itself. Any particles that do not
– 16 –

strike the Sun should result in a distribution centered around it. A clear benefit of this type
of test is that each scenario can be tested much more quickly (≈15 min) than the full particle
distributions. Only10 4 particles are necessary to get a clear idea of each distribution.
A brief test was undertaken to motivate the use of these “rogue” GCRs. If GCRs are low
enough energy, they are easier to deflect away and therefore would have difficulty reaching the
photosphere. The full data set with the rounded shadow structure and a 50:50 polarity ratio
was tested with the typical104 GCRs. Every particle’s closest distance from the Sun was
tracked, andifitweredeflectedandbecamerogueitsenergyandclosestapproachwerebinned.
The results of this test are in Fig. 9. They confirm that low energy particles are more likely
to be completely deflected and become rogue. Also, note how quickly the energy spectrum of
rogue particles falls off when compared to the overall spectrum. The main conclusion from
this survey is that the number of particles actually hitting the Sun is highly dependent on
the energy spectrum.
10
2 10Energy (TeV) 1
10
2
103
104
10Particle Count Energy of GCRs
All Particle Energies
Rogue Particles
0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 Closest Approach (Rsol)
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Energy (TeV)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Particle Count
Energy vs Closest Approach
Figure 9: Left histogram shows the energy spectrum of all sampled particles compared to
the energy spectrum of particles that never crossed the plane of interception (rogue particles).
It is clear that these particles are more likely to be low energy, due to how easy they are to
deflect. The right plot shows the closest approach of these particles to the Sun’s photosphere.
Higher energy particles must come extremely close to the photosphere to be deflected.
4.3 Initial Findings
There were 18 scenarios tested and their relevant statistics were tabulated. Shadows were
either round or distorted, but they are always shifted from center. The magnetic field polarity
ratios for the initial tests are 50:50, 33:67, and 67:33. This means that each of the 3 data sets
had 6 potential candidate scenarios. The simulated origin distributions were considered to
agree with theory based on how close their means were to (0,0). The mean was determined
as a combination of the near-Sun particles and a generalized distribution of the particles that
hit the Sun. Since particles that hit the Sun cannot be mapped (as they never cross the plane
of intersection), it is assumed that the mean of this sub-distribution is (0.0,0.0) [i.e. the Sun’s
center]. The standard deviation on this distribution is assumed to beσ=R⊙
3 as effectively
all particles are contained within both3σof the mean and within the Sun’s disc. Overall, the
solar min shadow scenarios were in best agreement with theory. The two best of these are
shown in Fig. 10.
All of the shadow mean centers were plotted with error bars to see how well they agree
with the (0,0) mean model. The resulting plots are shown in Fig. 11. They were grouped by
– 17 –

Figure 10: Initial simulations in best agreement with theory from the solar minimum data
set. Particles beyond2 ◦ from Sun center are removed to isolate the region of interest.
3 different categories. In the left figure the data were grouped by the magnetic field polarity.
In the center figure the data were grouped by shadow type. Finally, in right figure the same
is true except that they vary by data period.
Note the effect the polarity ratio has on the final∆DEC position of the shadow template.
This behavior can be used to inform other future polarity ratios to test. It is also interesting
to note that the distorted shadow templates performed better in these trials than the simple
round and shifted shadows for the solar max data and the full data period, but the opposite
is true for the solar min data. It seems that the success or failure of one template over the
other is highly dependent on the∆RA shift. All data sets experience a right ascension shift
that over-compensates for the shadow’s location.
4.4 Extended Analysis
The∆RA and∆DEC shift for every particle in each simulation was recorded and the results
show that the mean∆RA value across all scenarios isµ α =−0.3264 ◦ ±0.0152 ◦. This is
concerning because it indicates that all of the shadows are too close to the Sun in RA for any
version of the current model. Based on prior study, the RA shift should be dominated by the
geomagnetic field. Since the field is directed Northward in the Northern hemisphere, particles
will tend to deflect Eastward which constitutes a positive RA shift. Recall the geomagnetic
fieldmodelinEq.3.3. Usingthevaluesreferencedinthispaperandthecoordinateconversions
from Eq. 3.9, that model predicts that the Earth’s field near the far detector (47°49’ 13.3”
N, 92°14’ 28.5” W) has a magnitude of|⃗B|= 1.424×10 16 ρ−3 T depending on the distance
from the Earth’s centerρ. At Earth’s surface this gives a|⃗B|of approximately5.5×10 4 nT.
This is consistent with open source USGS data, so it seems unlikely that this is the issue.
The energy of the simulated muons is also a significant factor in the simulation. It
was motivated earlier that the GCR energy distribution is a continuous set of distributions
superimposed on the cosmic ray energy distribution. They should follow the power law
∝E −2.75 but the data may be consistent with a cutoff energyE0 which is larger than8.0 TeV.
The observed muons are known to have a cutoff surface energy of0.73 TeVin the far detector
– 18 –

 RA
Δ 0.2
−0.1
−0
0.1
0.2
0.3
 DEC Δ  0.4
−0.3−0.2−0.1−00.150/50 Polarity
33/67 Polarity
67/33 Polarity
Distribution of Means: Sorted By Polarity Ratio
 RA
Δ 0.2
−0.1
−0
0.1
0.2
0.3
 DEC Δ  0.4
−0.3−0.2−0.1−00.1Full Data Period
Solar Max Data
Solar Min Data
Distribution of Means: Sorted by Data Set
Figure 11: Scatter plot of the simulated shadow origin’s∆RA and∆DEC means. The
same data is plotted in all 3 figures. The top left figure categorizes the tests based on the
polarity ratios. The top right figure categorizes them by which shadow template was used.
The bottom figure categorizes them by the data sets. Black arc in each plot marks the the
boundary of the photosphere as viewed from Earth.
yet the mean muon energy is1.15 TeV[6]. Furthermore, a1.0 TeVparticle corresponds
roughly to a10 TeVcosmic ray. A larger primary GCR cutoff energy than8.0 TeVwould
cause the overall distribution to deflect less overall.
Further simulations were carried out treating the cutoff energy,E0, as a free parameter
to determine what cutoff energy is consistent with the Parker spiral model. The same 18
shadow models that were tested at 8.0TeV were also tested at 7 other successively increasing
E0 values. In all cases, the distribution took the form of theE−2.75 power law with the same
distribution of masses and energy and the mean right ascensionµα was determined. The solar
min data cluster has a distinctly separate range of∆RA values from the full data and solar
max periods. To prevent the latter values from outweighing the former, a weight of 2 was
added to the solar min mean centers. This is justified by the fact that a singleE0 value should
describe all distributions since it should not vary by month or year. A modified weighted right
– 19 –

ascension meanµ α,w was calculated for eachE0 set. These values were then plotted and fit
to a function to determine whereµα,w = 0. There is no analytical function provided from
theory, but the data nevertheless follows an easily modeled form by first taking the limit of
µα,w asE 0 goes to 0 and∞. AsE0 goes to 0, the expected GRC distributions should deflect
towardsµ α,w =−∞at an increasing rate. AsE 0 goes to∞,µ α,w should approach some
µα,max because the deflection is always toward negative∆RA values and the particles would
not deflect at all if they had infinite energy. By simulating all 6 data set combinations with
no field acting (equivalent to infinite energy) and finding their weighted mean right ascension
it was determined thatµα,max = 0.143◦ ±0.007. From these limits the following functional
form was constructed:
µα,w =µ α,max −a 0E−a1
0 .(4.1)
The valuesa 0 anda 1 are free parameters. This function was then linearized and fit to the
observed data using a least squares fit. The result of this fit is shown in Eq. 12.
Using this fit function, it was determined that aµα,w value of 0 occurs at the primary
cosmic ray energy cutoff ofE0 = 22.8±1.2 TeV. Note that it is 2-3 times higher than the
accepted value of10 TeV. Using thisE 0 value a more centered set of shadow distributions
is produced using the same 18 scenarios from earlier. The new cutoff energy is the only
difference in these simulations. The resulting full set of simulated origin trajectories is shown
in Fig. 13 following the same format as Fig. 11.
These results show consistent agreement of all shadow templates originating from the
Sun. Templates from the full sampling period appears to be the most well reconstructed of
the sets, followed by the solar minimum sets. This is expected, due to the full data set having
a much more certain shadow location. The HMF tends to be much less dynamic at solar
minimum [7] so it is not surprising that the solar max sets share the least agreement. The
data seems to favor a positive polarity dominated HMF, especially for the solar max data.
The distorted and simple round shadows both tend to deviate by similar amounts.
The determination ofE 0 = 22.8±1.2 TeVis contingent upon the Parker spiral model
being an accurate representation of the HMF. This value is inconsistent with observation,
indicating that there is more structure to the HMF than is accounted for in this base model.
Significant shifts in the observed shadow location can be produced by slight alterations to the
GCR energy spectrum.
5 Extensions and Conclusions
5.1 Zenith Corrected Energy Distribution
After the completion of the energy analysis detailed in Section 4.4, it was realized that because
the minimum cutoff energy (E0) depends on the distance the particles travel through rock
then it must therefore also depend on the zenith angle of the incident particles. A cutoff of
≈7.8 TeVcorresponds to a particle penetrating from a zenith of0◦;E 0 = 7.8 TeV
cosθ z whereθ z
is the zenith angle. Once a minimum cutoff energy is determined for any particular particle,
a possible energy of the particle can be sampled using that minimum and the characteristic
E−2.75 distribution. The results are shown along with the initially testedE 0 = 8.0 TeV
spectrum and theE 0 = 22.8 TeVspectrum in Fig. 14. From this plot it is clear that the
actual spectrum behaves more like the8.0 TeVspectrum than theE0 = 22.8 TeVspectrum.
The corrected spectrum most closely mimics how a 10TeV spectrum would behave but again
– 20 –

Figure 12: Fit function of theE 0 andµ α,w relationship. Functional form approximated
using the limits ofµα,w. The result is used to determine the cutoff energy,E0, for which the
weighted right ascension mean,µα,w, is 0.
with a shorter peak and a higher volume tail. The weighted mean right ascension (µα,w) for
the 10.0TeV minimum cutoff wasµα,w =−0.216±0.005 ◦. Therefore, this correction alone
would not be enough to explain the higher than expected∆RA shift and it would move the
simulated shadow centers closer to their expected positions.
– 21 –

 RA
Δ 0.2
−0.1
−0
0.1
0.2
 DECΔ  0.3
−0.2−0.1−00.10.20.350/50 Polarity
33/67 Polarity
67/33 Polarity
Distribution of Means: Sorted By Polarity Ratio
 RA
Δ 0.2
−0.1
−0
0.1
0.2
 DECΔ  0.3
−0.2−0.1−00.10.20.3Full Data Period
Solar Max Data
Solar Min Data
Distribution of Means: Sorted by Data Set
Figure 13: Scatter plot of the simulated shadow origin’s∆RA and∆DEC means.E0 was
set to 22.8TeV. The same data is plotted in all 3 figures. The left figure categorizes the tests
by polarity ratios. The center figure categorizes them by shadow template. The right figure
categorizes them by the data sets. From these plots, each scenario is specified. The black
circle in each plot marks the the boundary of the photosphere as viewed from Earth. All
simulated shadow origins are within the photosphere.
5.2 Possible Additional Parameters
The model tested in this study, the Parker spiral model, is a simple foundation upon which
much more complex models can be built. There were a number of assumptions made to
motivate its basic structure, but there are several aspects of it that are known to vary. The
rotational period of the Sun (ω⊙) is fairly stable as mentioned [7] but the solar wind velocity
(usowi) and photospheric magnetic field magnitude (B0) are variant and have significant effects
on the overall field. Another set of simulations could be generated whereusowi andB 0 are
allowed to vary freely. Varyingusowi would produce a direct effect on the direction of the
HMFfieldvectorsmorethananythingelse, giventhatitonlyaffectstheazimuthalcomponent.
VaryingB 0 would have an inverse effect to varying the energy. A stronger field makes the
– 22 –

0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Zenith Angle
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Particle Count
Zenith: Muons Seen by the FD Near the Sun
10 210
10
210
310
410
510
Corrected Particle Spectrum
8.0 TeV Particle Spectrum
22.8 TeV Particle Spectrum
Energy Spectrum Comparison
Particle Count
Energy (TeV)
Figure 14: The left figure shows the zenith angles of the near Sun data particles (within
4◦). The right figure compares the8.0 TeVspectrum and theE 0 = 22.8 TeVspectrum to
the corrected spectrum drawn directly from the data. Energies are generated using minimum
cutoff energies calculated fromθz angles and randomly sampling a value from the CR power
law distribution.
particles less rigid and a weaker field makes them more rigid. Even using the residual sims
these variations would be difficult to test. Quicker less comprehensive methods such as the
Krueger Plots in Fig. 5 would allow dozens or hundreds of parameter combinations to be
tested for general effectiveness before a larger scale more comprehensive survey is performed.
Also, data from direct satellite measurements could allow for a more accurate representation
of the polarity, velocity, and strength of the HMF in specific regions and times.
There are other aspects of the HMF that were simply ignored, because either their effects
were deemed too rare to be relevant or their complexity is beyond the scope of this study.
In any plasma, there exist regions of disturbances in the form of waves and shock fronts
[7]. These disturbances exist in the Sun/Earth system most prominently in the form of the
magnetosphere’s bow shock and the HMF’s corotating interaction regions. There is also the
matter of the neutral current sheet which may deserve consideration. The neutral current
sheet projects outward from the Sun’s neutral line which is typically near the Sun’s rotational
axis but it sometimes develops a tilt. As the solar wind moves radially outward away from
the photosphere, it is driven toward this neutral region which forms the neutral current sheet
[7]. The spiral structure still forms as the Sun rotates and the result is a wave-like structure
which increases in amplitude radially. It has been likened to a ballerina’s skirt and therefore
is known as the Ballerina Model of the HMF. It is significant because the neutral tilt line
is known to move further from the solar equator during solar maximum [7]. This has a
dramatic effect on the HMF structure and therefore it would be a good thing to include in a
GCR motion simulation.
Any theoretical model would be extremely complex and therefore the subject of its own
study. The solar wind velocity vector would take on a polar component which makes Gauss’
Law no longer usable. If this model could be implemented, it may show different collective
polarity ratios than the ones determined in this study. It is certainly plausible that the large
solar maximum∆DEC values observed in this study are due to a more ballerina-like structure
during that period. It is also plausible that individual particles may experience multiple
polarity changes throughout their journey from Sun to Earth. The wave-like structure of
the Ballerina Model suggests each time a particle near the orbital plane crosses through
– 23 –

the neutral current sheet, the polarity may change. This would cause the deflections to be
partially self canceling, thus explaining why they appear to have deflected less than the base
model.
5.3 Conclusions
The cosmic ray solar muon shadow is observable in the MINOS far detector muon data not
only for the 13 year period from 2003-2016 but for much shorter time periods near solar
max (2012-2014) and solar min (2007-2009). The shadows were located using aΛprobability
max-likelihood search technique with better than 6σcertainty on the shadow’s location for
the whole time period and better than 3σcertainty on both the solar max and solar min
shadow locations. These shadows show distinctly different positions depending on the point
in the solar cycle. A method for defining distorted shadow structures using theΛprobability
histograms has also been demonstrated.
A functional magnetic field model and integration technique have been defined, imple-
mented, and tested. A4 th order Runge-Kutta scheme proves sufficient for modeling time
reversible relativistic particle motions subject to the Lorentz force. A theoretical framework
for superimposing the HMF and the GMF have been illustrated and implemented as well.
Typical CGR motions have been observed, plotted, and discussed. The polarity of the HMF
has shown to have a direct and measurable effect on the∆DEC deflection of galactic cosmic
rays. The geomagnetic field and HMF together will typically shift GCRs to larger declination
and right ascension positions, but the degree to which the overall distribution deflects depends
greatly on HMF conditions and the primary cosmic ray energy spectrum.
A primary cosmic ray energy distribution following a power law ofE−2.75 best models
the observed shadows with a minimum cutoff energy ofE0 = 22.8±1.2 TeVwhich is 2-3 times
the experimentally determined value [2]. It has been directly shown that the position of the
shadows is highly dependent on the energy spectrum of the corresponding GCR distribution.
A number of untested factors remain relevant and perhaps responsible for the discrepancies
between the shadow locations at different points in the solar cycle. These factors include
neutral line tilt, impulses from shock fronts, and HMF polarity variations. This study finds
the cosmic ray solar muon shadows observed solar minimum to be in best agreement with
the dipolar model of the geomagnetic field and the Parker spiral model of the interplanetary
magnetic field. The full data set and the solar max data set show clear indications of other
factors at work, most likely some combination of the aforementioned effects. The general
direction of deflection of CGRs due to the HMF field is consistent with the Parker spiral
model as a base with more complex structures not yet modeled.
References
[1] Petr Travnicek,Detection of high-energy muons in cosmic ray showers,Charles University,
CERN-THESIS-2006-032, 2004
[2] P. Adamson and et al.,Observation in theMINOSfar detector of the shadowing of cosmic rays
by the sun and moon,Astroparticle Physics,vol34 (jan 2011) 6, pages 457-466,
[10.1016/j.astropartphys.2010.10.010]
[3] Thomas K. Gaisser,Cosmic Rays and Particle Physics,Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, (1990)
– 24 –

[4] D.G. Michael and et al.,The magnetized steel and scintillator calorimeters of theMINOS
experiment,Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A,vol596 (Nov
2008) 2, pages 190-228, [10.1016/j.nima.2008.08.003]
[5] S.J. Fogarty,Observation of the Cosmic Ray Shadows of the Moon and the Sun Using the
MINOS Far Detector,University of Minnesota Duluth Digital Conservancy(2019)
[6] P. Adamson and et al.,Observation of muon intensity variations by season with the MINOS
near detector,Physical Review D,vol90 (jul 2014) 1, [10.1103/physrevd.90.012010]
[7] May-Britt Kallenrode,Space Physics: An Introduction to Plasma and Particles in the
Heliosphere and Magnetospheres, New York, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, (2004)
[8]Solar Cycle Progression, [https://www.swpc.noaa.gov/products/solar-cycle-progression],
Accessed: 2022-06-15
[9] W. Cash,Parameter Estimation in Astronomy through Application of the Likelihood Ratio,The
Astrophysical Journal,vol228 (1979) 1, page 939
[10] J A Simpson,Elemental and Isotopic Composition of the Galactic Cosmic Rays,Annual
Review of Nuclear and Particle Science,vol33 (1983) 1, pages 323-382,
[10.1146/annurev.ns.33.120183.001543]
[11] Alec Habig,Muon Astronomy and Cosmic Ray Physics with the Macro Detector,Indiana
University(1996)
[12]Earth Orbital Parameters, [https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/earthfact.html],
Accessed:2022-06-11
[13]Interplanetary Magnetic Field, [https://www.daviddarling.info/encyclopedia/I/IMF.html],
Accessed: 2022-06-23
[14] N. A. Schwadron and M. Bzowski,The Heliosphere Is Not Round,The Astrophysical Journal,
vol862 (jul 2018) 1, pages 1-11, [10.3847/1538-4357/aacbcf]
[15] Franz J. Vesely,Computational Physics, Springer Science and Business Media, New York,
(2001)
[16] Vincent Tatischeff, John C Raymond, Jean Duprat, Stefano Gabici and Sarah Recchia,The
origin of Galactic cosmic rays as revealed by their composition,Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society,vol508 (oct 2021) 1, pages 1321-1345, [10.1093/mnras/stab2533]
– 25 –