Title: Quantum and Structural Effects Captured via a Statistical Method: the SACM Applied to HCN and HNC Colliding with CO
Authors: F. Tonolo, E. Quintas-Sánchez, A. Batista-Planas, R. Dawes, François Lique
Published: 2026-05-11
Categories: astro-ph.GA, astro-ph.SR

Quantum and Structural effects via SACM
Quantum and Structural Effects Captured via a Statistical Method: the
SACM Applied to HCN and HNC Colliding with CO
F. Tonolo,1 E. Quintas-Sánchez, 2 A. Batista-Planas, 2 R. Dawes, 2 and François Lique 1
1)Univ. Rennes, CNRS, IPR (Institut de Physique de Rennes), UMR 6251, Rennes, F-35000,
France
2)Department of Chemistry, Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, Missouri 65409,
USA
(*Electronic mail: francois.lique@univ-rennes.fr)
(*Electronic mail: francesca.tonolo.1@univ-rennes.fr)
(Dated: 12 May 2026)
This work spotlights the Statistical Adiabatic Channel Model as an efficient and accurate method for deriving low-
temperature (de)-excitation rate coefficients for collisions induced by heavy projectiles. For such systems, fully quan-
tum treatments become intractable, while quasi-classical methods fail at low temperature. Here, we demonstrate that
the Statistical Adiabatic Channel Model overcomes these limitations by combining statistical sampling with an adia-
batic channel representation. Its application to the HCN and HNC isomers colliding with CO yields rate coefficients in
quantitative agreement with full quantum results benchmarked for the lowest total angular momentum. These systems
are relevant for modeling cometary comae, where reliable molecular data remain scarce. Remarkably, this approach
also reproduces near-resonant energy transfer and isomeric effects, demonstrating that essential quantum and structural
features can be captured within a statistical framework.
Recent advances of the new generation of telescopes are
providing an unprecedented volume of accurate observational
data, addressing astrophysical environments ranging from the
interstellar medium to the atmospheres of comets, planets, and
exoplanets1–4. Turning this observational richness into quanti-
tative physico-chemical information requires models that can
reliably translate line intensities into molecular abundances
and temperatures. Central ingredients for this interpretation
are the collisional (de)-excitation rate coefficients for the dom-
inant projectiles. Such rate coefficients govern molecular level
populations when the local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE)
approximation breaks down,e.g., in the low-density regimes
typical of many astrophysical environments5–7. Despite their
fundamental role, reliable collisional data remain scarce and
often constitute a major bottleneck for the interpretation of
modern observations8. This is the case in environments where
the dominant projectiles are heavy species: their dense rota-
tional structure dramatically increases the number of acces-
sible scattering channels, making fully quantum calculations
computationally prohibitive in most cases. Cometary comae,
the gaseous envelopes formed by sublimation of ices from
cometary nuclei under solar radiation, constitute illustrative
examples in this framework. They represent key tracers of as-
trochemical evolution because they contain the chemical sig-
natures of the early Solar System 9. However, they are domi-
nated by CO, CO 2 and H2O, molecular gases with small ro-
tational constants, which significantly increases the computa-
tional cost of accurate dynamics calculations. Yet, their phys-
ical conditions (very low temperatures and densities) remain
challenging to fully reproduce and control in laboratory exper-
iments, despite improved experimental techniques, based on
molecular beams, flow-based methods and laser spectroscopy,
have now begun to provide very detailed information on col-
lisions, including the observation of quantum resonances and
interference effects10–15. As a consequence, the interpretation
of cometary observations mainly relies on accurate theoretical
collisional rate coefficients.
In this context, the Statistical Adiabatic Channel Model
(SACM) has emerged as a promising alternative to fully quan-
tum approaches. Conceptualized by Quack and Troe in the
mid-1970s16 and further developed by Loreauet al. 17, the
SACM combines a statistical sampling of inelastic collisional
transitions with an adiabatic channel representation. More
technically, within this method the scattering Hamiltonian is
diagonalized excluding the kinetic energy term in the basis
of angular functions for the collision. Upon diagonalization,
a set of adiabatic potential curves is obtained as a function of
the distance (R) between the two colliders for each value of to-
tal angular momentum (J tot). Each curve defines an entrance
channel characterized by an effective centrifugal barrier. A
collision is assumed to occur when the kinetic energy exceeds
this barrier, leading to an open channel. In this framework,
inelastic transition probabilities are determined solely by the
number of open channels at a given energy, which are assigned
equal statistical weight. A major advantage of this approach
is its computational efficiency. Because the adiabatic curves
are independent of the collision energy, they need to be com-
puted only once for each value of the total angular momentum.
Moreover, the basis of accessible rotational levels can be se-
lectively truncated by retaining only the adiabatic curves that
provide the dominant contributions to the scattering matrix.
Taken together, these factors lead to a substantial reduction
in terms of computational cost, convergence time, and mem-
ory requirements with respect to full quantum calculations. In
terms of accuracy, the SACM is particularly well suited for
systems that form long-lived intermediate complexes, where
energy redistribution is expected to be statistical. Moreover,
while quasi-classical trajectory methods tend to lose accu-
racy at low collision energies, SACM is most effective in this
regime, making the two approaches complementary depend-
arXiv:2605.10389v1  [astro-ph.GA]  11 May 2026

Quantum and Structural effects via SACM 2
ing on the temperature range considered. Owing to the na-
ture of the CO and H2O projectiles and their interactions with
collision partners in cometary comae, the SACM has already
shown encouraging results for several systems, typically re-
producing thermalized rate coefficients within a factor of two
of exact close-coupling (CC) results18,19.
Despite these successes, it remains unclear whether SACM
could reliably reproduce the essential quantum and structural
signatures that govern low–temperature collisions. Owing to
its intrinsically statistical formulation, the method would, in
principle, appear insensitive to such effects, as conventional
statistical approaches assume complete energy redistribution
within the intermediate complex and depend only on global
densities of states. However, the adiabatic channel repre-
sentation of SACM could retain geometry-dependent dynam-
ical information and interaction anisotropy, thereby confer-
ring an unexpected sensitivity to the detailed topography of
the potential energy surface and enabling the reproduction
of near energy-resonant transfer and structural features. To
date, no computationally affordable approach has convinc-
ingly demonstrated the capability to describe low temperature
quantum and structural features in collisions involving heavy
projectiles. In this work, we address this challenge by system-
atically evaluating the SACM ability to capture such effects.
A particularly sensitive benchmark in this respect is pro-
vided by comparative studies of collisional rate coefficients
for molecular isomers with similar rotational structures.
These systems are indeed scarcely discernible by pure statis-
tical approaches, as their relative dynamics depends on the
distinct contributions of the anisotropic terms of the interac-
tion potentials. Consequently, these comparisons constitute a
stringent test of the method’s ability to resolve subtle struc-
tural features. We present here a comparative study of the
HCN and HNC isomers colliding with CO, which is the domi-
nant projectile in comets at large heliocentric distances, where
low kinetic temperatures amplify such effects. These two
isomers have long attracted considerable attention in molec-
ular physics, as their collisional coefficients exhibited distinct
propensity rules depending on both the isomeric form and col-
lision partner 20,21. Previous studies have demonstrated that
accurate collisional rate coefficients for HCN and HNC are
crucial for reliable molecular abundance determinations and
chemical diagnostics in a wide range of environments. In par-
ticular, Hayset al. 22 proved experimentally that the isomeric
differences between HCN and HNC have a strong impact on
the collisional excitation in low temperature conditions, influ-
encing the inferred physical conditions and chemical compo-
sitions.
However, although both HCN and HNC isomers have been
observed in numerous cometary comae 23–27, the only avail-
able collisional data of these species in such environments
are the recently retrieved datasets limited to HCN in colli-
sion with CO and H 2O19,28. As a consequence, the wide va-
riety of HNC/HCN abundance ratios (ranging from∼0.03 to
0.3) in these environments remains puzzling, and the forma-
tion mechanism of HNC is still unclear9,22. In order to expand
the collisional information for these systems, and test the reli-
ability of the SACM in capturing prominent quantum effects
with respect to isomeric variations, we decided to extend the
existing dataset of HCN colliding with CO by deriving the
corresponding rate coefficients also for its isomeric counter-
part, HNC.
The computational protocol adopted to derive the (de)-
excitation rate coefficients of HNC in collision with CO
closely follows that previously established for the HCN and
CO system 19. In the following, the main steps are briefly
summarized, and the results are reported and discussed. For
a more detailed description of the computational methods
and convergence tests, the reader is referred to the Compu-
tational Methods section. A global four dimensional inter-
action potential of the HNC and CO collisional system was
constructed at the same level of accuracy of the potential for
the HCN and CO system 19, based on coupled-cluster elec-
tronic structure theory, and subsequently scattering calcula-
tions were performed within the SACM statistical approach.
As in the HCN–CO system, HNC forms strongly hydrogen-
bonded, nearly collinear complexes with CO, with the H-atom
directed toward either end of the CO molecule, preferentially
the C end. The potential wells for HNC are significantly
deeper than for HCN, reflecting the stronger N—H bond com-
pared to that of C—H for HCN.
Using the HNC–CO interaction potential, the (de)-
excitation cross sections were computed for transitions among
the first 10 rotational levels of the HNC target molecule (j 2)
and the first 9 levels of the projectile CO (j 1), accounting for
more than 99% of the population at 50 K. These data were
used to derive state-to-state and thermalized rate coefficients
over the 5–50 K temperature range. The thermalized coef-
ficients are commonly used in radiative transfer models of
cometary comae under the assumption of thermal equilibrium
between the rotational temperature of the projectile and the ki-
netic temperature of the surrounding gas. They were obtained
by averaging the state-to-state rate coefficients over the CO
rotational distribution (Eqs. 2 and 3 in Tonoloet al. 19).
As was done for the HCN and CO system, the accuracy of
the SACM in describing the HNC and CO collisional behav-
ior was assessed through comparison with full-quantum CC
calculations restricted to a single partial wave,J tot =0. The
results forT=10,30,and 50 K are illustrated in Figure 1. In
accordance with the findings of Tonoloet al. 19, the SACM
showed good accuracy also for the HNC and CO collisional
system. It reproduces state-to-state rate coefficients within a
factor of two, and with maximum deviations within one or-
der of magnitude. After thermal averaging, discrepancies are
further reduced, yielding deviations within a factor of two for
all the thermalized rate coefficients. This was somewhat ex-
pected, since the wells in the HNC–CO interaction potential
are nearly twice as deep as those of HCN–CO, favoring even
more a statistical redistribution of the energy.
While this agreement demonstrates the reliability of SACM
in reproducing overall collisional dynamics, it is not informa-
tive of its accuracy in describing quantum effects. However,
as illustrated in Figure 2 for the HNC and CO case and in
Figure 7 of Tonoloet al. 19 for its isomeric counterpart, the
SACM outcomes reveal clear signatures of near-resonant en-
ergy transfer regimes for both the HCN/HNC and CO sys-

Quantum and Structural effects via SACM 3
10 K
30 K
50 K
Thermalized rate coeﬃcients / cm3 s-1
SACM
10 K
30 K
50 K
State-to-state rate coeﬃcients / cm3 s-1
CC
SACM
CC
FIG. 1. Comparison between the state-to-state (left panel) and thermalized (right panel) rate coefficients for the HNC and CO system, computed
with the CC and SACM approaches atJ tot =0 and forT=10,30 and 50 K.
tems. These purely quantum phenomena arise when the ro-
tational energy levels of the colliding partners align closely
and promote transitions that conserve the total internal en-
ergy, leading to dominant probabilities when∆j 2 =−∆j 1,
∆j 2 =−∆j 1 ±1, and∆j 2 =−∆j 1 ±2. A possible explanation
for this behavior is that, as the collision energy increases, the
number of accessible adiabatic channels grows, effectively in-
creasing the density of energetically allowed final states con-
nected to a given initial state. This enhanced channel den-
sity increases the likelihood of transitions into energetically
nearby states, thereby favoring near-resonant energy transfer.
In particular, at a given collision energy, transitions involv-
ing the smallest energy mismatch among the accessible chan-
nels tend to be favored, leading to an effective propensity to-
ward quasi-resonant transitions. However, since the SACM
framework cannot resolve the resonances of bound and quasi-
bound states, such features may be underestimated with re-
spect to CC calculations. A comparison with full quantum
results, includingJ tot >0 values, would be highly valuable in
this regard. However, the computational cost and memory re-
quirements associated with such calculations, which involve
more than 15000 scattering channels, makes them unafford-
able for the present collisional systems. Further investigations
on lighter systems would therefore be of interest to assess the
accuracy of SACM in describing these effects.
To probe the ability of the SACM to capture structural ef-
fects, we investigated its capability to discriminate isomer-
dependent variations of the interaction potential in scattering
calculations. In particular, we analyzed how structural differ-
ences between HCN and HNC are reflected in their thermal-
ized collisional rate coefficients. Figure 3 presents a repre-
sentative subset of thermalized de-excitation rate coefficients
as a function of the temperature (left panel) and the final ro-
tational state (right panel). In both panels, the de-excitation
between thej 2 →j ′
2 levels of both HCN (solid lines) and
HNC (dashed lines) are shown. The left panel reports the tem-
perature dependence of transitions originating fromj 2 =9.
A weak sensitivity to the kinetic temperature stands out: al-
though absolute values are slightly enhanced at lower temper-
atures, the relative trends remain largely preserved across the
explored thermal range. The right panel displays the depen-
dence of the de-excitation rates on the final rotational level
j′
2. In general, thermalized rate coefficients decrease with in-
creasing∆j 2, reflecting the growing energy gap involved in
the transition. However, no clear propensity rule emerges with
respect to either the initial or final rotational states. A distinc-
tive feature common to both panels is the overall enhancement
of the collisional de-excitation of HNC relative to HCN. This
trend indicates that SACM is sensitive to differences in the
depth of the interaction potential and their impact on colli-
sional efficiency. The deeper potential well of the HNC and
CO system indeed favors the formation of a longer-lived in-
termediate complex, which in turn enhances energy transfer
during collisions. To further quantify this effect, we examined
the ratio of the thermalized rate coefficients of HCN and those
for HNC for each transition. The left panel of Figure 4 dis-
plays these ratios atT=30 K, which are depicted in red when
HCN exhibits larger rates and in blue when HNC dominates.
As expected, transitions involving HNC are generally favored,
particularly for low rotational levels, which are more sensitive
to the differences in the potential well depth between the two
isomers. At higher values ofj 2, rotational levels become pro-

Quantum and Structural effects via SACM 4
1x10-11 5x10-112x10-112x10-12
T=30 KState-to-state rate coeﬃcients (cm3 s-1), 
−Δj1=(j′ 
1−j1)
Δj2=(j2−j′ 
2)
j2=9, j1=0
 j2=9, j1=1
 j2=9, j1=2
j2=9, j1=3
 j2=9, j1=4
 j2=9, j1=5
j2=9, j1=6
 j2=9, j1=7
 j2=9, j1=8
HNC-CO 
FIG. 2. Variation of some state-to-state rate coefficients of the HNC and CO collisional system as a function of∆j2 (x axis) and−∆j 1 (y axis),
starting fromj 2 =9 andj 1 =0–8 and forT=30 K.∆jis defined as the difference between the initial (j) and final (j ′) state.
j2
HCN
HNC
j'2
j2'
HCN
HNC
= 9j2
 0
FIG. 3. Dependence on the temperature and final rotational state of two sets of de-excitation thermalized rate coefficients for thej 2 →j ′
2
transitions of HCN (solid lines) and HNC (dashed lines) by collisions with CO. Left panel: variation with the temperature of the de-excitation
rate coefficients starting fromj 2 =9. Right panel: variation of the rate coefficients as a function ofj ′
2, starting fromj 2 =1–9 and forT=30 K.
gressively less influenced by variations in potential stability.
In this regime, collisional (de)-excitation is more favored for
the more stable isomer, HCN, leading to a gradual inversion
of the dominant trend. Exceptions to this trend appear when
the initial and/or final states correspond to quantum numbers
3 or 4, which seem to favor collisions with HCN. This behav-
ior reflects the apparent favor of HCN transitions involving
these states, as already shown in Figure 3, that is not observed
for HNC. At present, no clear physical explanation for this
behavior has been identified.

Quantum and Structural effects via SACM 5
j− 
2
j2
log10(
HCN
HNC)
log10(
HCN
HNC)log10(
HCN
HNC)
j− 
2j− 
2
j2
j2
Thermalized rate coeﬃcients, T= 30 K
CC,
SACM,
Jtot=0
Jtot=0
FIG. 4. Left panel: Variation of the intensity ratio of the thermalized rate coefficients for thej 2 →j ′
2 transitions of HCN with respect to
HNC in collision with CO, atT=30 K. Red squares indicate the transitions where collisions with HCN are favored, while blue squares where
the (de)-excitation of HNC is promoted. Right panel: Variation of the intensity ratio of a reduced set of thermalized rate coefficients for the
transitions involving the first 4 rotational levels of each target molecule, calculated with the full quantum CC method (upper plot) and the
SACM approach (bottom plot), both restricted at the lowest total angular momentum (Jtot =0).
These results demonstrate the high sensitivity of SACM
to variations in the anisotropic components of the interac-
tion potential associated with the two structural isomers. To
further assess the robustness of this approach, we compared
the HCN/HNC ratios of the rate coefficients obtained from
SACM with those derived from full quantum CC calculations
restricted to the lowest partial wave,J tot =0. The right panel
of Figure 4 presents this comparison for transitions involving
the lowest-energy rotational levels, which lie in the regime
of maximum sensitivity to the potential anisotropy. An ex-
cellent agreement is observed between the two methods, with
relative variations that are fully consistent across all examined
transitions. This result provides an independent and stringent
validation of the ability of SACM to capture isomer-specific
effects in molecular collisions.
Taken together, our findings establish the SACM as a re-
liable and computationally efficient framework for describ-
ing low-temperature collision dynamics involving heavy pro-
jectiles. In this regime, fully quantum treatments become
prohibitively expensive due to the rapid growth of scattering
channels, severely limiting their applicability. By contrast, the
SACM method preserves the essential quantum and structural
features governing energy transfer while achieving a substan-
tial reduction in computational cost. In particular, it exhibited
clear signatures of near-resonant energy transfer on the state-
to-state rate coefficients of HCN and HNC colliding with CO,
a hallmark of low-temperature quantum dynamics. Moreover,
the isomeric ratios of the corresponding thermalized rate coef-
ficients provided a sensitive probe of the different anisotropies
of the interaction potentials. Finally, this work reports the first
comprehensive dataset of state-to-state and thermalized rate
coefficients for HNC in collision with CO, involving the 10
lowest rotational levels of HNC and the 9 lowest levels of CO
over the 5–50 K temperature range. These data will support
the interpretation of current and future observations of HNC
in cometary comae, providing new insights into its formation
pathways and helping to constrain the pronounced variations
in isomeric abundance observed in these environments.
COMPUTATIONAL METHODS
As shown in Fig. 5, the four-dimensional CO–HNC and
CO–HCN PESs are described using Jacobi coordinatesR,θ 1,
θ2, andϕ. CO is monomer 1, while HNC/HCN is monomer
2. Here, ⃗Rconnects the centers of mass, and⃗r 1,⃗r2 lie along
the molecular axes.Ris the length of ⃗R,θ 1 andθ 2 are the an-
gles between ⃗Rand⃗r1,⃗r2, andϕis the dihedral angle between
⃗R×⃗r1 and ⃗R×⃗r2.
a. Potential Energy SurfaceFor construction of the
PESs, both monomers were held rigid. For CO–HNC, the
bond distances were fixed atr CO =1.128 Å,r HN =0.994 Å
andr NC =2.163 Å.
As was done in the past for other van der Waals lin-

Quantum and Structural effects via SACM 6
FIG. 5. (upper) Coordinates used to describe the CO–HNC/HCN
interaction. (middle and lower)R-optimized contour plot of the
CO–HNC (middle) and CO–HCN (lower) PESs as a function of the
extended angles ˜θ1 and ˜θ2 for planar configurations (ϕ=0 ◦ and
ϕ=180 ◦). For each pair of angles, the energy (given in cm −1) is
optimized with respect to the center-of-mass distanceR. See text for
details.
ear dimers 29–37, the PES analytical representation was con-
structed using an automated interpolating moving least
squares (IMLS) methodology, freely available as a software
package under the nameAUTOSURF 38. The fitting basis and
most other aspects of the IMLS procedure were similar as
TABLE I. Geometric parameters and potential energy for stable
structures in the PES. Energies are given relative to the asymptote.
Units are Å , degrees, and cm−1.
CO–HNC CO-HCN
GM LM GM LM
R4.400 4.150 4.826 4.532
θ1 180.0 0.0 180.0 0.0
θ2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
ϕ— — — —
V−1030.59−563.98−604.13−363.32
for other previous systems that have been described in detail
elsewhere38–41.
The short-range (high-energy) part of the PES was re-
stricted by excluding regions with repulsive energies more
than 6 kcal/mol (∼2000 cm −1) above the separated
monomers asymptote. Theab initiodata coverage in the fitted
PES extended toR=25 Å, while the zero of energy was set at
infinite separation of the monomers. Allab initiocalculations
were performed using the Molpro electronic structure code
package42 and using the explicitly correlated CCSD(T)-F12b
method, where CCSD(T) denotes the coupled-cluster single
and double approximation augmented by a perturbative treat-
ment of triples, extrapolated to the complete basis set (CBS)
limit. The CBS extrapolation was performed using the VTZ-
F12 and VQZ-F12 bases 43 and thel −3 formula44. In total,
3776 points were used, resulting in an estimated global root-
mean-squared fitting error of 1.064 cm−1 (excluding the long
range where the fitting error is extremely small). The esti-
mated error is 0.186 cm −1 for geometries corresponding to
energies in the wells (below the asymptotic zero). To represent
the long range (out to arbitrary distances), the PES switches
smoothly to an analytic expression representing electrostatic,
induction, and dispersion interactions between the fragments
(truncated at 8th order). The long-range representation was
produced using the recently released LRF software45.
Figure 5 shows a 2D comparative representation of the
CO–HNC/HCN PESs (denotedR-optimized) as a function
of the extended angles ˜θ1 and ˜θ2 for planar configurations.
The extended-angle coordinates have been described in detail
elsewhere46. Both systems are characterized by two minima:
the global minimum (GM), a collinear arrangement where the
C-atom of CO approaches the H-atom of HNC or HCN; and
a local minimum (LM), also collinear, where the O-atom of
CO approaches the H-atom of HNC or HCN. These collinear
minima are seen across the middle of the two lower panels in
Figure 5, with GM appearing twice in each plot due to the use
of extended angles. The energies and structural parameters
are given in Table I, where it is seen that for CO–HNC, GM
and LM have well depths of 1031 cm−1 and 564 cm−1 respec-
tively, whereas for CO–HCN, the corresponding well depths
are substantially less at 604 cm−1 and 363 cm−1.
b. Scattering CalculationsOn top of the HNC and CO
interaction potential, collision dynamics calculations were
performed by using the HIBRIDON code47.
The scattering matrices were constructed by including, at
each total energy up to∼500 cm −1, all open adiabatic chan-

Quantum and Structural effects via SACM 7
nels, assuming equal probability for their occurrence. In
this energy range, the highest accessible rotational levels are
jmax
2 =18 for HNC andj max
1 =15 for CO. However, employ-
ing the complete rotational basis resulted in substantial mem-
ory requirements, exceeding 15000 open channels already at
Jtot =2. To reduce the computational cost, the basis was there-
fore truncated toj max
2 =12 andj max
1 =10. The reliability of
this truncation was assessed by verifying that, forJ tot =2, the
convergence of the rate coefficients remained within 20% of
the values obtained with the full basis over the 5–50 K temper-
ature range. Using the reduced basis, a partial-wave expansion
was carried out forJ tot values from 0 to 180, ensuring conver-
gence of the cross sections to better than 5%. This procedure
yielded state-to-state collisional cross sections for transitions
involving rotational levels up toj2 =9 for HNC andj 1 =8 for
CO. These cross sections were subsequently averaged over a
Maxwell–Boltzmann energy distribution to obtain the corre-
sponding state-to-state rate coefficients between 5 and 50 K.
To evaluate the accuracy of the SACM approach, a subset
of rate coefficients was compared with results obtained from
full quantum CC calculations. The CC computations were
performed over the 3–200 cm−1 energy range, using very fine
energy steps (0.2 cm−1) below 20 cm−1, which were gradually
increased to 5 cm−1 above 150 cm−1. The rotational bases for
HNC and CO were optimized by analyzing the effect of in-
cluding different rotational levels on the convergence of in-
elastic cross sections, and selecting basis sets that ensured
convergence within 2%: between 2 and 50 cm −1, the first 26
rotational states of HNC and the first 24 states of CO were
included, which were progressively increased to 30 and 28,
respectively, at 200 cm−1. In order to keep the computational
cost manageable in the considered energy range, the angu-
lar part of the nuclear Schrödinger equation was restricted
to a single partial wave withJ tot =0. The radial dynamics
was then solved by numerical propagation over theR=2.9–
42.0 Å range. CC state-to-state rate coefficients were calcu-
lated for temperatures between 5 and 50 K, accounting for (de-
)excitation processes among HNC–CO rotational levels be-
low 80 cm−1. These results were finally compared with their
SACM counterparts, which were obtained using the same ro-
tational basis employed for data production, but considering
only the adiabatic channels up to 200 cm−1 and forJ tot =0.
DATA A VAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data underlying this article will be made avail-
able through the EMAA 48, LAMDA 49 and BASECOL 50
databases. The two PESs employed in this study (CO-HCN
and CO-HNC) are provided as Supplementary Materials.
AUTHORS DECLARATIONS
The authors have no conflicts to disclose.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The two potential energy surfaces (PESs) employed in this
study (CO-HCN and CO-HNC) are provided as supplemental
material. Within each potential, a Fortran program that en-
ables the evaluation of the energy (in cm −1) at any point on
each potential as a function of the Jacobi coordinates is also
present.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank the Regional Council of Brittany and
the “Programme National de Planétologie” (PNP) under
the responsibility of INSU, CNRS (France) for supporting
this work. FL and FT acknowledge the support from the
CEA/GENCI (Grand Equipement National de Calcul Inten-
sif) for awarding access to the TGCC (Très Grand Cen-
tre de Calcul) Joliot Curie/IRENE supercomputer within the
A0110413001 project. ABP was supported by the Kummer
Institute for Student Success of the Missouri University of
Science and Technology. RD and EQS are supported by the
United States Department of Energy (DOE), Grant No. DE-
SC0025420.
1J. P. Gardner, J. C. Mather, M. Clampin, R. Doyon, M. A. Greenhouse,
H. B. Hammel, J. B. Hutchings, P. Jakobsen, S. J. Lilly, K. S. Long,et al.,
“The James Webb space telescope,” Space Science Reviews123, 485–606
(2006).
2A. Wootten and A. R. Thompson, “The Atacama large millime-
ter/submillimeter array,” Proceedings of the IEEE97, 1463–1471 (2009).
3P. E. Dewdney, P. J. Hall, R. T. Schilizzi, and T. J. L. Lazio, “The square
kilometre array,” Proceedings of the IEEE97, 1482–1496 (2009).
4E. Pascale, P. Eccleston, and G. Tinetti, “The ARIEL space mission,”
in2018 5th IEEE International Workshop on Metrology for AeroSpace
(MetroAeroSpace)(IEEE, 2018) pp. 31–34.
5M. López-Puertas and F. W. Taylor,Non-LTE radiative transfer in the at-
mosphere, V ol. 3 (World Scientific, 2001).
6F. Lique, F. Van Der Tak, J. Kłos, J. Bulthuis, and M. Alexander, “The
importance of non-LTE models for the interpretation of observations of in-
terstellar NO,” Astronomy & Astrophysics493, 557–563 (2009).
7C. A. Bowesman, S. N. Yurchenko, A. F. Al-Refaie, and J. Tennyson,
“TIRAMISU: Non-LTE radiative transfer for molecules in exoplanet at-
mospheres,” The Astrophysical Journal997, 203 (2026).
8F. Tonolo, “Collisional excitation in space: recent advances and future chal-
lenges in the JWST era,” Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sciences12,
1713849 (2025).
9M. J. Mumma and S. B. Charnley, “The chemical composition of
comets—emerging taxonomies and natal heritage,” Annual Review of As-
tronomy and Astrophysics49, 471–524 (2011).
10S. Chefdeville, T. Stoecklin, A. Bergeat, K. M. Hickson, C. Naulin, and
M. Costes, “Appearance of low energy resonances in CO–para-H2 inelastic
collisions,” Physical Review Letters109, 023201 (2012).
11M. Brouard, D. H. Parker, and S. Y . van de Meerakker, “Taming molecular
collisions using electric and magnetic fields,” Chemical Society Reviews
43, 7279–7294 (2014).
12A. Bergeat, J. Onvlee, C. Naulin, A. Van Der Avoird, and M. Costes,
“Quantum dynamical resonances in low-energy CO(j=0)+ He inelastic
collisions,” Nature chemistry7, 349–353 (2015).
13T. de Jongh, M. Besemer, Q. Shuai, T. Karman, A. van der Avoird, G. C.
Groenenboom, and S. Y . van de Meerakker, “Imaging the onset of the
resonance regime in low-energy NO-He collisions,” Science368, 626–630
(2020).

Quantum and Structural effects via SACM 8
14J. Toscano, H. Lewandowski, and B. R. Heazlewood, “Cold and controlled
chemical reaction dynamics,” Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics22,
9180–9194 (2020).
15H. Labiad, M. Fournier, L. A. Mertens, A. Faure, D. Carty, T. Stoecklin,
P. Jankowski, K. Szalewicz, S. D. Le Picard, and I. R. Sims, “Absolute
measurements of state-to-state rotational energy transfer between CO and
H2 at interstellar temperatures,” Physical Review A105, L020802 (2022).
16M. Quack and J. Troe, “Complex formation in reactive and inelastic scat-
tering: Statistical adiabatic channel model of unimolecular processes iii,”
Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische Chemie79, 170–183
(1975).
17J. Loreau, F. Lique, and A. Faure, “An efficient statistical method to com-
pute molecular collisional rate coefficients,” The Astrophysical Journal Let-
ters853, L5 (2018).
18A. Godard Palluet, R. Dawes, E. Quintas-Sánchez, A. Batista-Planas, and
F. Lique, “A promising statistical approach for studying the collisional ex-
citation induced by co: Application to the cs–co system,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics162, 241101 (2025).
19F. Tonolo, E. Quintas-Sánchez, A. Batista-Planas, R. Dawes, and F. Lique,
“Collisional excitation of HCN by CO to refine the modeling of cometary
comae,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry A (2025).
20H. N. Varambhia and J. Tennyson, “Electron collision with the HCN and
HNC molecules using the R-matrix method,” Journal of Physics B: Atomic,
Molecular and Optical Physics40, 1211 (2007).
21M. Hernández Vera, F. Lique, F. Dumouchel, P. Hily-Blant, and A. Faure,
“The rotational excitation of the HCN and HNC molecules by H 2 revis-
ited,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society468, 1084–1091
(2017).
22B. M. Hays, D. Gupta, T. Guillaume, O. Abdelkader Khedaoui, I. R. Cooke,
F. Thibault, F. Lique, and I. R. Sims, “Collisional excitation of HNC by
He found to be stronger than for structural isomer HCN in experiments at
the low temperatures of interstellar space,” Nature Chemistry14, 811–815
(2022).
23W. M. Irvine, P. Bergman, T. B. Lowe, H. Matthews, D. McGonagle,
A. Nummelin, and T. Owen, “HCN and HNC in comets C/2000 WM1
(linear) and C/2002 C1 (Ikeya-Zhang),” Origins of Life and Evolution of
the Biosphere33, 609–619 (2003).
24G. Villanueva, K. Magee-Sauer, and M. Mumma, “Modeling of nitro-
gen compounds in cometary atmospheres: Fluorescence models of am-
monia (NH3), hydrogen cyanide (HCN), hydrogen isocyanide (HNC) and
cyanoacetylene (HC3N),” Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radia-
tive Transfer129, 158–168 (2013).
25M. Agúndez, N. Biver, P. a. Santos-Sanz, D. Bockelée-Morvan, and
R. Moreno, “Molecular observations of comets C/2012 S1 (ISON) and
C/2013 R1 (Lovejoy): HNC/HCN ratios and upper limits to PH 3,” Astron-
omy & Astrophysics564, L2 (2014).
26M. Cordiner, J. Boissier, S. Charnley, A. Remijan, M. Mumma, G. Vil-
lanueva, D. Lis, S. Milam, L. Paganini, J. Crovisier,et al., “ALMA map-
ping of rapid gas and dust variations in comet C/2012 S1 (ISON): new
insights into the origin of cometary HNC,” The Astrophysical Journal838,
147 (2017).
27M. Cordiner, N. Roth, S. Milam, G. Villanueva, D. Bockelée-Morvan,
A. Remijan, S. Charnley, N. Biver, D. Lis, C. Qi,et al., “Gas sources from
the coma and nucleus of comet 46p/wirtanen observed using alma,” The
Astrophysical Journal953, 59 (2023).
28M. Zoltowski, F. Lique, P. Zuchowski, J. Kłos, J. Loreau, and D. Kedziera,
“Collisional excitation of HCN by H 2O,” Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society540, 626–632 (2025).
29E. Castro-Juárez, X.-G. Wang, T. Carrington Jr, E. Quintas-Sánchez, and
R. Dawes, “Computational study of the ro-vibrational spectrum of co–co2,”
The Journal of chemical physics151, 084307 (2019).
30E. Quintas-Sánchez, R. Dawes, X.-G. Wang, and T. Carrington, “Compu-
tational study of the rovibrational spectrum of co2–n2,” Physical Chemistry
Chemical Physics22, 22674–22683 (2020).
31M. Gancewski, H. Jó´ zwiak, E. Quintas-Sánchez, R. Dawes, F. Thibault,
and P. Wcisło, “Fully quantum calculations of o2–n2 scattering using a new
potential energy surface: Collisional perturbations of the oxygen 118 ghz
fine structure line,” The Journal of Chemical Physics155, 124307 (2021).
32B. Desrousseaux, E. Quintas-Sánchez, R. Dawes, S. Marinakis, and
F. Lique, “Collisional excitation of interstellar pn by h 2: New interaction
potential and scattering calculations,” The Journal of Chemical Physics154,
034304 (2021).
33E. Quintas-Sánchez, R. Dawes, and O. Denis-Alpizar, “Theoretical study
of the hcs +–h2 van der waals complex: potential energy surface, rovibra-
tional bound states, and rotationally inelastic collisional cross sections,”
Molecular Physics119, 1980234 (2021).
34A. Zadro˙zny, H. Jó´ zwiak, E. Quintas-Sánchez, R. Dawes, and P. Wcisło,
“Ab initioquantum scattering calculations for the CO–O2 system and a new
CO–O2 potential energy surface: O2 and air broadening of the R(0) line in
CO,” J. Chem. Phys.157, 174310 (2022).
35Y . Ajili, E. Quintas-Sánchez, B. Mehnen, P. S.˙Zuchowski, F. Brzek, N. El-
Kork, M. Gacesa, R. Dawes, and M. Hochlaf, “Theoretical study of the
co2–o2 van der waals complex: potential energy surface and applications,”
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics24, 28984–28993 (2022).
36A. Olejnik, H. Jó´ zwiak, M. Gancewski, E. Quintas-Sánchez, R. Dawes, and
P. Wcisło, “Ab initio quantum scattering calculations and a new potential
energy surface for the hcl(x1σ +)–o2(x3σ −
g ) system: Collision-induced line
shape parameters for o 2-perturbed r(0) 0–0 line in h 35cl,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics159, 134301 (2023).
37D. Bostan, B. Mandal, C. Joy, M. ˙Zółtowski, F. Lique, J. Loreau,
E. Quintas-Sánchez, A. Batista-Planas, R. Dawes, and D. Babikov, “Mixed
quantum/classical calculations of rotationally inelastic scattering in the co
+ co system: a comparison with fully quantum results,” Physical Chemistry
Chemical Physics26, 6627–6637 (2024).
38E. Quintas-Sánchez and R. Dawes, “Autosurf: A freely available program
to construct potential energy surfaces,” J. Chem. Inf. Model.59, 262–271
(2019).
39M. Majumder, S. A. Ndengué, and R. Dawes, “Automated construction of
potential energy surfaces,” Mol. Phys.114, 1–18 (2016).
40R. Dawes and E. Quintas-Sánchez, “The Construction of Ab Initio-Based
Potential Energy Surfaces,” inReviews in Computational Chemistry vol. 31
(John Wiley & Sons, 2018) Chap. 5, pp. 199–264.
41E. Quintas-Sánchez and R. Dawes, “Spectroscopy and scattering studies us-
ing interpolated ab initio potentials,” Annual Review of Physical Chemistry
72, 399–421 (2021).
42H.-J. Werner, P. J. Knowles, G. Knizia, F. R. Manby, and M. Schütz,
“Molpro: a general-purpose quantum chemistry program package,” Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science2, 242–253
(2012).
43K. A. Peterson, T. B. Adler, and H.-J. Werner, “Systematically convergent
basis sets for explicitly correlated wavefunctions: The atoms H, He, B–Ne,
and Al–Ar,” J. Chem. Phys.128, 084102 (2008).
44D. Feller, K. A. Peterson, and T. D. Crawford, “Sources of error in elec-
tronic structure calculations on small chemical systems,” The Journal of
chemical physics124, 054107 (2006).
45A. L. Batista-Planas, E. Quintas-Sánchez, and R. Dawes, “Long-range fit:
A software package for the representation and study of long-range molecu-
lar interactions,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation (2026).
46R. Dawes, X. G. Wang, and T. Carrington, “CO dimer: New potential en-
ergy surface and rovibrational calculations,” Journal of Physical Chemistry
A117, 7612–7630 (2013).
47M. Alexander, P. J. Dagdigian, H.-J. Werner, J. Kłos, B. Desrousseaux,
G. Raffy, and F. Lique, “Hibridon: A program suite for time-independent
non-reactive quantum scattering calculations,” Computer Physics Commu-
nications289, 108761 (2023).
48A. Faure, A. Bacmann, and R. Jacquot, “Excitation of molecules and atoms
for astrophysics (emaa): A spectroscopic and collisional database,” Astron-
omy & Astrophysics700, A266 (2025).
49F. L. Schöier, F. F. van der Tak, E. F. van Dishoeck, and J. H. Black, “An
atomic and molecular database for analysis of submillimetre line observa-
tions,” Astronomy & Astrophysics432, 369–379 (2005).
50M. Dubernet, C. Boursier, O. Denis-Alpizar, Y . Ba, N. Moreau, C. Zwölf,
M. Amor, D. Babikov, N. Balakrishnan, C. Balança,et al., “Basecol2023
scientific content,” Astronomy & Astrophysics683, A40 (2024).