Title: The benefit of a multi-band high resolution spectroscopic monitoring for studying stellar transients: the NGC 300 OT2008-1 UVES spectrum as a test case
Authors: Elena Mason, Steven N. Shore, Andrea Pastorello, Paolo Di Marcantonio
Published: 2026-05-20
Categories: astro-ph.SR

Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. aanda©ESO 2026
May 21, 2026
The benefit of a multi-band high resolution spectroscopic
monitoring for studying stellar transients: the NGC 300 OT2008-1
UVES spectrum as a test case.
Elena Mason1, Steven N. Shore2,1 , Andrea Pastorello3, and Paolo Di Marcantonio1
1 INAF-OATS, Via Giambattista Tiepolo 11, 34143 Trieste (TS), Italia
e-mail:elena.mason@inaf.it
2 Dipartimento di Fisica “Enrico Fermi”, Università di Pisa, Largo B. Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa (PI), Italia
3 INAF-OAPD, Vicolo dell’Osservatorio 5, 35122 Padova (PD), Italia
Received September 15, 1996; accepted March 16, 1997
ABSTRACT
Aims.This work aims to advocate the benefit of high resolution spectroscopic monitoring in the study of local group transients.
Taking advantage of the experience gained through a vast and systematic study of transients such novae and non-compact-stellar-
mergers which we monitored through panchromatic high resolution spectroscopy, we show that a similar approach -i.e. a change of
paradigm in the observing strategy and the analysis- in the study of a number of (local group) transients would be advantageous.
Methods.As an exemplary analysis, we focus on the optical transient NGC 300 OT2008-1. Searching the ESO archives, we found a
low resolution (FORS) and a high resolution (UVES) spectrum that were separated by only one day with no changes between them.
We reduced and analyzed each spectrum comparing the different information accessible in the two cases.
Results.The independent analysis of the FORS and UVES spectra show that in the low resolution spectra we can securely identify
only a small sample of lines and miss the correct characterization of the ejecta energetics which remain at the level of speculation.
Instead, in the high resolution data, we identify a larger sample of emission lines and analyze their profiles. This points to a complex
geometry and ejecta dynamics whose inference are simply impossible in low resolution spectra. Line profile studies are not possi-
ble with low resolution spectra, and may lead to potentially misleading measures. Additionally, because of the limited information
available from low spectral resolution data, the interpretation is compromised (e.g. FWHM measurement of unresolved lines), and
prevented formulating any realistic physical scenario other than conducting parameter fitting to oversimplified, biased, standard mod-
els. In this occasion only one epoch was available, but monitoring is fundamental to characterize the transient evolution. In particular,
since, based on the UVES spectrum, we propose a new very specific scenario, we discuss how it could have been confirmed or
dismissed thanks to a high resolution spectroscopic monitoring. Low and high resolution spectra serve different but complementary
purposes. With LR one does bolometric-like studies (SED, strengthening or weakening of the major transitions), while with HR one
does dynamics and precise physical characterization. We also show examples from our past works, on different types of transients,
for which it was possible, by monitoring with high resolution spectroscopy, to disentangle the various components, constrain their
physical parameters, the involved energy source, and derive the ejecta dynamics.
Key words.Techniques: spectroscopic; Line: formation; Line: profiles; Stars: mass-loss; Stars: circumstellar matter; Stars: individ-
ual: NGC 300 OT2008-1
1. Introduction
Spectroscopic observations of transients, in particular extra-
galactic transients, are mostly limited to low resolution (LR) for
a number of obvious reasons. Although these transients can be
intrinsically luminous, they are distant so apparent magnitudes
only occasionally reach 16th mag. Furthermore, stellar transients
usually fade rapidly. Thus, broad-band photometry is generally
the favored observing strategy since it permits long followup and
is cheap, time-wise. In addition, theoretical models often predict
only photometric behaviors. Optical spectroscopy with a resolu-
tion (R) of a few hundred is somewhat more demanding in terms
of telescope time than photometry but still widely used for clas-
sification and long term monitoring; while, high-resolution (HR)
spectra (with R up to several thousands) is considered prohibitive
even with the current 10m-class telescopes.
The initial exploration of the diversity of transients (when
all objects were generically tagged as novae) was necessarily
framed phenomenologically as a collection of events that have
gradually been taxonomically distinguished on the basis of new
observational criteria, including the peak brightness, the lumi-
nosity decline rate, the color evolution and, eventually, their
spectral appearance. The emission line width, which is indica-
tive of the expansion velocity of the gas, is one of the most
immediate physical parameters to estimate. In this context, the
extremely large velocities often exhibited by the spectral lines
(thousands to tens of thousands km/s) promoted the routine use
of LR spectroscopy since the line widths are already resolved
with R of a few hundred.
Furthermore, the requirement of target of opportunity (ToO)
and/or multi-epoch observations in time-critical fashion, has of-
ten limited the monitoring to small or mid-size telescopes, as
the pressure of the scientific community on these facilities is
usually lower. As a consequence of these strategies, extended
databases of light curves and LR spectra have been accumu-
Article number, page 1 of 10
arXiv:2605.21156v1  [astro-ph.SR]  20 May 2026

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
lated (e.g. ePESSTO and NUTS collaborations), and recently
complemented by deep and high angular resolution archival im-
ages from space telescopes showing the transient’s environment
within its host galaxy. All of this allowed a statistical inference
of their origin, including the basic properties of their progeni-
tors and a tentative physical scenario of the outburst. However,
in most cases, the ultimate interpretations are not unique and
the actual physics remains somewhat obscure. This is even more
evident when the transient event occurs while the star is still em-
bedded in a high density, clumpy and asymmetric circumstel-
lar medium (CSM). This is frequently observed in ejecta-CSM
interacting supernovae (Smith 2017). A further complication is
that a range of progenitor configurations and eruption mecha-
nisms may produce stellar transients exhibiting surprisingly sim-
ilar observational properties when the ejected material interacts
with the CSM (e.g., Pastorello & Fraser 2019). In all these cases,
simplified scenarios inferred through only photometric and LR
spectroscopic observations can be highly ambiguous or even
wrong.
Instead, the most significant progress always occurs when
individual objects are sufficiently bright and/or close to be ob-
served with high cadence, providing high signal-to-noise data
and, most importantly, using complementary approaches to
those usually adopted for normal transients, including (spectro-
)polarimetric observations (e.g. Leonard et al. 2000; Desidera et
al. 2004; Singh et al. 2024; Shrestha et al. 2025) and HR spec-
troscopy (e.g., Kaminski et al. 2009; Smith & Andrews 2020;
Smith et al. 2023; Pessi et al. 2024).
In this work, we emphasize the importance of systematic HR
observations of transients to determine the dynamics of the ex-
panding gas and constrain the physics of the ejection process
and the transient’s formation channel. This is crucial when the
observed velocity is low (<1000 km/s) and/or there is a con-
spicuous amount of circumstellar gas. Such HR observations
are limited to the Local Group of galaxies because of the cur-
rently available telescope collecting power. An appealing test
case is that of a peculiar interacting transient NGC 300OT 2008-
11 (300OT from hereafter). This transient has been extensively
studied in the past 15 years (e.g. Prieto et al. 2009; Bond et al.
2009; Berger et al. 2009; Gogarten et al. 2009; Thompson et al.
2009; Kashi et al. 2010; Patat et al. 2010; Ohsawa et al. 2010;
Kochanek 2011; Humphreys et al. 2011; Soker & Kashi 2012;
Adams et al. 2016; Valerin et al. 2025a, 2025b). It is the proto-
type of a novel class of ejecta-CSM interacting gap transients la-
beled Intermediate-Luminosity Red Transients (ILRTs)2. While
their light curves resemble type II supernovae, they are 1-2 or-
ders of magnitudes fainter. Their spectra show narrow emission
lines of H, and a characteristic [Ca II] doublet visible throughout
the ILRT evolution. The progenitors have been observed in qui-
escence in mid-infrared imaging taken by theSpitzerspacecraft,
and were moderate-mass stars embedded in dusty environments.
The observables of ILRTs appear to be consistent with the expec-
tations of electron-capture supernovae from super-AGB stars.
The evidence that the progenitors of an handful of ILRTs have
also been found to disappear several years after the outburst in
the mid-infrared supports their identification as terminal core-
1 This transient has recently been named with an IAU designation as
AT 2008jd (Monard 2022).
2 Data for other ILRTs were published by Prieto et al. 2008; Smith
et al. 2009; Botticella et al. 2009; Wesson et al. 2010; Szczygiel et al.
2012; Cai et al. 2018; Cai et al. 2021; Jencson et al. 2019; Stritzinger
et al. 2020; Karambelkar et al. 2023; Moran et al. 2024; Valerin et al.
2025a,b.
collapse explosion of the progenitors (Adams et al. 2016, Valerin
et al. 2025a,b).
Our purpose in this paper is to demonstrate the impact of HR
spectroscopy in the study of stellar transients. Our intention is
not specifically to attempt a definitive scenario for a particular
transient, but to present an example of how the chosen observ-
ing strategy constrains the interpretation. We thus analyzed a HR
UVES a LR FORS spectrum of 300OT, independently of any al-
ready published result and without taking in account the transient
classification. These two spectra were taken at the VLT only one
day apart, a time interval sufficiently small to exclude any sig-
nificant spectral development in an ILRT. They were retrieved
through the ESO archive. 3 (program: 281.D-5016, PI: Benetti).
These data are presented in Sect. 2. We analyze in detail the two
spectra, comparing the amount of information contained in each
of them in Sect. 3. In Sect. 4, we emphasize the importance of
multi-epoch observations spanning the evolution of the transient.
In Sect. 5 we discuss the limitations induced by the reduced
wavelength coverage. Finally, a discussion and the conclusions
are presented in Sect. 6.
2. The VLT archive and the data reduction
The UVES spectra were reduced with UVES pipeline version
6.1.3 and the graphic interfacegasgano, version 2.4.8. The re-
duction process was sped up downloading the master calibration
frames (an option which works withesorexbut not withesore-
flex). The flux calibration was performed using the master re-
sponse function produced by the observatory4. The FORS spec-
tra were reduced using IRAF’s recipes5. The procedure was quite
standard although the FORS data were taken with the polarimet-
ric optics (a Wallaston prims and a retarder-wave plate - see the
FORS User Manual 6 for more details) and the object light in
each exposure was split in two beams of orthogonal polarization,
the ordinary and extraordinary spectra. We separately extracted
and wavelength calibrated these two spectra in each frame and
then combined the two, flux calibrating their sum. Finally we av-
eraged the four spectra obtained at the four retarder wave plate
angles (0, 22, 45 and 67 deg), also verifying that they were com-
parable within the uncertainties. For the flux calibration we used
the spectophotometric standard star CD-32 9927 which was ob-
served∼1 month in advance with the same instrument setup
(GRIS300V and no order sorting filter). FORS GRISM300V
was used without order sorting filter and, therefore, is affected
by order overlap from about 6600 Å red-ward. The same wave-
length range is also strongly affected by fringes which we tried
to remove using the spectrophotometric standard 7. The appar-
ent emission features beyond∼8700 Å are likely residual fringes
(the fringe pattern in the science spectrum and the standard spec-
trum are not exactly overlapping because of the different instru-
mental flexures) and are, therefore, ignored. We note that there
is a slight discrepancy between the two final spectra in terms of
3 https://archive.eso.org/eso/eso_archive_main.html
4 https://www.eso.org/observing/dfo/quality/UVES/
pipeline/response.html
5 IRAF is distributed by the National Optical Astronomy Observatory,
which is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in
Astronomy (AURA) under a cooperative agreement with the National
Science Foundation.
6 https://www.eso.org/sci/facilities/paranal/
instruments/fors/doc.html
7 After a number of tests, we chose not to use the flat field in the whole
reduction process since, because of its odd illumination, it introduces
artifacts at the continuum level which is very hard to remove.
Article number, page 2 of 10

Elena Mason et al.: Low versus high resolution spectroscopy
5860 5880 5900 5920
6260 6280 6300 6320 6340
6550 6600
Fig. 1."Smear-out" effect and inaccurate wavelength solution of the
LR spectroscopy (blue line, FORS spectrum) compared to the HR one
(black line, UVES spectrum). See Section 3 for more details. In the
bottom panel, the FORS spectrum has been offset by the constant+2E-
15 erg/cm2/s/Å for clarity.
flux calibration. The color dependent part is probably ascribed to
the fact that FORS uses the telescope LADC (longitudinal atmo-
spheric dispersion corrector, Avila et al. 1997) which is set at the
beginning of the acquisition and does not change automatically
(with airmass) as the observation proceeds (section 3.11.4 of the
FORS User Manual, issue 116). Instead, the UVES slit rotates
with the sky and, by default, is set along the direction of maxi-
mum dispersion caused by the atmosphere. The spectra could be
corrected with existing photometry, if needed.
3. Low versus high resolution spectroscopy
The difference between HR and LR may seems obvious and well
known but with the widespread use of LR spectroscopy among
the transients community, the limitation intrinsic to LR seems
quite neglected. Consequently, it is worth stressing two singu-
larly important aspects of the spectroscopic analysis:
∗The process of line identification is linked to the complete-
ness of the sample of available lines: the larger the number of
detected (absorption and emission) lines, the more trustworthy
the identification is, with all that this reliability implies. A single
line cannot be securely identified and produces only best guess.
A line identification is solid when multiple transitions from the
the same multiplet and/or ion are also detected. LR spectroscopy,
by smearing out (i.e. loosing) weak transitions and blending tran-
sitions of close wavelength, jeopardizes the line identification
process, limiting it to only a few species. In addition, unresolved
blends, together with the larger uncertainty of the wavelength
solution, might lead to the wrong identification. Fig. 1 demon-
strates how the weak narrow features, in emission and absorp-
tion, are simply lost. From top to bottom, the Na I interstellar
absorptions, the forbidden [O I]λ6300 emission together with
the water atmospheric absorptions, and the narrow absorption
superposed on the Hαemission are not present in the LR spec-
trum.
∗The line profile analysis is linked to dynamics, separating
it from the energetics. Line profile analysis is, however, not pos-
sible in LR spectroscopy. By comparing profile structures, it is
possible to strengthen the identifications, and to distinguish dif-
ferent line forming regions. This provides information about the
geometry and the stratification of the emitting gas. In LR spectra
the lines, typically fitted with Gaussian and/or Lorentzian pro-
files, are dominated by the spectrograph’s line spread function,
LSF, leading to false dynamical information. Fig. 2 compares
the profiles of the Hβand [Ca II]λ7291 emissions from the tran-
sient with the [O I]λ5577 from the sky (a tracer of the spectro-
graph’s LSF) in the FORS and the UVES spectra. In particular,
in the FORS spectrum (left panel) the [Ca II] line is unresolved,
while the Hβemission is only marginally resolved. Instead, in
the UVES spectrum, both the Hβand [Ca II] emissions are re-
solved and are fundamentally different in morphology, width and
spanned velocity range.
In the following subsection we analyze the LR and the HR
spectra independently, to further underline the different reach of
the two strategies.
3.1. The two spectral analyses at face value: results from the
FORS spectrum alone
The FORS spectrum, with its superb S/N∼200-400, allows ro-
bust identification of the H Balmer lines down to H8, H-Paschen
10 and 11 (the latter in blend), He I 5875, the [Ca II] doublet
and the Ca II NIR triplet, in emission, Na I D and CaII H&K
in absorption. Other weaker features are visible but their iden-
tification remains uncertain. As typical for most LR grisms, the
wavelength solution is not very accurate and is also affected by
a nonlinear component most evident at the blue and red ends
of the spectrum. To this is added the smearing effect of the low
resolution. Thus, lines from the same series or multiplet have
different wavelength accuracy, and even after redshift correction
they display a range of offsets with respect to rest. For example,
the hydrogen Balmer lines have measured offsets (after redshift
correction) in the range -2.0 to+0.7 Å. Additionally, the red He I
lines have offsets of -0.7 to 1.2 Å. The lines measured at 5018.9
and 4925.7 are more consistent with Fe II RMT42λ5018.4 and
λ4923.9, than He Iλ5015.7 andλ4921.9, but the Fe II RMT42
λ5169.0 seems missing. Of the attempts to identify the blend
peaking at∼5174 Å, none is convincingly close to the Fe II
λ5169.0 so that the presence of Fe II RMT 42 cannot be con-
firmed. For similar reasons, a number of weak emission features
remain unidentified or highly uncertain (e.g. He IIλ4686) and,
with that, the ionization state of the emitting gas is uncertain.
In short, line identifications are possibilities rather than certain-
ties with LR spectra and the transient’s energetics are only con-
strained by its luminosity. Lacking P Cyg profiles, the expansion
velocity would be estimated by the width of the emission lines.
The only other physical information that can be obtained about
the line forming region is that the density of the emitting gas is
low, given the presence of the [Ca II] doublet. Had this spec-
trum been taken at the typically much lower S/N, e.g.∼20-30,
the number of identified lines would have decreased by 30-40%.
In both the low and the high S/N spectra, the detected tran-
sitions are inevitably ascribed to a same region, whose na-
ture could be virtually anything (precursor, ejecta, etc). In this
case, the combination of the observed low density (from the
[Ca II] lines), the steep Balmer decrement Hα/Hβ(∼4) sug-
Article number, page 3 of 10

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
-1000 0 1000 2000
-1000 0 1000
-1000 0 1000 2000
Fig. 2.Line profiles comparison between the transient’s Hβand [Ca II]λ7291 and the sky emission [O I]λ5577, in the FORS (left panel) and UVES
(right panel) spectra. In the left panel, the [O I] sky emission has been scaled to the Hβ(blue solid line) and the [Ca II] emission lines (blue dashed
line), to better show that the Hβwings are resolved, while those of the [Ca II] emission are not. In addition, the Hβand [Ca II] emission lines have
been offset (by -3.0E-16 and -3.2E-16 erg/s/Å/cm2, respectively) and shifted in velocity (by -168 and -260 km/s, again respectively) to facilitate
the comparison (NGC 300 heliocentric redshift is 147 km/s, Kachaeov et al. 2018). Their original alignment and relative flux is shown in the inset.
In the right panel (UVES spectrum), both the H and the [Ca II] lines are clearly resolved. The [OI]λ5577 sky emission is in ADU (right y axis).
gesting a high optical depth and high column density, and the
small/unresolved line width, would have favored the precursor
interpretation. A sequence of spectra of similar quality taken
across the outburst would have allowed measurement of only the
relative weakening/strengthening of the various transitions.
3.2. The two spectral analyses at face value: results from the
UVES spectrum alone
Compared to FORS, the UVES spectrum has similar wavelength
coverage and substantially lower S/N (∼5-30). Nevertheless,
what appears as a wavy continuum in FORS is actually a number
of weak emission and absorption features. These features crowd
together in the blue part of the spectrum, making the line iden-
tification difficult, but clearly showing that there is a "curtain"
of absorbing metals intercepting the U (and the NUV) flux. In
addition to the dozen lines identified in the FORS spectrum, we
confirm the presence of Fe II (of which particularly strong are
multiplet 42, 40, and 74, 48 and likely 49), Ti II (multiplets 41
and 31). Other Ti II multiplets are blended with other metal ab-
sorptions and not easily distinguishable. The same applies to Sc
II (solid evidence of multiplet 29 only). Also confirmed is the
presence of OI (multiplet 1, 4 and IF). He I is detected, in par-
ticularλ5875.6, 6678.1 and 7065.2. The presence of He II can
be dismissed despite lacking wavelength coverage around∼4686
Å and 3203 Å, since we do not detect the He IIλ10123 line, or
the weaker but relatively isolatedλ5411. Transitions from other
high ionization potential energy elements are also undetected.
Therefore, we conclude that the gas is relatively cool and dom-
inated by transitions from singly ionized metals. Most impor-
tantly, we can also state that there is UV-NUV radiation heavily
absorbed by the optically thick resonant transitions of the same
metals (iron peak elements) which de-excite through alternative
channels producing the emissions in the optical range. Hydrogen
and Helium are (singly) ionized and recombine, while the oxy-
gen is mainly excited by fluorescence (see below). Despite its
relatively low S/N, the HR UVES spectrum allows for a better
characterization of the ionization state of the emitting gas than
the LR FORS spectrum, regardless of its S/N.
However, the major advantage in the use of HR is in the
line profile analysis which is impossible in the LR mode and
which produces information that constrains, if not pinpoints, the
underlying physical processes. The most striking feature in the
HR spectrum that is invisible at LR is a narrow absorption at
about+190 to+200±10 km/s (LSR reference frame, spectrum
not corrected for the host galaxy redshift). As shown in Fig.3,
this absorption is common to several transitions (H Balmer and
Paschen, a number of Fe II transitions, Ca NIR, and O I). It is
asymmetric, being very sharp/steep in its blue side and with an
extended wing on the red side, and is replicated, in profile, by
the emissions in the forbidden transitions from O I and Ca II
and perhaps Fe II (only multiplet 14F could be ascertained). Be-
cause of the nature of the transitions (from H and excited level
of ionized metals) in which it is observed, it clearly originates
in circumstellar gas. Only the Na I D absorption at a similar ve-
locity cannot be firmly attributed either to the host galaxy or the
transient’s circumstellar environment. Most likely, given that the
Na I D narrow absorption is composite, it arises from both. The
circumstellar gas responsible of the narrow absorption compo-
nent is only weakly ionized (metals) and has a relatively low
density, not much larger than several 106 cm−1 (e.g. Dessart and
Hillier 2020, otherwise the O I and Ca II forbidden transitions
would not appear). In addition, since the absorption is detected
also in the Paschen series (although weakly), both Lyαand Lyβ
must be very opaque to substantially populate the n=2 and n=3
levels of the the hydrogen, respectively, and the gas column den-
Article number, page 4 of 10

Elena Mason et al.: Low versus high resolution spectroscopy
Fig. 3.Selection of transitions showing the narrow absorption compo-
nent mirrored by the [Ca II] and [O I] emissions (see text for more de-
tails). The spectrum has been smoothed with a boxcar smoothing func-
tion of width 15 points. Y-axis unit is Flux in erg/cm2/s/Å. The vertical
dotted line marks the+200 km/s velocity roughly matching the mini-
mum of all the observed absorptions.
sity -in the narrow component- must be large. The high opacity
of Lyβalso explains the fluorescence of the O I triplet∼λ8446
and the detection of its narrow absorption components.
This absorbing component is completely missed in the LR
spectrum. It is only detected, in emission, in the forbidden Ca II
multiplet, but it is kinematically undistinguished from all the
other emission lines (which we will call "broad" in the follow-
ing) and, therefore, everything is ascribed to a same uniform cir-
cumstellar matter (CSM) in view of the measured width (<1000
km/s). But the gas producing the narrow absorption and the for-
bidden Ca II and O I emissions is a separate region from that
producing the broad emission against which it is detected. The
kinematics of these regions are different and so is their degree of
ionization/excitation, the broad component showing He I which
is not observed in the narrow component.
The kinematics of the narrow component is particularly in-
formative. NGC 300 is a spiral galaxy with an intermediate in-
clination and an average redshift of 136 km/s (with respect to
the LSR, Westmeier et al. 2010), but its outskirts or spiral arms
will have some additional radial component. From the 2D map-
ping of Westmeier et al. 2010, the radial velocity at the posi-
tion of 300OT is in the range 181≤v r ≤196 km/s (with respect
to the LSR) with a dispersion of only 12 km/s. Now, the nar-
row (absorption) component has its minimum around 180 to 210
km/s suggesting a gas region moving away from the observer
and, possibly, toward the transient. At the same time, it has a
peculiar asymmetric profile indicative of a gas kinematic that is
not typically observed from gas being accreted by the central
object (e.g. Grinin et al. 1994, Folha & Emerson 2001, Batalha
et al. 2001, Perez et al. 2008, Hamilton et al. 2012, Cauley et
al. 2015, Hajigholi et al. 2016, Akimoto & Itoh 2019, Yang et
al. 2022, Erkal et al. 2022). The narrow absorption component
can be explained as the neutral gas (not yet affected by the tran-
sient ejecta) from a donor companion wind, similarly to the cir-
cumbinary material produced by the giant’s wind in symbiotic
recurrent novae (SyRN, e.g. Shore et al. 2011a, Walder et al.
2008, Orlando et al. 2009). The orbital motion accounting for its
redshift (or null velocity) with respect to the transient’ systemic
velocity and orbital phase at the time of the observations being in
the first elongation or the first two quadrants (i.e. the donor and
its wind are moving away from the observer). Then, similarly
to the dynamics observed in SyRN in nova outburst, the broad
component matches the shock front between the ejecta and the
circumtransient/circumbinary material (Shore et al. 2011a).
Considering the Roche lobe geometry for a generic binary
where the outburst occurs in one of the stars, the expanding
ejecta will smash directly against the companion wind in the di-
rection toward L1 and the companion, but will travel with the
wind (just at a higher velocity) in the opposite direction toward
L3. The companion wind and the ejecta will impact at an an-
gle in all the other directions. Similar impacts "at an angle"
will occur above and below the binary orbital plane. Hence, the
shock region is clearly asymmetric around the transient (no mat-
ter whether the ejecta have spherical symmetry) and with a range
of velocities that together will produce a smoothed bell-shaped
line profile. The steepness and the extension of the emission line
wings will result, in addition to the energetics of the shock, from
the observer’s line of sight. The presence of a shock precursor
will depend on both the (dynamically undisturbed) gas opacity
and the observer’s line of sight. The distribution of the circumbi-
nary gas might be axisymmetric with a higher density in the or-
bital plane due to the conservation of the angular momentum.
Since there will be different gas densities on the front and rear
side of the outbursting object as well as close to or away from the
orbital plane, it is reasonable to expect a range of gas conditions
sampled across the line profile.
We can check for those by computing the Balmer decrement
(with respect to Hβ) per velocity bin (Fig.4 right panel; the left
panel shows the individual line profile to aid the reader). Fig.4
shows a flatter decrement on the blue side of the emission com-
ponent with respect to the red side, suggesting larger opacity for
the latter. The figure also shows that the wings tend to behave
differently from the line core, being in particular less opaque.
Hence, either we are dealing with a medium consisting of mul-
tiple components (two to four, significantly complicating the ge-
ometry and the physics of the event) or with one characterized
by a continuum of different/varying physical conditions as in the
case of a shock front propagating in a CSM with a gradient (not
homogeneous). None of this could be inferred from LR spectra.
The wings deserve further attention since they could indi-
cate electron scattering, often observed (and expected) when
shocks are present. Although (e.g. Fig.4, left panel), the wings
of the Balmer emissions show different extension, suggesting
that dynamical effects are dominating over electron scattering,
they might result from the low S/N in the higher line of the se-
ries. It is essential to collect high S/N observations of the Balmer
series to establish the presence of electron scattering. The com-
parison with transitions from other species helps but might be
ambiguous since different emission measures and line formation
mechanisms have to be taken into account. Fig.5 shows in the
two top panels the H Balmer lines Hαto Hγscaled to the peak
Article number, page 5 of 10

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
-1000 0 1000 -500 0 500 1000
Fig. 4.Left Panel: H Balmer and Paschenεline profiles. Hεof the
Balmer series has been omitted since is severely blended with the
Ca IIλ3968 line (which is dominating). Right panel: the line ratio of
the H lines over Hβin velocity space. Note the different velocity range
adopted for the the left and the right panels, due to the noise in the line
ratio at large velocities. The blue and red shaded area, together, delimit
the core of the broad emission line and represent the part where the
difference in the ratio is significant and robust. The wings, having less
signal, do not permit equally solid inferences, although a difference is
apparent. See text for more details.
-2000 -1000 0 1000 2000
-2000 -1000 0 1000 2000
-1000 0 1000
-1000 0 1000
Fig. 5.Scaled profiles (broad component) of the H Balmer (top) and
the Fe II (bottom) lines to the Hαprofile. Left panels: the 300OT case
showing weak evidence of electron scattering. Right panels: the sym-
biotic nova V1413 Aql (ARAS database, observer: Francois Teyssier),
whose wings are indicative of electron scattering. See text for more de-
tails.
-500 0 500 1000 -500 0 500 1000
Fig. 6.Comparison of the broad component profiles among various
transitions showing how He I and the Ca II NIR triplet lines peaks on
the blue side of the vertical dashed lines, while Fe II, O I, and Na I peak
at or on the red side of the same lines. See text for more details.
intensity of the Hαbroad component for 300OT (left) and the
symbiotic nova V1413 Aql (right). In the bottom panels the same
exercise is repeated with a selection of Fe II emission from mul-
tiplets (RMT) 42 and 48. The matching among wings profiles in
the case of V1413 Aql is evident, less so in the case of 300OT.
Therefore there is no conclusive statement for the latter, with
the caveat that the S/N, blends, and scaling biases all affect the
inference.
Another interesting characteristic of the broad line profiles
is that transitions from singly ionized low ionization potential
elements (e.g. Fe II, Ca II), together with transitions from neu-
tral elements (O and Na), peak at greater redshifts than the He I
transitions (Fig.6). This suggests a gradient in the physical con-
ditions of the medium producing the broad emission component.
A velocity gradient tied to a stratified ionization will produce
different profiles and mean velocities for any non-spherical ge-
ometry. It is not the same for a spherical geometry since the ra-
dial velocity,v rad(r), the density,ρ(r), and the ionization are only
one dimensional. The inferred gradient and asymmetries are con-
sistent with the proposed environment produced by the wind of
a companion star where the shock front is propagating into. A
single expanding medium would require a complicated velocity
field and geometry to reproduce the same observations.
The stratification of the circumbinary gas is apparent also
from the analysis of the O I and Ca II transitions. The broad
emission of the O I triplet at∼8446 Å, together with the weak-
ness of the O I∼7774 Å emission, confirm the mechanism of flu-
orescence from the highly opaque Lyβ. However, the broad ab-
sorption at the O I triplet∼7774 Å indicates that other processes
Article number, page 6 of 10

Elena Mason et al.: Low versus high resolution spectroscopy
are occurring (absorption and collision), favoring the population
of the 5So lower level of the triplet. Most likely, regions that ap-
pear superposed in velocity space are distinct in the 3D geometry
of the circumbinary gas and dominated each by a different radi-
ation process. This also explains the slight difference of the peak
of the [Ca II] broad emission and the Ca II H&K absorption with
respect to the Ca II NIR triplet (which is bluer).
Both the narrow and the broad components indicate a high
optical depth since they sample different portions of the same
circumstellar material: one (the broad) hit by the ejecta (i.e. dy-
namically interacting), and the other (the narrow) still dynam-
ically undisturbed and simply absorbing the radiation coming
from the shock region. The former is relatively small and denser,
the latter is much more extended and diluted into the circum-
stellar space. Although there is a density gradient, the overall
column density is large. This explains the high opacity of both
components and the lack of an observed precursor emission.
4. The limits of a single (HR) epoch: the vital
importance of a monitoring
We have shown how a new physical plausible scenario that ac-
counts for all the observational facts can be inferred from a single
high resolution spectrum. Although this is only one possible in-
terpretation, it does not require a complex andad hocgeometry
and/or formation history for the line forming region (both narrow
and broad component). To confirm any such scenario requires
multi-epoch observations (i.e. time domain HR spectroscopy).
With time, the line profiles from a shocked gas change. A
precursor disappears, if initially present. The dynamically undis-
turbed neutral gas of the CSM (the narrow component we ob-
serve) can also disappear, once the shock has crossed the whole
medium and broken out. The profile of the broad component (the
shock front) narrows, changing in shape or (a)symmetry depend-
ing on the shock breakout and the observer’s line of sight. Dif-
ferent species might appear (e.g. coronal emissions) that display
completely different line profiles since they form in the post-
shock bubble. The sequence of Hαprofiles of RS Oph during
its 2006 outburst (Fig.7 left panel) shows such a development:
the precursor and the narrow absorption has disappeared by day
∼12 (with a velocity≥4000 km/s the ejecta reach the giant com-
panion in about half a day); the broad component has narrowed
from FWZI∼8000 km/s to∼2000 in about 1.5 months from the
outburst when the coronal emission such as [Fe X] appeared.
Coronal emissions have been reported for similar systems such
as V407 Cyg and showed to be valid shocks diagnostic, in view
of the strong correlation between the X-ray and [Fe X] emission
(Shore et al. 2011a, 2012a).
Conversely, optically thin ejecta in free expansion would
maintain the line profiles while only decreasing in flux and
narrowing in FWHM as the gas emission measure decreases
due to expansion (e.g. the two bottom profiles in the nova Ser
2005/V387 Ser Hαseries in Fig.7 right panel; see also the gallery
of nova line profiles in Mason et al. 2018, and Shore et al. 2016,
2013). During the initial optically thick phase, the line profile is
constantly changing according to the gas geometry, homogene-
ity and the instantaneous location of the pseudophotosphere (first
four profiles in Fig.7 right panel). Note how the absorption fea-
tures that are visible in the first two epochs subsequently turn
into emission. In addition, with just a single spectrum from, say,
day 15 or 38, one would have inferred a P Cyg profile and a
wind, an even more likely deduction from low spectral resolu-
tion spectra.
-4000 -2000 0 2000 4000 -4000 -2000 0 2000 4000
Fig. 7.Examples of line profile evolution in the case of an ejecta ex-
panding in a medium and producing shock emission in the symbiotic
recurrent nova RS Oph (left panel), and of ejecta in free expansion as
in the classical nova V378 Ser (right panel). The two sequences were
obtained at the 2.2+FEROS (R∼48000).
Further, the persistence of any CSM absorbing component
constrains its distance from the transient and therefore the CSM
geometry and its previous history. Similarly, the increasing in-
tensity (with no other line profile changes) of a photoionized
CSM depends on its distance, the radiation diffusion time within
the gas and, therefore, on the gas physical conditions, the du-
ration of the ionizing source, and depending on ionization, the
SED of the ionizing source (see e.g. Dwek and Felten 1992, for
the continuum, and Mason & Shore 2022, for line fluorescence).
Light echos can contribute additional emission components; the
time of their appearance constrains the distance of the scattering
echoing cloud. All these processes can be distinguished through
adequate monitoring8. It is only the observed evolution that al-
lows the distinction.
In summary, changes in intensity and profile shape of dif-
ferent lines constrain the ongoing dynamics; while appearance
or disappearance of different species informs about ionization
changes and, therefore, about the powering source. If we were to
have a sequence of HR spectra showing the profile evolution of
the broad emission components and the persistence or disappear-
ance of the narrow absorption component, or the appearance of
new species or ions, we would have been able to produce more
physical constraints in place of a merely plausible scenario. Be-
low we describe a few cases for which the monitoring in HR
spectroscopy lead to important physical constraints.
HR spectra of the T Pyx 2011 outburst early evolution
showed that the apparent outward motion of the absorption com-
ponent in the ejecta was consistent with an outward propagating
recombination wave (Shore et al. 2011b, in particular, their Fig-
ure 2, 4, and 5; see also Shore 2012b). In addition, those obser-
vations, combined with late time monitoring including the HR
8 The definitive confirmation of a light echo, however, requires com-
plementary linear spectropolarimetry.
Article number, page 7 of 10

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
UV wavelength range, revealed that the dynamical law of the
ejecta that matches free expansion (linear velocity law, De Gen-
naro Aquino et al. 2014) and not a wind (Friedjung 1966, 1987,
1992, 2011, Cassatella et al. 2004).
Similarly, the HR spectroscopic monitoring of the transient
ASASSN-17hx across its multiple light curve maxima (Mason
et al. 2020) showed that the observed lines variations (both in
profile and displayed ionic species) are consistent with a freely
expanding ejecta subject to the irradiation from a varying under-
neath source. In particular, the ionizing source was harder dur-
ing minima causing the ejecta pseudo-photosphere to recede, an
increased excitation of the high ionization potential energy ele-
ments such as He, and the ionization of the low ionization po-
tential metals (e.g. Fe II and iron group).
A final example of the greater amount of information pro-
duced by the monitoring in HR spectroscopy is given by V1309
Sco (Mason and Shore 2022). In that case, the six UVES epochs
allowed distinguishing two physically and dynamically distinct
components, despite the low velocities of the individual spec-
tral features. One, the low velocity component, was ascribed to
circumstellar material, in view of the lack of evolution for over
345 days. These spectra also constrained its geometry either to
a gas region orthogonal to the expanding ejecta (non spherically
symmetric) or to a very distant CSM with respect to the pro-
genitor. Target of Opportunity (ToO) observations in Rapid Re-
sponse Mode (RRM), could have helped constraining the dis-
tance of the CSM. The other component, that with high velocity,
was identified with expanding matter based on its temporal de-
velopment. In addition, a constraint could be set on the ionizing
source which turned offbefore the ejecta became optically thin9.
We stress, at last, that a single spectrum/epoch might be mis-
leading also when it comes to classification since intrinsic pe-
culiarities might apparently differentiate a transient from a given
class identified through phenomenology. An example of this was
ASASSN-18fv: initially suspected to be an exotic transient or a
red nova (i.e. a non compact stellar merger, e.g. Strader et al.
2018, Izzo et al. 2018a), it turned out to be a nova once it en-
tered the optically thin phase (UVES archive public spectra, see
also Pavana et al. 2020). The plethora of very narrow absorption
lines displayed by ASASSN-18fv made it strikingly similar to
the discovery spectrum of V1309 Sco. Its bluer spectral energy
distribution was not a particular concern in view of the fact that
many extragalactic red novae are initially blue (e.g. Valerin et
al. 2025a,b). Within a few months, ASASSN-18fv developed a
spectrum rich in Fe II lines with somewhat "castellated" profile,
as typically observed during the optically thin phase of classi-
cal novae, and eventually displayed nebular transitions such as
[Ne III] and [O III], also with similar profiles and no evidence
of molecular bands, consistent with a passive ejecta ionized by a
strong central source, as in novae. Compared to red-novae, this
evolution suggests a smaller column density and different pow-
ering source.
Monitoring of extragalactic rapidly fading transients with
HR spectroscopy might not be feasible in short exposure times,
but moving from HR to LR as the transient fades cannot help
in this sense. It is, therefore, important to consider longer expo-
sures (faint QSO and Lyαforests are routinely observed in HR
spectroscopy) for at least a number of transients and transient
types.
9 The late monitoring was complemented with intermediate resolution
spectra (XShooter), due to the faintness reached by the transient.
5. The limits of a small wavelength coverage
Some astrophysical science cases are only marginally affected
by a limited spectroscopic wavelength range but, for stellar
transients requiring a physical characterization, it is important
to cover the bulk of the transient spectral energy distribution
(panchromatism).
As mentioned earlier, the evidence for electron scattering re-
quires the comparison of several emission lines, ideally from a
same ion (e.g. H), to avoid biasing the inference with possible
emission measure and/or recombination effects. Fig.5, presented
in Section 3.2, shows how the emission lines wings broadened
by electron scattering affect each profile identically, producing
same wings and velocity extensions 10. The S/N must be high
across the whole wavelength range of the spectrum.
Similarly, the line identification process discussed in Sec-
tion 3 ideally requires that each transition is confirmed by the
simultaneous detection of other transitions from the same multi-
plets, or similar multiplets from the same ion, while recognizing
that, in a (violently) expanding gas, LTE conditions do not ap-
ply and peculiar fluorescence effects (from lines or continuum)
can occur that are induced by the velocity field of the expand-
ing gas (e.g., Williams & Ferguson 1983, Shore 2012, Shore et
al. 2014). Again, it is impossible to assess the ionization degree
of a gas region from a small spectral range spectrum, since no
species or ion has uniformly distributed transitions in any wave-
length interval.
The large majority of grisms (unless of extremely low reso-
lution, R∼100) cover only a few thousands Å of spectral range,
the blue or the red optical range, or Hαand Hβand anything
in between. But the blue (B) band alone, for example, cannot
help assessing whether the detection of, e.g., N III is due to fluo-
rescence or recombination, or establishing, upon the detection of
He II, whether the ionizing radiation is limited to∼54 eV or even
higher, or correctly infer the density and/or temperature gradi-
ents. The red part alone, missing the blue wavelengths, cannot
inform about metal absorptions (e.g. the iron curtain) or fluo-
rescence effects (Bowen blend, O III, O IV Raman). It further
prevents the detection of most of the forbidden transitions used
as density or temperature diagnostic (e.g. [O II] at 3726,3729 Å,
[O III] 5007,4959 and 4363 Å, [Ne III] 3869,3967 and 3342 Å,
[Ne V] 3425,3345 and 2975 Å, [S II] 4068,4076 Å). Detecting
just the Ca II NIR triplet does not establish whether it is due to
recombination or the large opacity of the Ca II H&K resonance
lines. It is interesting to note that many HR spectrographs, hav-
ing exoplanet studies as the driver science case, tend to penalize
the B and U band. This substantially impedes stellar science, in
general, and the studies of transients, in particular.
6. Discussion and conclusions
Taking advantage of the serendipity that the ESO archive
contained almost simultaneous observations of the transient
NGC 300 OT2008-1 taken at the VLT with the FORS and UVES
spectrographs, we had the idea of comparing the two intrinsi-
cally identical spectra to show the different information that is
possible to extract from each data set. For this reason, the two
spectra have been analyzed independently and without account-
ing for the results already present in the literature to which we
refer the reader interested in a comprehensive view about the ob-
10 More precisely, it must be that the scattering and the line forming
regions coincide in space or are one in front of the other.
Article number, page 8 of 10

Elena Mason et al.: Low versus high resolution spectroscopy
ject and its evolution (e.g. Berger et al. 2009, Kashi et al. 2010,
Patat et al. 2010, Humphreys et al. 2011, Valerin et al. 2025a,b).
Our analysis has two strong implications for studying tran-
sients. On the one hand it demonstrates the superior amount of
information available in the HR spectrum with respect to the LR
one. On the other hand, the reanalysis of the UVES spectrum
of 300OT has revealed new insights not fully noticed before.
The identification of the broad emission line region with a shock
front and of the narrow absorption with circumbinary material
produced by a companion star. In this new proposed scenario the
outbursting object resides in a binary systems in which the com-
panion has created a high column density environment. Because
of the relative velocity of the shock emission and the narrow ab-
sorption from the undisturbed gas, the binary was viewed from
one of the quadrant bracketing the 0.25 orbital phase at the time
of the observations.
This picture could not have been formulated based on LR
spectroscopy. This is the great limitation of LR spectroscopy
(and filter photometry): it impedes deductive analysis, favoring
an overly simplified modeling based on (frequently, nonphysi-
cal) parameters fitting. In contrast, HR spectroscopy favors de-
ductive analysis, securing the line identification with high ac-
curacy, permitting accurate determination of the transient’s ion-
ization structure, allowing the identification multiple compo-
nents (typically unresolved at low resolution, even in the case
of>1000 km/s lines such as in novae 11) by pinpointing the
true line profiles and wing extensions (often in LR spectra Gaus-
sian or Lorenzian wings results from the instrument’s LSF), and
helping to constrain the gas kinematic and physical conditions12.
However, determining the gas dynamics requires monitoring, i.e.
a series of HR spectra sampling different evolutionary phases of
the transient. Based on experience and the literature (e.g. Della
Valle et al. 2002, Ederoclite et al. 2006, Williams et al. 2008,
Mason et al. 2010, Shore et al. 2016), six to seven epochs per
transient are sufficient to track its evolution; the cadence of the
observations mildly depending on the transient’s rate of decline
in brightness. A S/N>20-30 along the whole spectrum is needed
to sample line wings and weak features.
The detailed HR spectroscopic followup of at least some in-
dividual transients requires a relatively large amount of time (of
the order of tens of hours per object, in place of the usual few),
and therefore a change of paradigm in the typical transient ob-
serving strategy. We are aware that the proposed approach is de-
manding in terms of (large) telescope time and oversubscription,
but the gain is pivotal. In addition, those high quality data would
serve as benchmark for sparse observations routinely collected
for large sample of transients, especially now that the medium
resolution, MR, spectrograph SoXS is will be dedicated to mon-
itor the transient universe (Schipani et al. 2018). We are not
claiming that HR spectroscopy will answer all the questions (in
this sense HR spectropolarimetry provides even more informa-
tion), but it is the key for a physical characterization of new or
poorly known astrophysical phenomena. HR is hardly the so-
lution for statistical and population analysis and in this sense
different observing strategies are complementary. The transient
community should, then, consider observations with large and
11 Until the early 2000s, novae were routinely observed in LR spec-
troscopy because their lines where resolved. However, it is the detection
of their substructures and their kinematics that allowed determining the
dynamics of nova ejecta and it is only through HR spectra that is possi-
ble to determine the ejecta filling factor.
12 The ability to determine parameters such as the gas density or tem-
perature depends upon optically thin conditions and the detection of
diagnostic lines.
extremely large telescopes and HR spectrographs not just excep-
tionally but somewhat systematically.
When offered to the worldwide community, FEROS at the
ESO 2.2m or FIES on the NOT, were limited to∼13 mag which
made them suitable for only bright Galactic transients such as
novae near maximum (e.g. Ederoclite et al. 2006, Williams et
al 2008, Shore et al. 2011a, 2011b, 2012a, 2013, 2016, Mason
& Munari 2014). UVES on the VLT has been excellent for no-
vae (e.g Mason & Munari 2014, Molaro et al. 2016, Mason et
al. 2018, Izzo et al, 2018b, Molaro et al. 2020) and other galac-
tic transients during early decline (e.g. red novae Mason et al.
2010, Tylenda et al. 2011, 2015, Mason & Shore 2022) but is
limited to magnitudes around∼17-18. This clearly hampers the
followup of novae at late decline (nebular phase) and the major-
ity of extragalactic transients. Only the near maximum phases of
bright Local Group transients can be observed with UVES.
The ArmazoNes high Dispersion Echelle Spectrograph (AN-
DES, Marconi et al. 2024) is the second-generation, high-
resolution, multi-wavelength spectrograph currently planned for
the ESO Extremely Large Telescope (ELT). Conceived as one of
the ELT’s flagship instruments, ANDES is designed to exploit
the telescope’s collecting area by delivering ultra-precise spec-
troscopy across a very broad wavelength range, from the near-
ultraviolet to the near-infrared (0.35 to 2.4µm). With a baseline
resolving power of R≃100000 and a fiber-fed design developed
upon the heritage of instruments such as HARPS (ESO/La Silla)
and ESPRESSO (ESO/VLT), ANDES is specifically optimized
for exoplanet science, including the detection and characteriza-
tion of exoplanet atmospheres and high-fidelity radial-velocity
studies (Palle et al. 2025). However, this does not preclude AN-
DES from being a powerful instrument for a broad range of other
astrophysical applications, including studies of galaxy formation
and evolution, the intergalactic medium, stellar chemical archae-
ology, and time-domain astronomy, with particular emphasis on
high-resolution investigations of transient phenomena (Roederer
et al. 2024).
In its current design, however, the limiting magnitude is ex-
pected to be approximately 18–19, that is, only about one magni-
tude deeper than UVES. This limitation could constrain several
of the non-exoplanet science cases, particularly those requiring
the follow-up of faint or rapidly fading sources. For this reason,
the ANDES consortium is actively evaluating possible strategies
to improve sensitivity. One option under consideration is the de-
ployment of an additional bundle of fibers connecting the front-
end injection system to the spectrograph modules of ANDES,
without the light scramblers that are necessary to limit system-
atics in precise radial-velocity measurements. The use of such
fibers, without junctions, and revised spectral formats compati-
ble with detector binning larger than 2×2, could enable observa-
tions of targets roughly one magnitude fainter (Schmidt, private
communication), corresponding to an improvement of about two
magnitudes relative to UVES. Although this may appear to be
a modest gain, it would increase by more than a factor of fif-
teen the accessible volume of parameter space currently reach-
able with UVES. More importantly, it would extend the tempo-
ral baseline over which selected transient sources can be moni-
tored, enabling observations into intrinsically fainter evolution-
ary phases and providing valuable insights on their physical and
chemical evolution.
We conclude that HR spectroscopy, panchromatism (ideally
UV+optical+NIR, or UV+optical and optical+NIR for blue and
reddened transients, respectively), and good signal-to-noise ratio
(>20-30 in the continuum) must be considered together. None of
them, alone, can produce solid results. Nor can a single mul-
Article number, page 9 of 10

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aanda
tiwavelength HR high S/N spectrum. A final extension, to HR
linear spectropolarimetry, would be invaluable in constraining
the structure of these complex sources. The systematic use of
those observing strategies, complemented by routine observa-
tions in low and medium resolution spectroscopy and photom-
etry at smaller facilities, would provide considerable improve-
ments in the characterization of transients by combining the in-
sights gained through a detailed physical analysis and those de-
rived from statistical studies. It would, in addition, produce con-
straints for theoretical models, possibly reducing the forcing of
oversimplified models to the observations.
Acknowledgements.EM thanks Ferdinando Patat from ESO-Garching for his
precious suggestions about the data reduction of FORS linear spectropolarimetry
data. EM thanks Tobias Schmidt for sharing his work about possible strategies
to observe faint targets with ANDES. AP acknowledges support from the PRIN-
INAF 2022 “Shedding light on the nature of gap transients: from the observations
to the models”.
References
Adams, S. M.; Kochanek, C. S.; Prieto, J. L.; et al., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 1645
Akimoto, H.; Itoh, Y ., 2019, IJAA, 9, 321,
Avila, G.; Rupprecht G.; Beckers, J.M.. 1997, SPIE, 2871.1135A
Batalha, C.; Lopes, D. F.; Batalha, N. M., 2001, ApJ, 548, 377
Berger, E.; Soderberg, A. M.; Chevalier, R. A.; et al., 2009, ApJ, 699, 1850
Bond, H. E.; Bedin, L. R.; Bonanos, A. Z.; et al., 2009, ApJ, 695, L154
Botticella, M. T.; Pastorello, A.; Smartt, S. J.; et al., 2009, MNRAS 398, 1041
Cai, Y .-Z.; Pastorello, A.; Fraser, M.; et al., 2018 MNRAS, 480, 3424
Cai, Y .-Z.; Pastorello, A.; Fraser, M. ; et al., 2021, A&A, 654, A157
Cassatella, A.; Lamers, H. J. G. L. M.; Rossi, C., 2004, A&A, 420, 571
Cauley, P. W.; Johns-Krull, C. M., ApJ, 810, 5
De Gennaro Aquino, I. ; Shore, S. N. ; Schwarz, G. J.; et al., 2014, A&A, 562,
A28
Desidera, S.; Giro, E.; Munari, U.; et al., 2004, A&A, 414, 591
Dessart, L.; Hillier, J. D., 2020, A&A, 642, A33
Dwek, E.; Felten, J. E., 1992, ApJ, 387, 551
Ederoclite, A.; Mason, E.; Della Valle, M.; et al., 2006, A&A, 459, 875
Erkal, J.; Manara, C. F.; Schneider, P. C.; et al., 2022, A&A, 666, 188
Folha, D. F. M.; Emerson, J. P., 2001, A&A, 365, 90
Friedjung, M., 1966, MNRAS, 132, 317
Friedjung, M., 1987, A&A, 179, 164
Friedjung, M., 1992, A&A, 262, 487
Friedjung, M., 2011, A&A, 536, 97
Gogarten, S. M.; Dalcanton, J. J.; Murphy, J. W.; et. al, 2009, ApJ, 703, 300
Grinin, V . P.; The, P. S.; de Winter, D.; et al., 1994, A&A, 292, 165
Hamilton, Catrina M.; Johns-Krull, Christopher M.; Mundt, Reinhard; et al.,
2012, ApJ, 751, 147
Hajigholi, M.; Persson, C. M.; Wirstrom, E. S.; et al., 2016, A&A, 585, 158
Humphreys, R. M.; Bond, H E.; Bedin, L. R.; et al., 2011, ApJ, 743, 118
Izzo, L.; Molaro, P.; Mason, E.; et al., 2018a, ATel 11468
Izzo, L.; Molaro, P.; Bonifacio, P.; et al.; 2018b, MNRAS, 478, 1601
Jencson, J. E.; Adams, S. M.; Bond, H. E.; et al., 2019, ApJ, 880, L20
Kacharov, N.; Neumayer, N.; Seth, A. C.; et al., 2018, MNRAS, 480, 1973
Kaminski, T.; Schmidt, M.; Tylenda, R.; et al., 2009, ApJS, 182, 33
Karambelkar, V . R.; Kasliwal, M. M.; Blagorodnova, N.; et al., 2023, ApJ, 948,
137
Kashi, A.; Frankowski, A.; Soker, N., 2010, ApJ, 709, L11
Kochanek, C. S., 2011, ApJ, 741, 37
Leonard, D. C.; Filippenko, A. V .; Barth, Aaron J.; Matheson, T., 2000, ApJ,
536, 239
Lucy, L. B.; Danziger, I. J.; Gouiffes, C.; Bouchet, P., 1989, LNP, 350, 164
Marconi, A.; Abreu, M.; Adibekyan, V .; et al., 2024, SPIE, 13096, 13
Mason, E.; Diaz, M.; Williams, R. E.; et al. 2010; A&A, 516, 108
Mason, E.; Munari, U., 2014, A&A, 569, 84
Mason, E.; Shore, S. N.; De Gennaro Aquino, I.; et al., 2018, ApJ, 853, 27
Mason, E.; Shore, S. N. ; Kuin, P. ; Bohlsen, T., 2020, A&A, 635, A115
Mason, E.; Shore, S. N., 2022, A&A, 664, A12
Molaro, P.; Izzo, L.; Mason, E.; et al., 2016, MNRAS, 463, L117
Molaro, P.; Izzo, L.; Bonifacio, P.; et al., 2020, MNRAS, 492, 4975
Monard, B., 2022, TNSCR, 463, 1
Moran, S.; Kotak, R.; Fraser, M.; et al., 2024, A&A, 688, A161
Perez, M. R.; McCollum, B.; van den Ancker, M. E.; et al., 2008, A&A, 486, 533
Orlando, S.; Drake, J. J.; Laming, J. M., 2009, A&A, 493. 1049
Ohsawa, R.; Sakon, I.; Onaka, T.; et al., 2010, ApJ, 718, 1456
Palle, E.; Biazzo, K.; Bolmont, E.; et al.; 2025, ExA, 59, 29
Pastorello A.; Fraser, M., 2019, Nat. Astr. 3, 676
Patat, F.; Maund, J. R.; Benetti, S.; et al., 2010, A&A, 510, 108
Pavana, M.; Raj, A.; Bohlsen, T.; et al., 2020, MNRAS, 495, 2075
Pessi, T.; Cartier, R.; Hueichapan, E.; et al., 2024, A&A, 688, L28
Prieto, J. L.; Kistler, M. D.; Thompson, T. A.; et al., 2008, ApJ, 681, L9
Prieto, J. L.; Sellgren, K.; Thompson, T. A.; Kochanek, C. S., 2009, ApJ, 705,
1425
Roederer, I. U. ; Alvarado-Gómez, J. D.; Allende Prieto, C.; et al.; 2024, ExA,
57, 17
Schipani, P.; Campana, S.; Claudi, R.; et al., 2018, SPIE, 10702E0FS
Shore, S. N. ; Augusteijn, T. ; Ederoclite, A. ; Uthas, H., 2011b, A&A, 533L, 8
Shore, S. N. ; Wahlgren, G. M. ; Augusteijn, T. ; et al., 2011a, A&A, 527A, 98
Shore, S. N.; Wahlgren, G. M.; Augusteijn, T.; et al., 2012a, A&A, 540A, 55
Shore, S. N., 2012b, BASI, 40, 185
Shore, S. N.; De Gennaro Aquino, I.; Schwarz, G. J.; et al., 2013, A&A, 553A,
123
Shore, S. N.; De Gennaro Aquino, I.; Scaringi, S.; et al., 2014, A&A, 570L, 4
Shore, S. N.; Mason, E.; Schwarz, G. J.; et al., 2016, A&A, 590A, 123
Shore, S. N.; Kuin, N. P.; Mason, E.; De Gennaro Aquino, I., 2018, A&A, 619A,
104
Shrestha, M.; DeSoto, S.; Sand, D. J.; et al., 2025, ApJ, 982, L32
Smith, N.; Ganeshalingam, M.; Chornock, R.; et al., 2009, ApJ, 697, L49
Smith, N., 2017, inHandbook of Supernovae, Alsabti A. W., Murdin P. editors,
p. 403
Smith, N.; Andrews, J. E., 2020, MNRAS, 499, 3544
Smith, N.; Pearson, J.; Sand, D. J.; et al., 2023, ApJ, 956, 46
Singh, A.; Teja, R. S.; Moriya, T. J.; et al., 2024, ApJ, 975, 132
Soker, N.; Kashi, A., 2012, ApJ, 746, 100
Strader, J.; Chomiuk, L.; Holoien, T. W.-S.; et al., 2018, ATel 11456
Stritzinger, M. D.; Taddia, F.; Fraser, M.; et al., 2020, A&A, 639, A103
Szczygiel, D. M.; Kochanek, C. S.; Dai, X., 2012, ApJ, 760, 20
Thompson, T. A.; Prieto, J. L.; Stanek, K. Z.; et al., 2009, ApJ, 705, 1364
Tylenda, R.; Kami´nski, T.; Schmidt, M.; et al., 2011, A&A, 532, 138
Tylenda, R.; Górny, S. K.; Kami´nski, T.; Schmidt, M., 2015, A&A, 578, 75
Valerin, G.; Pastorello, A.; Reguitti, A.; et al., 2025a, A&A, 695, A42
Valerin, G.; Pastorello, A.; Mason, E.; et al., 2025b, A&A, 695A, 43
Walder, R.; Folini, D.; Shore, S. N., 2008, A&A, 484, L9
Westmeier, T. ; Braun, R. ; Koribalski, B. S., 2011, MNRAS, 410, 2217
Wesson, R.; Barlow, M. J.; Ercolano, B.; et al., 2010, MNRAS, 403, 474
Williams, R.E.; Ferguson. D.H., 1983, ASSL, 101, 97
Williams, R. E.; Mason, E.; Della Valle, M.; Ederoclite, A., 2008, ApJ, 685, 451
Yang, W. J.; Menten, K. M.; Yang, A. Y ., et al., 2022, 658, 192
Article number, page 10 of 10