Title: Radiative PIC simulations of relativistic pair plasma: multiple interacting current sheets and turbulent evolution
Authors: Fulvia Pucci, Elena Amato, Dario Borgogno, Niccolo' Bucciantini, Maria Elena Innocenti, Kevin M Shoeffler, Marco Tavani, Valerio Vittorini
Published: 2026-05-18
Categories: astro-ph.HE, physics.plasm-ph

Radiative PIC simulations of relativistic pair plasma: multiple interacting
current sheets and turbulent evolution.
Fulvia Pucci, 1, 2,a) E. Amato, 1, 3 Dario Borgogno,4 N. Bucciantini, 1, 3, 5 P. Buratti,4, 6 M. E. Innocenti, 7 K. M.
Schoeffler,7 Marco Tavani,4 and Valerio Vittorini 4
1)INAF, Osservatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri, Largo E. Fermi 5, I-50125 Firenze,
Italy
2)SETI Institute, Mountain View, CA, USA
3)Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Universit` a degli Studi di Firenze, Via G. Sansone 1,
I-50019 Sesto F. no (Firenze), Italy
4)IAPS, INAF, Via del Fosso del Cavaliere, 100, 00133 Roma RM, Italia
5)INFN, Via G. Sansone 1, I-50019 Sesto F. no (Firenze), Italy
6)ENEA, NUC Department, Via E. Fermi 45, 00044 Frascati, Italy
7)Institut f¨ ur Theoretische Physik, Ruhr-Universit¨ at Bochum, Bochum, Germany
(Dated: 20 May 2026)
Two-dimensional relativistic particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations of radiative magnetic reconnection in pair plas-
mas with multiple interacting current sheets are carried out to mimic the dynamics in high-energy astrophys-
ical environments, such as particle acceleration regions in pulsar wind nebulae and relativistic outflows, where
the magnetic field is expected to reverse polarity multiple times. Initially, due to reconnection within each
isolated sheet, particles are accelerated and synchrotron emission beyond the burn-off limit is confirmed,
even if the particle distribution function shows steep slopes. After this phase, plasmoids lead to cross-sheet
interactions and merging, with new current sheets formed. In this regime a Kolmogorov-like spectrum for
the magnetic energy develops over a couple of decades, followed by a dissipation range starting around
5d e (electron inertial lengths), showing that multi-sheet reconnection evolves nonlinearly into well-developed
turbulence. This phase provides secondary acceleration and further cooling by synchrotron emission, with
intermittent radiative bursts. We show that high energy accelerated particles by the primary current sheets
are further energized during the turbulent phase, while the distribution of the most energetic particles remains
steep.
I. INTRODUCTION
Magnetic reconnection is widely recognized as a key
mechanism for the rapid conversion of magnetic energy
into plasma heating, bulk flows, and non-thermal parti-
cle acceleration across astrophysical and laboratory envi-
ronments. Recently, systems exhibiting multiple current
sheets have become a focus of growing interest. In the
heliosphere, the heliospheric current sheet (HCS;1) is typ-
ically observed to be stable in the solar wind at 1 AU; yet,
in the inner heliosphere, signatures of magnetic recon-
nection in the near-Sun HCS are observed with surpris-
ing frequency by Parker Solar Probe 2–4. The HCS can
become compressed and unstable near the heliospheric
termination shock5. Spacecraft observations in the solar
wind often reveal that single-sector boundaries contain
multiple subscale current layers (i.e., thinner than the
HCS), interpreted and modeled as the folding or interac-
tion of individual magnetic flux tubes 6–8. In the magne-
tosphere, localized double layers and intense parallel elec-
tric fields can transiently appear within and between cur-
rent layers, mediating fast particle acceleration and the
generation of flat-top or non-thermal distributions 9,10.
The coupling between reconnection and the emergence of
such structures is now recognized as a distinctive feature
a)Electronic mail: fulvia.pucci@inaf.it
of kinetic-scale turbulence. In the case of finite plasma
βp (the ratio of the plasma pressure to the magnetic pres-
sure) island growth and related particle acceleration has
been investigated with particle-in-cell simulations 11–14.
A. Multi-layered Structures in Pulsar Winds
Similar multi-layer structures naturally arise in pulsar
environments. Here, the rapid rotation and strong mag-
netic field of a neutron star induce huge electric fields
that pull charges off the surface, setting up currents
and accelerating particles to energies high enough to
emit gamma rays. At these energies, photon–photon or
photon–magnetic-field interactions then create cascades
of electron–positron pairs that fill the magnetosphere.
The alternating magnetic polarity of the rotating mag-
netosphere induces alternating magnetic field polarity in
the subsequent pulsar wind — the “stripes”—separated
by current sheets dominated by the electron–positron
pairs15–21. Magnetic reconnection in pair plasmas is cen-
tral to understanding how striped pulsar winds convert
their enormous Poynting flux into the energetic particles
and radiation. The dissipation of these sheets — through
reconnection and subsequent plasmoid formation — is
proposed as the key mechanism enabling the conversion
of Poynting-dominated outflows into particle-dominated
winds and high-energy radiation. Particle-in-cell simu-
arXiv:2605.19109v1  [astro-ph.HE]  18 May 2026

2
lations have shown that when these current sheets in-
teract with the pulsar termination shock, they can trig-
ger efficient particle acceleration and strong synchrotron
emission22–25.
B. PIC simulations of multiple current sheets dynamics to
explain Flares in the Crab Nebula.
Recent kinetic studies have demonstrated that when
the reconnection outflows and secondary current sheets
coexist, the system naturally evolves toward a turbulent,
multi-scale state characterized by magnetic island coa-
lescence (e.g., Sironi and Spitkovsky 23, Ceruttiet al. 26).
In the relativistic regime, particle-in-cell (PIC) simula-
tions with synchrotron or inverse-Compton radiation re-
action have revealed that radiative feedback can drasti-
cally modify reconnection dynamics. Early works by26–28
showed that strong cooling compresses current sheets, en-
hances field intensities, and produces ultra-compact, ra-
diatively efficient plasmoids—potentially explaining fast
γ-ray flares from systems such as the Crab Nebula and
black hole coronae. More recently, 29,30 by means of 2D
and 3D radiative reconnection simulations, demonstrated
how synchrotron back reaction regulates plasmoid com-
pression and introduces intermittent, beamed radiation
patterns. These studies collectively indicate that radia-
tive cooling is not a passive energy sink, but an ac-
tive agent shaping both field topology and particle dy-
namics. Despite these advances, multi-layer configura-
tions—where multiple current sheets form, interact, and
merge—remain largely unexplored under radiative con-
ditions. Yet, such configurations are expected in global
systems where reconnection drives secondary tearing and
cascading instabilities, ultimately producing a turbulent
hierarchy of current structures. Exploring these pro-
cesses in a controlled setup is thus essential for connect-
ing kinetic-scale dissipation to macroscopic variability in
high-energy sources.
C. This work.
In this work, we present two-dimensional PIC simula-
tions performed withZeltron 26, designed to investigate
the radiative evolution of multiple interacting current
sheets. Our configuration extends the setup discussed
in Ceruttiet al. 26, i.e the Crab flaring emission region,
in the context of a more realistic multiple current sheet
configuration, following the evolution to a nonlinear later
stage. Indeed, we expect that within the Crab flaring
emission region considered by Ceruttiet al. 26 – with size
estimated to beL∼7×10 15 cm, see e.g. Vittoriniet al. 31
– multiple current sheet will be present. This work also
extends Nakanotani, Zank, and Zhao 32 to include syn-
chrotron back reaction, allowing us to study how the in-
teraction between the adjacent current sheets changes the
radiative losses and the latter in turn affect the dynam-
ics, energy partition, and the properties of the electro-
magnetic fields and accelerated particles. To capture the
essential physics of radiative magnetic reconnection in a
multi-layer system while retaining full kinetic and radia-
tion feedback, we consider a 2D periodic domain contain-
ing four parallel current sheets. This configuration can be
regarded as the minimal kinetic realization of a “multiple
current sheet” system: it allows for the formation, inter-
action, and coalescence of plasmoids both within each
sheet and between different sheets, while remaining com-
putationally tractable for fully relativistic, radiative PIC
simulations. By comparing radiative and non-radiative
runs, we assess how feedback from synchrotron back re-
action modifies the hierarchy of current layers and the
resulting particle and radiation spectra. These results
provide new insight into environments where magnetic
reconnection competes with other – secondary– instabil-
ities.
II. SIMULATION SETUP AND PARAMETERS
We perform two-dimensional relativistic particle-in-
cell (PIC) simulations of a pair-plasma using the code
Zeltron26. The domain contains four Harris-type cur-
rent sheets centered at positionsy i (i= 1. . .4) so that all
the current sheets are at the same distance from the near-
est neighborsy s =L y/4 –whereL y is the length of the
box in the y-direction– and the first current sheet from
the lower boundary is located aty of f set =L y/8. We
chose the Harris equilibrium as it is an exact equilibrium
of the Vlasov–Maxwell system: no artificial transient is
introduced as might occur with a force free equilibrium
(see e.g. Anet al. 33). We use biperiodic boundary con-
ditions. Compared to the extensively studied single- and
double-current-sheet setups (e.g., Schoeffleret al. 34,35 ),
a four-layer system introduces new behavior and further
plasma acceleration, as we will show here. At the same
time, a configuration with four sheets is still small enough
to allow us to resolve the relevant kinetic and radiation-
reaction scales over many dynamical times. The in-plane
magnetic field is derived from a vector potential oriented
alongz,
Az(y) =B 0asi ln

cosh
 y−y i
a

,(1)
whereB 0 is the asymptotic upstream magnetic field. All
the values in CGS units are shown in Table I. The half-
thickness of each sheetais defined as 26
a= 2 kBTd
βdγd e B0
,(2)
withγ d = (1−β 2
d)−1/2, whereβ d =v d/c, the drifting
population speed, is also shown in Table I. The pressure
balance is localized at the current sheets, i.e.a≪y s
then the rest of the domain results to be magnetically
dominated. The equilibrium fields are defined separately

3
over four intervals: [0≤y <1/4]:y 1 = 1/8,s 1 =−1;
[1/4≤y <1/2]:y 2 = 3/8,s 2 = 1; [1/2≤y <3/4]:
y3 = 5/8,s 3 =−1; [3/4≤y <1]:y 4 = 7/8,s 4 = 1.
This configuration yields
B(y) = dAz
dy ˆx=B 0si tanh
 y−y i
a

ˆx,(3)
and an equilibrium current density
J(y) = cB0
4πa si sech2
 y−y i
a

ˆz,(4)
(CGS units are used unless otherwise stated). The mini-
mal Larmor radius for the background particles is defined
as:
ρc = kBTd
eB0
,(5)
whereT d is the temperature of the drifting electrons.
We allow the tearing instability to develop sponta-
neously from particle noise as we noticed that introducing
perturbations might drive preferential secondary merging
between the current sheets, which is one of the primary
focus of this work.
The density of the plasma at the current sheets is ob-
tained usingJ=e(n pvp −n eve), i.e. the current is car-
ried by counter-streaming electrons and positrons mov-
ing atv s =±β dc, where s =p,e labels the species and
np ∼n e ∼n 0:
2en0βdc= c
4πa B0,(6)
which yields the density at the sheet centern 0 =
B0/(8πeβda).
The plasma density profile follows the Harris equilib-
rium with a uniform background:
n(y) =n b +n 0 sech2
 y−y i
L

,(7)
wheren 0 andn b are the drifting and background densi-
ties, respectively. The locationsy i corresponding to the
density peaks are the same as the current sheet locations,
described above, to provide a pressure equilibrium con-
figuration.
We define the “hot” magnetization parameter as
σhot = B2
0
4πw ,(8)
whose value is shown in Table I, wherew≃nγ 1mc2
is the enthalpy of the system, since we assumeγ 1 ≫1
so that the thermal contribution dominates the plasma
energy content. In terms of the usual definition of the
magnetization parameterσ cold, which compares the mag-
netic energy density with the rest–mass energy density
of the plasma, we haveσ hot = σcold
γ (see e.g. Zenitani
and Hoshino 36, Sironi and Spitkovsky 37). Time is nor-
malized using the inverse Larmor frequencyω c =ρ c/c,
whereρ c is the minimum Larmor radius, listed in Ta-
ble I. This setup matches the configuration employed in
Ceruttiet al. 26, for comparisons to our multi-sheet geom-
etry. We also adopt the same initial background particle
energy distribution, i.e. a power-law with indexpbe-
tweenγ 1 andγ 2, see Table I. In Ceruttiet al. 26, even if
the energy associated with the Crab Nebula background
is much lower thanγ 1, the choice of the initial energy
range is justified by the computational time available.
The drifting particle distribution– supporting the current
sheet– is assumed to be a Maxwell-J¨ uttner with drift ve-
locityβ dcand normalized temperatureT d. All the values
in CGS are described in Table I. The goal of this work is
to compare the evolution of the two sheet configuration
with the case of multiple current sheets and to deter-
mine how the development of turbulence affects particle
acceleration and synchrotron emission.
III. REMARKS ON MULTIPLE ”INTERACTING”
CURRENT SHEETS.
From Pucciet al. 38 we know that for adoublecurrent
sheet with inter-sheet half-distancey s and thicknessa,
the linear eigenmodes of the tearing instability are af-
fected by the presence of other current sheets despite an
inter-sheet distancey s/a≫1. Although the analysis in
Pucciet al. 38 is valid in a resistive fluid approach, mass
ratio and specific equilibrium prescription, it can be gen-
eralized for collisionless plasmas and different equilibrium
configurations, see e.g. Del Sartoet al. 39 for a proton-
electron plasma. We then expect, from the linear phase
of the tearing instability –if present–, the growth of cou-
pled modes between the multiple current sheets, i.e. the
interaction occurs from timet= 0. Still, possible com-
petitor instabilities due to the proximity of the current
sheets – like the kink instability – are expected to develop
at later times (τ M HD ∼L/v A), allowing tearing modes,
developing here on kinetic scales (τ kin ∼ω −1
ci ), to kick
in first. We will then improperly refer to the “current
sheets interaction” discussing the visible non linear in-
terplay between plasmoids developed originally in differ-
ent current sheets. We emphasize that for example in an
extended striped-wind configuration the number of cur-
rent sheets is in principle very large 23 and, as mentioned
above, we expect a significant number of current sheets
in the Crab flaring region as well. However, for a system
with approximately uniform spacing between layers, the
local reconnection physics is primarily controlled by the
inter-sheet separation and the plasma parameters, rather
than by the global number of sheets. Our periodic four-
layer setup should therefore be viewed as a local “unit
cell” of a much larger chain of current sheets, represen-
tative of a segment of a pulsar wind or other multi-layer
systems.

4
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The simulation shows the development of the tearing
instability, followed by the formation of plasmoids and a
merging phase within the current sheets, similar to that
observed in Ceruttiet al. 26, see Fig.1. Aftertω c ≃737
macroscopic islands from different current sheets start
merging.
A. Evolution and energy transfer to the plasma.
Fig. 2 shows the temporal evolution of the normalized
energy components: magnetic energy dominates during
the initial phase, gradually decreasing as it is converted
into particle kinetic energy and radiation. In Fig. 2
we also show the synchrotron cumulative emission from
the accelerated particles, which increases monotonically
over time as expected. When synchrotron radiation is
switched on, equipartition of magnetic and kinetic en-
ergy – marked by the green shaded area – occurs about
100ω −1
c later than the case without back reaction on par-
ticles. In both cases, kinetic energy rises rapidly and
reaches a plateau, which sets at significantly lower energy
in the case back reaction is switched on. To understand
the energy transfer in Fig. 2 we also plotted the quan-
tityJ 2 which is as a proxy for dissipation: it is associated
with the steepening of magnetic-field gradients hence cur-
rent concentration. A delay in the peak of the electric
field with respect toJ 2 suggests the current enhances
during plasmoid compression, then triggering magnetic
reconnection. After the kinetic energy and magnetic en-
ergy reach equipartition, the peaks ofJ 2 become hardly
visible on the plot. Still, local enhancements are visible
attω c ≃500,700,950, when we see in Fig. 1 the merging
phase between different current sheets is still ongoing.
The quantityE·J, plotted in Fig. 3, shows the energy
transfer from fields to the plasma. The maxima are in
correspondence of the current sheets and islands merg-
ing (see e.g. Drakeet al. 11) for primary as well as for
secondary merging, confirming energy conversion at this
locations by the reconnection electric field. While still
a factor 20 smaller than the magnetic energy, the elec-
tric field is slightly larger than what found by Cerutti
et al. 26, probably due to the enhanced dynamics of the
four coupled current layers.
V. TURBULENT EVOLUTION
In this section we examine the magnetic energy distri-
bution from scales of about 100d e down to a fewd e and
compare magnetic spectra with reference slopes, to un-
derstand at which scales we can expect different physical
mechanisms responsible for the cascade and dissipation
of fluctuations in the system.
A. Fourier Analysis and Isotropic Spectrum
To characterize the spatial distribution of magnetic
fluctuations we compute the two–dimensional Fourier
transform of each field componentB x(x, y),B y(x, y) and
Bz(x, y) over the simulation domain. We define the dis-
crete Fourier transform as
˜B(kx, ky) =
Nx−1X
n=0
Ny−1X
m=0
B(xn, ym)e −i(kxxn+kyym),(9)
where the discrete wavenumbers are
kx = 2π
Lx
mx, k y = 2π
Ly
my.(10)
The spectral power associated with each component of
the magnetic field field is calculated as
PJ(kx, ky) =
 ˜B(kx, ky)

2
.(11)
We then construct the isotropic 1D spectrumE(k)
by integrating the 2D power over circular shells in
(kx, ky)–space, withk=
q
k2x +k 2y being the radial dis-
tance in mode space. In this work we compute the
isotropic spectrum summing over rings, which preserves
the total spectral power when integrated over all shells.
The isotropic spectraE Bx(k),E By(k) andE Bz(k) of the
three magnetic components are computed independently,
and the total magnetic spectrum is obtained as
EB,tot(k) =E Bx(k) +E By(k) +E Bz(k).(12)
In Fig. 4 (left) we show the results attω c = 884–
similar results we obtain a slightly later and earlier times.
The yellow shaded area shows a scaling compatible with
k−5/3, the hallmark of an inertial-range cascade of mag-
netized Kolmogorov turbulence 40. Even if the slope ex-
tends only over about a decade, due to the limited reso-
lution of the simulation, the range would appear to indi-
cate the existence of a self-similar, conservative transfer
of energy from large to smaller scales. Note that there
is currently a debate on how reconnection dynamics af-
fects the turbulent cascade in MHD, see, e.g., the review
by Schekochihin 41. Nonetheless MHD turbulent phe-
nomenologies all yield magnetic field spectra with neg-
ative power-law exponents in the range 3/2 — 5/3. Here
the nonlinear interactions proceed via reconnection and
merging of plasmoids, originating within but also be-
tween different current sheets.
At higher wavenumbersk d e >2×10 −1, which in
terms of length-scales translates inl∼5d e, the steep-
ening transitions toward ak −2 spectrum, which is in-
dicative of a dissipation range. This break, usually ex-
pected atl∼d e, is consistent with theoretical predic-
tions from kinetic turbulence 40,41 and with observations
in collisionless plasmas (e.g. in spacecraft measurements

5
FIG. 1:Color-coded plasma density at different times, normalized to the initial drifting particle densityn 0. Superimposed
magnetic flux function iso-contours. We also show some of the tracked particles, labelled with circles, whose size depends on
the particle energy to show energy gains and losses. We also show the particle orbits to trace back the particle location at the
energization region.
where the magnetic-field spectrum transitions from an
MHD-like inertial range to a kinetic dissipation range,
with slopes 42–46 between−2 and−4)
Since the system reaches equipartition before the tur-
bulent phase, see Fig. 2, we also computed the kinetic
energy spectrum. In a relativistic plasma, whenγ≫1
as in our case, the total kinetic energy density (bulk +
thermal) is obtained by summing over all particless:
U tot
e =
X
s
γs msc2 ns,(13)
Our system is compressible, hence in analogy with the
kinetic energy plotted in see Fig. 2, we define
K ≡
p
U tote [K] = erg1/2 cm−3/2,(14)
whose squareK 2 =U tot
e is the total kinetic energy
density. The kinetic power spectrum is thenE K(k) =P
|k′|≈k | ˜K(k′)|2. IfE K(k)≈E B(k) at a given scalek,
the system is locally in kinetic–magnetic equipartition at
that scale. We stress thatU tot
e includesboththe bulk
kinetic energy and the thermal (internal) energy of the
particles, since for each particleE s =γ s msc2 ns contains
contributions from both ordered bulk motion and random
thermal motion. In our simulations, the particles are
ultra-relativistic with⟨γ⟩ ∼10 7, so the thermal energy
strongly dominates over the bulk kinetic energy 1
2 ρv2
bulk.
The quantity
p
U tote therefore provides a more complete
and physically meaningful measure of the kinetic energy
content of the plasma than the bulk velocity alone. The
resulting spectrum is again in agreement with the−5/3
Kolmogorov spectrum. While Kritsuket al. 47 found that
highly compressible turbulence leads to a different spec-
tral scaling, our case likely involves less extreme density
fluctuations. The behavior we found could also be ex-
plained with a cascade dominated by Alfv´ enic modes or
in the presence of significant correlations between den-
sity and velocity fluctuations. A detailed investigation of
these possibilities is left for future work.
B. Particle acceleration and radiative emission.
In Fig. 5 (top panel) we show the particle distribu-
tion at different times: the inset shows the phase before
merging while the main plot shows times after the current
sheets started interacting. We can see the formation of a
non-thermal tail beyondγ= 10 9, up to timestω c >1000,
well after the beginning of the merging phase. Withpde-

6
FIG. 2:Energy normalized to the initial total energy
available in the system. Magnetic energy with (blue) and
without (purple) radiation back reaction. Electric field
energies multiplied by a factor 20 for readability, with back
reaction (red dashed line, similar to the case when radiation
is off). Kinetic energy of all the particles (green dashed line
with back reaction, cyan without). Orange dotted line
marks the total energy lost through synchrotron cooling. In
gold, the current dissipationJ 2 rms, normalized to its peak
value. Green shaded area marks the evolution before the
equipartition between magnetic and kinetic energy for the
simulation with back reaction, while the light blue shaded
area marks the merging phase between plasmoids in
different current sheets.
FIG. 3:Energy transfer from magnetic field to particles
E·J,Jbeing the total current carried by positrons and
electrons. Superimposed (solid blue lines), magnetic field
lines.
fined as the background distribution power-law index at
t= 0, we indicate the background distribution power-law
index att >0 withp 1. In Fig. 5 (top panel) a hard spec-
tral indexp 1 ≫2 is visible, especially in the initial phase,
with a small number of particle populating the very high
energy part of the spectrum. This differs with respect
to the two current sheet case studied by Ceruttiet al. 26,
in which attω c ∼400 a non-thermal particle population
with a slopep 1 ∼2 is observed. There are two possible
explanations: (i) when the current layers start interacting
with each other, the reconnecting field is not the initial
magnetic fieldB 0 and sinceγ rad ∝B −1/2
0 the distribu-
tion new cut-off is determined by this new magnetic field
value (ii) plasmoid merging makes the kinking of current
sheets a favorable instability with respect to tearing, de-
termining a different energy transfer from field to the
plasma. In the case of four current sheets distributed
over a domain with a double size along the y-direction
(meaning the inter-distance between the current sheets
is doubled) we expect the same behavior of the parti-
cle distribution functions as in Ceruttiet al. 26. During
the merging phase the high energy distribution displays
ap 1 ≫2 at all the times sampled. We still can’t ex-
clude the presence of a short transient phase during which
p1 ∼2, despite in Ceruttiet al. 26 this appears as a short,
transient feature. Comparing to what found by Nakano-
tani, Zank, and Zhao 48 in their MHD 2D simulation for
the turbulent phase, we also found a steeper slope even
in the case where we switched of the radiation reaction,
as shown in Fig. 5 (top panel, gray dashed line).This
suggests the energization mechanisms in the MHD and
kinetic framework might differ. Finally we observe that
the low energy part of the spectrum is also populated,
which is typical of diffusion mechanisms (see e.g. Sironi
and Spitkovsky 23). In Fig. 5 (bottom panel) we show
the chromatic fluxνF(ν), with times prior to plasmoid
merging in the inset. After the first development of plas-
moids leading to emitted fluxes aroundϵ 1 = 2 103M eV
the main plasmoid merging events (dark blue, green and
gold curve) show emission up to aboutϵ 1 ≤10 3M eV,
while even for later times the flux at energiesϵ 1 ≥160
MeV remains non-negligible.
VI. ORBITS.
We describe here some representative particle orbits
showing acceleration during the simulations, and their
radiative signatures. The sample of our tracked particle
is a small subset of the total particles and just a few
particles are accelerated toγ >10 6, hence the maximum
synchrotron emission we found for this subset is less than
the burn-off limit energy reference. Still, here the goal is
to identify where and which process is providing energy
to the plasma.
Fig.1 shows the trajectories in the (x, y) and plane of
particles labelled by different colored circles. The size
of the circle represents the energy associated with the
particle – basically the particleγ. Before multiple cur-
rent sheet merging attω C = 147 the particle labelled
in green gains significant energy in the the third from
the top layer. In Fig. 6 we see the particle synchrotron
critical energyϵ sync = 3heB⊥γ 2/4πmcspikes. At

7
FIG. 4:(Left)Isotropic 1D spectra of magnetic energy componentsE Bx(k),E By(k),E Bz(k) and total magnetic energy
EB,tot(k) attω c = 884, together with the kinetic power spectrumE K(k)
(see text for the detailed calculation).
tωC = 295 the particle has entered an island and radiated
most of its energy without any significant gain within the
plasmoid. The particle labelled in orange, gains energy
when entering the second from the top current sheet at
aroundtω C = 295, then further accelerates at a plas-
moid merging location (within the same current sheet)
attω C = 442. After the merging is over, attω C = 589
we can see (orange solid line, tracking the particle or-
bit) that the orange particle reverses its motion, while
it was initially bounded to be ejected from the current
sheet in between the two merging plasmoids. The parti-
cle is now trapped in the resulting merged island. Dur-
ing the rest of the simulation it will remain within large
plasmoids, radiating through multiple bursts with rela-
tively low energy (ϵ≤1 MeV), see Fig. 6. Finally, the
particle labeled with a red circle is the most represen-
tative of the merging dynamics. It gains energy around
tωC = 442, subsequently radiating most of its energy,
see Fig. 6 lower panel. Aftertω C = 884 it undergoes
a secondary acceleration, reflected in Fig.1 in the parti-
cle marker size increase. This secondary energization is
due to the crossing of the plasmoid merging region in the
lower left quadrant aroundtω C = 884. In Fig. 6 we can
see that attω C >1000 most of the particle energy is ra-
diated as the particle is trapped in the newly formed big
plasmoid in the left lower corner. Comparing Figs. 3,1
we can see that the area the particle just crossed is char-
acterized by high values ofE·J, suggesting again that en-
ergization is mostly due to the reconnecting electric field
rather than Fermi acceleration within islands coalescing
islands. We can then conclude most of the energy gains
for the sampled particles occur through the reconnecting
electric field. In reconnecting systems first-order Fermi
acceleration arises when particles undergo repeated re-
flections from contracting islands or from curved and
relaxing magnetic field lines, hence gaining energy over
multiple recurring reconnection cycles 49,50. Here we ex-
pected turbulence to facilitate first-order Fermi processes
by enhancing particle transport, rather than observing
stochastic (second-order) Fermi acceleration. In partic-
ular, we were expecting turbulence to enable repeated
encounters with current sheets and transport necessary
for multiple acceleration to occur at the reconnection re-
gion. It is possible, however, that the turbulence devel-
oped here is not sufficient to produce persistent contrac-
tion or efficient/multiple return of particles to reconnec-
tion regions; in that case, the corresponding first-order
Fermi mechanism is expected to remain relatively inef-
ficient. This picture can substantially change in three-
dimensional simulations, where stochastic field-line wan-
dering and enhanced transport allow energetic particles
to escape local trapping and repeatedly access active ac-
celeration regions51–53.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
We have investigated the nonlinear evolution of multi-
ple interacting current sheets under relativistic, radiative
conditions using theZeltronPIC code. Starting from
a four-layer Harris equilibrium with alternating magnetic
polarity, the system develops tearing instabilities on each
sheet, followed by plasmoid formation and successive is-
land merging. As reconnection proceeds, the interaction
between adjacent sheets triggers kinking of these struc-
tures and a transition toward a turbulent regime charac-

8
FIG. 5:Top: normalized background particle distributions
u2N(u), initially a power-law with indexp= 2,
(corresponding to a flat top hat with the normalization) at
different times. Shaded gray area marks the value ofγ
corresponding to synchrotron energy emission above the
burn-off limit. Bottom: chromatic fluxνF(ν), shaded gray
area marks the energy above the burn-off limit. In both
panels the insets show earlier time, prior to the merging.
terized by enhanced electric fields and distributed dissi-
pation sites.
•The initial single current sheet acceleration phase
is comparable to what found by Ceruttiet al. 26.
Some differences emerge, due to the closer proxim-
ity of the current sheet configuration we adopted:
(i)the highly dynamical multiple current sheet con-
figuration provides slightly larger values of electric
field; (ii) particle energy distribution never reaches
a−2 slope, even if this could be a transient feature,
as shown in Ceruttiet al. 26. The latter is most
probably due to the redistribution of magnetic en-
ergy in shorter current sheets, subject to the islands
dynamics, making particle acceleration at high en-
ergy dependent on the local magnetic field config-
uration.
•The evolution of the 4-sheet system evolves via
magnetic reconnection and nonlinear interactions
which lead to a fully developed turbulence at in-
termediate times, characterized by a magnetic en-
ergy spectrum with a slope that is comparable to
a Kolmogorov−5/3 scaling. The spectrum, well-
developed for just over a decade, then steepens at
kinetic scales where energy is dissipated. Much
higher resolution simulations would be required to
glean the details of spectrum formation and inter-
play between reconnection and cascade in the for-
mation of the spectral slope.
•In this turbulent phase, comparing to what found
by Nakanotani, Zank, and Zhao 48 in their MHD
2D simulation, we didn’t find the same−2 spectral
slope in the turbulent regime. This is also valid
in the case the back reaction is not switched on.
This suggests the energization mechanisms in the
MHD and kinetic framework might differ, but fur-
ther simulations should be run to assess the role of
a sheared field with respect to the pressure equilib-
rium adopted in this work. Our results for the ki-
netic energy spectrum suggest a scenario with more
moderate density fluctuations with respect to Krit-
suket al. 47, and are consistent with a Kolmogorov-
like scaling. This may reflect a cascade dominated
by Alfv´ enic dynamics or the presence of correla-
tions between density and velocity fluctuations, the
exploration of which is deferred to future works.
•The synchrotron radiative energy losses act as an
active feedback mechanism at all times, especially
during the initial turbulent phase: magnetic energy
is mainly converted in radiation loss. In the case
without any radiation reaction all of the energy is
instead converted into kinetic energy of the plasma.
•Particles tracked show acceleration occurs mainly
in reconnecting current sheets, while no major ac-
celeration by the Fermi mechanism is shown in par-
ticles trapped in plasmoids.
Overall, our results highlight that the inclusion of multi-
ple current sheets within the same ’emission region’ sub-
stantially modifies the morphology and energetics of re-
connection: inter-layer coupling accelerates the onset of
turbulence, enhances radiative efficiency, and leads to a
more homogeneous dissipation of magnetic energy. These
findings provide a framework for understanding the role
of magnetic reconnection in episodic high-energy flares
observed in the Crab Nebula, where multi-layer current
sheets may be expected. The theoretical analysis carried
out here may be applicable, with an appropriate change
in parameters, to many other environments: for example,
to the fate of the pulsar striped wind.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Simulations were carried out with the PLEIADI (Cata-
nia) supercomputer by USC VIII-Computing of INAF.

9
FIG. 6:Top panel: trajectories (projected onto the yz-plane) of high-energy particles labelled in Fig.1. Bottom panel:
critical synchrotron photon energy, see text for the definition.
FP sincerely thanks Fabio Vitello and Salvatore Scavo for
technical support. FP also thanks Eloisa Menegoni for
discussions on reconnection simulations with Zeltron. EA
and NB acknowledge support by the European Union —
NextGenerationEU RRF M4C2 1.1 under grant PRIN-
MUR2022TJW4EJ. FP, MEI and KS acknowledges sup-
port from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG,
German Research Foundation), within the Collaborative
Research Center SFB1491 and grant number 544893192.
1E. J. Smith, Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
106, 15819 (2001).
2T. Phan, B. Lavraud, J. Halekas, M. Øieroset, J. Drake, J. East-
wood, M. Shay, P. Pyakurel, S. Bale, D. Larson,et al., Astronomy
& Astrophysics650, A13 (2021).
3T.-D. Phan, J. Verniero, D. Larson, B. Lavraud, J. Drake,
M. Øieroset, J. Eastwood, S. Bale, R. Livi, J. S. Halekas,et al.,
Geophysical research letters49, e2021GL096986 (2022).
4S. Du, H. Li, R. Skoug, J. Steinberg, and F. Guo, Frontiers in
Astronomy and Space Sciences12, 1664531 (2025).
5M. Opher, J. F. Drake, M. Swisdak, K. M. Schoeffler, J. D.
Richardson, R. B. Decker, and G. Toth, ApJ734, 71 (2011),
arXiv:1103.2236 [astro-ph.SR].
6N. U. Crooker, G. L. Siscoe, S. Shodhan, D. F. Webb, J. T.
Gosling, and E. J. Smith, J. Geophys. Res.98, 9371 (1993).
7S. Maiewski, J. Kleimann, and H. Fichtner, Astronomy & As-
trophysics639, A80 (2020).
8T. Phan, J. Drake, D. Larson, M. Oieroset, S. Eriksson, Z. Yin,
B. Lavraud, M. Swisdak, S. Bale, R. Livi,et al., The Astrophys-
ical Journal Letters971, L42 (2024).
9J. Egedal, W. Daughton, A. Le, and A. L. Borg, Physics of
Plasmas22, 101208 (2015).
10N. Singh, G. V. Khazanov, and B. E. Wells, Journal of Geophys-
ical Research: Space Physics116, A04217 (2011).
11J. F. Drake, M. Opher, M. Swisdak, and J. N. Chamoun, ApJ
709, 963 (2010), arXiv:0911.3098 [astro-ph.SR].
12K. M. Schoeffler, J. F. Drake, and M. Swisdak, The Astrophys-
ical Journal743, 70 (2011).
13K. M. Schoeffler, J. F. Drake, and M. Swisdak, The Astrophys-
ical Journal Letters750, L30 (2012).
14K. M. Schoeffler, J. F. Drake, M. Swisdak, and K. Knizhnik,
The Astrophysical Journal764, 126 (2013).
15F. V. Coroniti, ApJ349, 538 (1990).
16Y. Lyubarsky and J. G. Kirk, ApJ547, 437 (2001), arXiv:astro-
ph/0009270 [astro-ph].
17Y. Lyubarsky, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety358, 113 (2005).
18A. A. Philippov and A. Spitkovsky, ApJ855, 94 (2018),
arXiv:1707.04323 [astro-ph.HE].
19A. Philippov, D. A. Uzdensky, A. Spitkovsky, and B. Cerutti,
ApJ876, L6 (2019), arXiv:1902.07730 [astro-ph.HE].
20B. Cerutti, A. A. Philippov, and G. Dubus, A&A642, A204
(2020), arXiv:2008.11462 [astro-ph.HE].
21B. Cerutti, A. A. Philippov, and G. Dubus, A&A642, A204
(2020), arXiv:2008.11462 [astro-ph.HE].
22K. Nagata, M. Takamoto, and T. Yoshida, The Astrophysical
Journal680, 627 (2008).
23L. Sironi and A. Spitkovsky, The Astrophysical Journal741, 39
(2011).
24B. Cerutti and G. Giacinti, Astronomy & Astrophysics642, A123
(2020).
25W. Lu, Y. Yuan, D. Lin, and X. Li, The Astrophysical Journal

10
Letters908, L44 (2021).
26B. Cerutti, G. R. Werner, D. A. Uzdensky, and M. C. Begelman,
The Astrophysical Journal770, 147 (2013).
27B. Cerutti, G. R. Werner, D. A. Uzdensky, and M. C. Begelman,
The Astrophysical Journal782, 104 (2014).
28L. Sironi and A. M. Beloborodov, The Astrophysical Journal907,
74 (2021).
29J. M. Mehlhaff, G. R. Werner, D. A. Uzdensky, and M. C. Begel-
man, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society498,
799 (2020).
30K. M. Schoeffler, T. Grismayer, D. A. Uzdensky, and L. O.
Silva, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society523,
3812 (2023).
31V. Vittorini, M. Tavani, G. Pucella, E. Striani, I. Donnarumma,
P. Caraveo, A. Giuliani, S. Mereghetti, A. Pellizzoni, A. Trois,
A. Ferrari, G. Barbiellini, A. Bulgarelli, P. W. Cattaneo, S. Co-
lafrancesco, E. Del Monte, Y. Evangelista, F. Lazzarotto, L. Pac-
ciani, M. Pilia, and C. Pittori, The Astrophysical Journal Letters
732, L22 (2011).
32M. Nakanotani, G. P. Zank, and L. Zhao, Frontiers in Astron-
omy and Space SciencesV olume 9 - 2022(2022), 10.3389/fs-
pas.2022.954040.
33X. An, A. Artemyev, V. Angelopoulos, A. Runov, and S. Ka-
maletdinov, The Astrophysical Journal952, 36 (2023).
34K. Schoeffler, B. Eichmann, F. Pucci, and M. Innocenti, Journal
of Plasma Physics91, E42 (2025).
35K. Schoeffler, F. Bacchini, K. Kormann, B. Eichmann, and
M. Innocenti, arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.11100 (2025).
36S. Zenitani and M. Hoshino, ApJ670, 702 (2007),
arXiv:0708.1000 [astro-ph].
37L. Sironi and A. Spitkovsky, ApJ783, L21 (2014),
arXiv:1401.5471 [astro-ph.HE].
38F. Pucci, M. Velli, A. Tenerani, and D. Del Sarto, Physics of
Plasmas25, 032113 (2018), arXiv:1801.08412 [physics.plasm-ph].
39D. Del Sarto, F. Pucci, A. Tenerani, and M. Velli, Jour-
nal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics121, 1857 (2016),
https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/2015JA021975.
40R. Bruno and V. Carbone,Turbulence in the Solar Wind, Vol.
928 (2016).
41A. A. Schekochihin, Journal of Plasma Physics88, 155880501
(2022), arXiv:2010.00699 [physics.plasm-ph].
42R. J. Leamon, C. W. Smith, N. F. Ness, and H. K. Wong, Journal
of Geophysical Research: Space Physics103, 4775 (1998).
43C. W. Smith, K. Hamilton, B. J. Vasquez, and R. J. Leamon,
The Astrophysical Journal Letters645, L85 (2006).
44O. Alexandrova, J. Saur, C. Lacombe, A. Mangeney, J. Mitchell,
S. J. Schwartz, and P. Robert, Physical Review Letters103,
165003 (2009).
45F. Sahraoui, M. L. Goldstein, P. Robert, and Y. V. Khotyaintsev,
Physical Review Letters102, 231102 (2009).
46C. H. K. Chen, Journal of Plasma Physics82, 535820602 (2016).
47A. G. Kritsuk, M. L. Norman, P. Padoan, and R. Wagner, The
Astrophysical Journal665, 416 (2007).
48M. Nakanotani, G. P. Zank, and L. Zhao, Frontiers in Astronomy
and Space Sciences9, 954040 (2022).
49J. F. Drake, M. Swisdak, H. Che, and M. A. Shay, Nature443,
553 (2006).
50J. T. Dahlin, J. F. Drake, and M. Swisdak, Physics of Plasmas
21, 092304 (2014).
51J. T. Dahlin, J. F. Drake, and M. Swisdak, Physics of Plasmas
24, 092110 (2017).
52G. Kowal, E. M. de Gouveia Dal Pino, and A. Lazarian, Physical
Review Letters108, 241102 (2012).
53L. Comisso and L. Sironi, Physical Review Letters121, 255101
(2018).

11
T ABLE I:Physical and numerical parameters adopted in the simulations.
Current sheets
Upstream magnetic fieldB 0 5 mG
Layer half-thicknessa/ρ c 2.7
Particle distributions
Drift particles velocityβ drift 0.6
Drift particles temperaturek BT /mc2 4×10 7
Background densityn bg/n0 0.1
Background distribution energy range (γ 1,γ 2) 4×10 7, 4×10 8
Background distribution power-law indexp 2
Radiation-reaction limitγ rad 1.3×10 9
Minimum Larmor radiusρ c 1.4×10 13 cm
Magnetizationσ 16
Numerical Parameters
Resolutionρ c/∆x=ρ c/∆y 3
Time step ∆t ω 1 0.07
Particles per cell (4 species) 100
Domain sizeL x/ρc =L y/ρc 500