Title: Improved Big Bang Nucleosynthesis constraints on decaying massive relics
Authors: Sara Bianco, Jonas Frerick, Marco Hufnagel, Kai Schmidt-Hoberg
Published: 2026-05-26
Categories: hep-ph, astro-ph.CO

Prepared for submission to JCAP
Improved Big Bang Nucleosynthesis
constraints on decaying massive relics
S. Bianco, a J. Frerick, b M. Hufnagel, c and K. Schmidt-Hoberg a,d
aDeutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany
bDipartimento di Fisica, Sapienza Universit` a di Roma & Sezione INFN Roma1, Piazzale
Aldo Moro 5, 00185, Roma, Italy
cService de Physique Th´ eorique, Universit´ e Libre de Bruxelles, C.P. 225, B-1050 Brussels,
Belgium
dCP3-Origins, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Den-
mark
E-mail: sara.bianco@desy.de, jonas.frerick@uniroma1.it, marco.hufnagel@ulb.be,
kai.schmidt-hoberg@desy.de
Abstract.We present updated and improved Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN) constraints
on heavy, long-lived beyond the Standard Model (BSM) relicsϕdecaying into pairs of Stan-
dard Model particles, covering a comprehensive set of two-body decay channels. We treat
the leading effects of these injections in detail, discussing the modification of the neutron-
to-proton ratio from hadronic interconversions, as well as hadro- and photodisintegration of
the light elements. Our analysis incorporates several important refinements with respect to
earlier work. We adopt up-to-date primordial abundance measurements, including the new
4He determination and the latest nuclear reaction rates. The hadronic and electromagnetic
injection spectra are computed usingPythia 8, providing a proper treatment of final-state
radiation and hadronisation. We further implement an improved treatment ofp↔nin-
terconversions, accounting for dynamical equilibrium, kaon-induced processes, and updated
rates. Additionally, we make use of a refined hadrodisintegration formalism which allows us
to also consider disintegration processes while BBN is still active. Together, these improve-
ments yield updated exclusion contours on lifetime, mass, and abundance of the relic for each
decay channel considered. Furthermore, we discuss the irreducible freeze-in contribution from
inverse decays.
ULB-TH/26-21, DESY-26-066
arXiv:2605.26824v1  [hep-ph]  26 May 2026

Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 The light-element abundances 3
3 Injections of SM particles during BBN 4
3.1 Interconversions 5
3.1.1 Relevant timescales 6
3.1.2 Nucleon-antinucleon pairs 9
3.1.3 Kaons 11
3.1.4 Pions 14
3.1.5 Numerical scheme for all mesons 15
3.2 Hadrodisintegration 17
3.3 Photodisintegration 18
3.4 Effects on the background cosmology 20
3.5 Treatment of the errors 21
4 From decays to final-state particles utilisingPYTHIA22
5 Results & Discussion 24
5.1 Decay intoe +e− 25
5.2 Decay intou¯u30
5.3 Decay intoγγ30
5.4 Decay into other channels 31
5.5 Comparison with previous literature results 35
6 Conclusions 35
A Updated interconversion cross sections 39
B Checking dynamical equilibrium against full-time evolution 39
C Implementing hadrodisintegration intoAlterAlterBBN41
D An improved numerical scheme 43
D.1 A note on the effective degrees of freedom around neutrino decoupling 46
E More detailed results fromPYTHIA47
Contents
1 Introduction
Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN) represents one of the earliest and most precisely testable
predictions of the standard cosmological model. The successful explanation of the primordial
abundances of light elements as relics of nuclear reactions occurring in the first minutes
– 1 –

of cosmic history, provides a stringent probe of both the Standard Model (SM) of particle
physics and the thermal history of the early Universe [1–5]. Any new physics active during or
after the BBN epoch, corresponding to temperatures below a few MeV, is therefore subject
to tight observational constraints [6, 7].
A particularly well-motivated class of beyond the SM (BSM) scenarios features massive,
long-lived relicsϕthat are produced in the early Universe and decay to SM particles on
timescales comparable to or longer than the BBN epoch [8–13]. Even for small abundances
of these relics at the time around and after BBN, their decay products can profoundly alter the
light-element abundances through several distinct mechanisms. At early times, the presence
of the relic modifies the Hubble rate, thereby shifting the neutron-to-proton ration/pand
thus the 4He yield. The decays after neutrino decoupling generally also change the effective
number of neutrinosN eff as well as the time-temperature relation. At the same time, injected
hadrons can additionally interconvert protons and neutrons via scatterings and annihilations,
further changing the neutron-to-proton ratio. Once baryons, and in particular neutrons, are
no longer immediately thermalised after their injection, their kinetic energy is sufficient to
hadrodisintegrate light nuclei, especially 4He, while at even later epochs energetic photons
ande ± pairs initiate electromagnetic cascades that photodisintegrate previously synthesised
nuclei. The interplay of these processes leads to a modification of predicted abundances that
can be confronted with observations to place bounds on the relic’s massm ϕ, lifetimeτ ϕ, and
primordial abundanceY ϕ =n ϕ/sSM withn ϕ the relic’s number density ands SM the SM
entropy density. We are generally agnostic about the production mechanism of the relicϕ
and treatY ϕ andτ ϕ as independent in our study. We note however that not all combinations
are physically realisable due to an irreducible freeze-in production via inverse decays, and
we comment on the impact of this correlation on our results. Furthermore, we are able to
constrain relic abundances that, if stable, would be significantly below the DM abundance. 1
Constraints on decaying relics from BBN have a long history [7, 15–19], with compre-
hensive analyses of both hadronic and electromagnetic energy injection spanning a wide range
of masses and lifetimes [6, 20]. Note that while we concentrate on heavy relics in this work,
a complementary line of investigation has focused on light, MeV-scale relics, for which the
assumption that the decaying particle is non-relativistic at the time of its decay no longer
holds fully and also the often utilised ‘universal photon spectrum’ does not apply. In this
regime it is therefore mandatory to evaluate the actual phase space distributions of the vari-
ous species. Recent studies have made important progress in this direction, deriving refined
BBN constraints on MeV-scale dark-sector states and mediators [21–30]. The present work
is complementary to these efforts: we focus on the regime ofheavyrelics,m ϕ ≳O(few GeV),
which are thoroughly non-relativistic at decay, and for which the dominant non-trivial effects
are hadronic and electromagnetic energy injection at intermediate and late times.
In this paper, we present updated and improved BBN bounds on heavy decaying relics
across a comprehensive set of SM two-body decay channels, except for neutrinos, whose
treatment requires additional care and is left for future work. Our analysis builds on and
substantially refines the approach of refs. [6, 19] through several important improvements.
First, we adopt up-to-date abundances of the light elements including the updated measure-
ment of the primordial 4He abundance from ref. [31], which significantly tightens constraints
from the helium yield. Second, we incorporate updated nuclear reaction rates relevant for
standard BBN. Third, we implement a refined treatment ofp↔ninterconversions, includ-
1Also gravitational particle production could be probed in our formalism [14].
– 2 –

ing a dynamical equilibrium approach, the contribution of kaon-induced interconversions,
and updated rate computations. Fourth, we perform a proper treatment of final-state radia-
tion (FSR) and hadronisation usingPythia 8[32], providing a self-consistent and accurate
modelling of the hadronic and electromagnetic injection spectra.
To calculate the light-element abundances we adaptedAlterBBN[33, 34] into a sub-
stantially extended version which we denote asAlterAlterBBN, a comprehensive code that
can handle arbitrary background cosmologies [23, 24], and takes into account the injection
of hadronic material, accounting for bothp↔ninterconversions and hadrodisintegration
during the BBN epoch. At late times, hadrodisintegration and photodisintegration are in-
stead computed withACROPOLIS[35]. We additionally correct an error in the electromagnetic
energy-loss curve, first identified in [36], which had led to artificially strong hadrodisintegra-
tion rates by protons in earlier analyses. Finally, we refine the treatment of elastic nucleon
scattering in the hadronic cascade [37–39].
This paper is organised as follows: In section 2, we introduce the observational data
available for BBN with emphasis on the latest results. We then introduce the three main
sources of constraints in section 3, namely neutron-proton interconversions 3.1, hadrodisinte-
gration 3.2, and photodisintegration 3.3. In particular, we present a detailed account of the
highly important dynamical equilibrium approximation when discussing the interconversions.
In section 4, we discuss the use ofPYTHIAto obtain the composition of the injection after
FSR and hadronisation. Combining all these ingredients, we show the resulting constraints
for a plethora of decay channels in section 5, including a comparison to previous literature
before wrapping up with our conclusions in section 6. We provide several appendices with
detailed explanations on technical details. Throughout this article, we work in natural units
ℏ=c=k B = 1.
2 The light-element abundances
To describe the observational and theoretical values of the light-element abundances, we use
the conventional notationN/N ′ ≡Y N /YN ′ withN, N ′ ∈ { 1H,D, 3He, 7Li},Y N ≡n N /nb,
andn b the baryon number density. For 4He, we follow the common notationY p ≡4Y 4He.
The primordial light-element abundances are inferred from several independent astro-
physical observations. The helium-4 mass fractionY p is determined from emission lines of
metal-poor Hiiregions [31, 40, 41], while the deuterium abundance is measured from quasar
absorption systems [42, 43]. The helium-3 abundance is constrained by measurements in the
local interstellar medium [44], and lithium-7 is inferred from the Spite plateau of metal-poor
halo stars [45]. Combined with the baryon density determined from the CMB [46], these
observations place standard BBN in an increasingly well-constrained setting. Throughout
this work, we adopt the following observed values, taking the latest recommended values for
D/1H and 3He/D from ref. [47] and ref. [44], respectively:
D/1H = (25.08±0.029)×10 −5 ,(2.1)
3He/D = (8.3±1.5)×10 −1 ,(2.2)
where the latter is used only as an upper limit. 2 Note that we have used the D/ 1H ratio
suggested in theupdated2025 version of [47]. For 4He we use the recent determination of
2The rationale behind argument is that it is expected that 3H/D only decreases after BBN has concluded
[44].
– 3 –

ref. [31],
Yp = (2.458±0.013)×10 −1 ,(2.3)
whose improved precision with respect to earlier measurements has a notable impact on our
constraints, as we discuss in Sec. 5. Finally, the primordial lithium abundance inferred from
the Spite plateau reads [47]
7Li/1H = (1.45±0.25)×10 −10 .(2.4)
This value is known to be in tension with the standard BBN prediction – the so-called
cosmological lithium problem – for which an astrophysical resolution currently appears most
likely [48, 49]. Since we do not address this discrepancy in the present work, we conservatively
exclude the lithium abundance from our analysis pipeline.
On the theoretical side, we need a tool to track thermal BBN (potentially with a modified
background cosmology) to compare to the observations. To this end, we have modified
AlterBBN[33, 34] into a version we denote asAlterAlterBBNin the following. This code can
handle arbitrary background cosmologies [23, 24] and further incorporates the most recent
set of nuclear reaction rates [50–54], as well as the injection of hadronic material which we
have added for this work. As further input for BBN, we take the value of the baryon-to-
photon ratioηobtained by the latest Planck measurements [46]. This determination ofηhas
a strong correlation withN eff, which we incorporate by following the prescription presented
in [27].
3 Injections of SM particles during BBN
The injection of high-energy SM particles into the primordial plasma at temperatures below
a few MeV is well known to significantly affect cosmological observables, in particular the
abundances of light elements produced during BBN, through a variety of mechanisms.
In this work, we study in detail the impact of injecting different SM particles, excluding
neutrinos, whose treatment requires special care. To accurately assess these effects, it is
necessary to account for rapid decays as well as the hadronisation of coloured particles.
These coloured particles do not have to originate from the primary decay but could also be
induced by final-state radiation. As hadronisation proceeds on very short timescales, the
cosmologically relevant species at the time of BBN are nucleons (protons and neutrons),
mesons (in particular pions and kaons), photons, and electrons.
These particles can affect the formation of light elements via a number of different
effects. The direct effects can be categorised as follows, ordered by the earliest times when
they become relevant:
1.InterconversionsFor 0.1 s≲t inj ≲10 2 s, the most stringent constraints on particle
injections typically arise from changes to the neutron-to-proton ratio (n/p), which can
be due to changes in the Hubble rate as well as hadronic interconversion reactions, where
the latter typically dominate if present. Precisely trackingn/pis essential whenever
processes beyond the standard weak rates affect this ratio prior to BBN.
2.HadrodisintegrationFort inj ≳10 2 s, injected nucleons are no longer thermalised
immediately compared to scatterings and may disintegrate the previously formed light
nuclei via hadronic interactions.
– 4 –

ϕ
N N K
π
Annihilation Decay
n/p interconversion
Figure 1: Flowchart of the hadronic interconversion due to the relic decay, including sec-
ondary pion production from heavier hadrons.
3.PhotodisintegrationFort inj ≳10 4 s, the universal spectrum formed in electromag-
netic cascades contains sufficiently energetic photons to disintegrate the light elements
produced during BBN.
In addition, the injections generally lead to changes in thebackground cosmology, which
need to be taken into account. In the following, we will discuss these effects and their
implementation in detail, pointing out improvements made compared to what has been done
in the literature.
3.1 Interconversions
Mesons and baryons can interconvert neutrons and protons via charge-exchange and absorp-
tion reactions [6, 15, 19, 55–58]. Charged pions are one prominent example, with reactions
such asπ −p→nXorπ +n→pX, but kaons, antinucleons, and other hadrons contribute
analogous processes. The cross sections for the two pion reactions above are very similar, so
which direction of the conversion dominates strongly depends on the available target nuclei
and hence the pre-existing ratio ofn/p. Once the primordial plasma approaches the tem-
peratures relevant to BBN, it is strongly proton-dominated within the SM. Theπ − +p→n
channel is therefore generally more efficient at these temperatures due to more target nuclei,
so hadronic injections genericallyincreasen/pabove its SM value. 3
Interconversion reactions impactn/pfor all the temperatures at which exotic decays
occur, potentially well above the BBN epoch. However, what directly controls light-element
abundances is then/pratio atT≲100 keV, when nucleosynthesis occurs. Any increase in
n/pat that point translates almost linearly into an enhanced 4He mass fractionY p, since
virtually every neutron present is eventually incorporated into helium.
3Note that this assumessymmetrichadron injections. While this is true for primary injections, secondary
pion injections generally have a small asymmetry. This, however, is negligible and does not impact this
conclusion.
– 5 –

3.1.1 Relevant timescales
To see which particles are relevant, it is instructive to estimate the timescales for different
processes, in particular the scattering, decay and thermalisation rates. Interconversions are
only possible for sufficiently long-lived particles where a significant amount of hadronic in-
teractions occur before decay. Assuming a typical hadron-nucleon (interconversion) cross
section of∼10 mb [15, 57] and taking the value of the baryon-to-photon ratioη∼6·10 −10
at the time of CMB, we can estimate the typical scattering rate for a given hadron as
Γhad =⟨σv⟩ had
n/p nn/p ∼ ⟨σv⟩ had
n/p ηnγ ∼6·10 6 s−1
 T
MeV
3 
σhad
n,p
10 mb
!
.(3.1)
The only hadrons that do not decay much more rapidly than this scattering timescale are
from the set [π ±, K±, KL, n,¯n, p,¯p] with4 [47]
τπ± = (2.6033±0.0005)×10 −8 s (3.2)
τK± = (1.2380±0.0020)×10 −8 s (3.3)
τKL = (5.116±0.021)×10 −8 s (3.4)
τn/¯n= (878.4±0.5) s (3.5)
τp/¯p>9·10 29 yr.(3.6)
As interconversions are only relevant early on, neutrons (and of course protons) can be
considered stable in this discussion, whereas the charged pions and kaons, as well as the
long-lived neutral kaon, may dominantly scatter or decay depending on the temperature
considered. All other mesons and baryons decay instantaneously w.r.t. the relevant timescales
and therefore are not considered here. 5
Due to the electromagnetic interactions the injected charged hadrons are rapidly scat-
tered down to thermal energies. 6 More specifically, taking the expression for the Coulomb
scattering energy loss rate in the case ofT≲m e for relativistic particles [19, 36], we can esti-
mate the thermalisation timescale to be∼10 −12 s even for temperatures as low as 0.1 MeV.
We have made this statement more quantitative for different injections in figure 2, where
we have checked the time it takes for a particle to scatter down to energies similar to the
temperature for different initial energies.7 We compare these times to other typical timescales
at play. For simplicity, we only focus on pionic rates, in particular the interconversion rates
of thermal pions in dark blue, assuming (conservatively) that pions scatter on all baryons
instead of just protonsorneutrons and taking a cross section of⟨σv⟩= 1 mb. 8 As we take
the pion cross section to be temperature independent, the interconversion rate just inherits
the approximateT 3−scaling of the baryon abundance. In reality, we will use temperature-
dependent thermal cross sections and, in particular, theπ − −prate will be enhanced by
Coulomb interactions.
4In most decay channels, the limit on the proton lifetime is even longer.
5In fact, our procedure lets these short-lived particles decay immediately as discussed in section 4.
6This simplifies the analysis as otherwise we would have to account for the (energy-dependent) time dilation
of relativistic unstable particles as well as the energy dependence of the scattering cross sections.
7To be specific, we define
tth(Einj) =
Z 3T
Einj
dE dt
dE .(3.7)
8Note that pion interconversion cross sections are typically 1-2 orders of magnitude below the other hadronic
cross sections we will encounter later.
– 6 –

10−2 10−1 100 101
Injection temperature Tinj [MeV]
10−19
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
103
105
Thermalisation time tth [s]
τπ
H−1
tn↔ p,π
tn↔ p,weak
hadrodis interconversions
Einj = 1 TeV ,π
Einj = 1 TeV ,K±
Einj = 1 TeV ,p
Einj = 1 TeV ,n
Figure 2: Display of relevant timescales for hadrons during the temperature frame of in-
terest. Apart from the thermalisation time, we also show the decay timeτ π (black), the
approximate pion-driven interconversion rates (dark blue), the Hubble rate (red), and the
weak interconversion rate (dark red).
We also show the pion decay rate at rest in black. The grey gradient shows where
interconversions lose their importance w.r.t. hadrodisintegration (cf. 3.2). The exact tran-
sition depends on the mass, lifetime, and abundance of the relic as well as on the type of
injection. In practice, we have found that ignoring interconversions below temperatures of
100 keV is a good approximation and balances the run time of the code and the accuracy of
the light-element determination.
Additionally, since we typically consider relic masses which allow for nucleons in the final
state, we ignore hadrodisintegration via mesons, as they typically decay before interacting,
which gives a huge suppression compared to injected nucleons. For a more quantitative
statement, we refer to the note at the end of section 3.2.
Finally, we have also plotted the Hubble timescale (∼T 2) and the timescale of weak
interconversions (∼T 5) for comparison. It is fairly clear that all processes discussed before
are happening essentially instantaneously w.r.t. the cosmological background evolution. In
conclusion, we see that thermalisation (or decay) is always happening before interconversions
for all charged particles and even for neutrons in the temperature window of BBN.
– 7 –

These considerations do not hold for the long-lived component of the neutral kaon, which
is known to be stopped less efficiently [15, 57]. 9 However, since we find this particle to be a
subdominant component of the overall injection, we resort to the conservative approximation
that the neutral kaons also thermalise rapidly (see also refs. [55, 56, 59]). To see that this is
conservative, note that as discussed above, the interconversions are preferentially converting
protons to neutrons for similar cross sections due to the larger proton target density at the
time whenn/pactually affects the light-element abundances and for regions in parameter
space that are close to the allowed region. In addition, a fully relativistic treatment would
lead to two partially compensating effects. On the one hand, the relativistic time dilation
will effectively increase the lifetime of the kaon in the cosmic frame. This effective decrease
in decay rate makes all scattering rates more relevant in turn, as long as only a small fraction
of kaons scatters before decay. On the other hand, the scattering cross section decreases with
energy [57], which has the opposite effect. Overall, the time dilation will be the dominant
effect, such that we somewhatunderestimatethe effect of neutral kaons by treating them as
thermalised, making this approximation conservative.
An essential ingredient in the calculation of the interconversion rates are the actual
abundances of the participating hadrons. As we will discuss below, we will start out with a
certain injection rate of the different hadrons, but we need to take into account scatterings,
annihilations and decays to obtain the actual abundances. As we have seen above, many of
the relevant timescales which enter this calculation are rather short and certainly significantly
shorter than the fusion rates during BBN. It turns out that tracking the hadrons and BBN
in the same code without approximations requires very short time steps compared to the
duration of BBN, which in turn leads to prohibitively long run times. We therefore briefly
investigate an important concept that facilitates the treatment of the interconversions: the
approximation of dynamical equilibrium. Let us begin with a generic Boltzmann equation
for the number density of a species in an FLRW Universe
dn
dt + 3Hn=S−Γn ,(3.8)
whereSis an arbitrary source term and Γ is a (fast) rate which depletes the number density.10
If all interactions happen much faster than the Hubble rate, these processes are driven to
equilibrium instantaneously w.r.t. the cosmological evolution. This equilibrium only changes
with the background expansion and the change in the source terms, which are slow com-
pared to the interactions. In our case, this line of reasoning is possible since the relic and
the background evolution of the Universe are essentially unaffected by the presence of the
additional hadrons, while the hadrons themselves react rapidly due to the strong nuclear
reactions. Thus, we can solve the time dependence of the background quantities separately
and feed them into the source term, which carries all the time dependence for the hadronic
9Note that the neutron is still stopped efficiently due to magnetic moments interactions for temperatures
as low as 100 keV [19, 36]. This is earlier than what our figure naively seems to imply; the reason is that
disintegration processes will become more relevant than thermalisation well before thermalisation becomes
less efficient than the Hubble rate.
10See also figure 2 where it is clear that the interconversion rates are always much faster than the Hubble
rate.
– 8 –

number densities. We can therefore set
dn
dt + 3Hn≃0 (3.9)
⇒n de ≃ S
Γ ,(3.10)
where we have introduced the superscript de to denote a quantity in dynamical equilibrium.
We can make intuitive sense of this expression ifSis described by a decay,S= Γ decnsource.
In this case, the particle of interest tracks the evolution of the decaying particle rescaled by
the fraction of injection rate over the depletion rate, Γ dec/Γ.
Having established the properties of the injected particles as well as how to infer their
abundance via dynamical equilibrium, we will next discuss the individual injections in more
detail. Since all particles share the temperature of the plasma, we know that the available
kinetic energy is insufficient to produce heavier hadrons from lighter ones, i.e. in all processes
involving only pions in the initial state, neither kaons nor baryons can be produced. Con-
versely, for nucleons and kaons, we will find that decays, annihilations, and nuclear scattering
can produce secondary pions, see also figure 1 for a schematic representation. 11 With this in
mind, we will first focus our discussion on the heavier particles, starting with (anti-)nucleons.
3.1.2 Nucleon-antinucleon pairs
Let us start this section by pointing out that, depending on the injection time, nucleons can
lead to either hadrodisintegration or baryonic interconversions. At early times, the nucleons
quickly scatter down to thermal energies and subsequently participate in interconversion
processes. At later times, if their energy before the first scattering is still above the 4He
binding energy, they will instead mainly contribute to disintegration. As we will see later,
this transition occurs roughly atT= 0.1 MeV.
As baryon number is conserved in the decays, we find that baryons and anti-baryons are
always injected in pairs. As the anti-nucleons will eventually annihilate on the background
neutrons and protons, we have four different constellations:
1. ¯pp+p BG →p+X(no interconversion)
2. ¯pp+n BG →p+X(interconversion)
3. ¯nn+n BG →n+X(no interconversion)
4. ¯nn+p BG →n+X(interconversion) .
In other words, a background nucleon is annihilated away and replaced by the partner of the
annihilated antinucleon, which, depending on the process, leads to an effective interconver-
sion. As an example, let us discuss the case of an injected proton-antiproton pair. If the
antiproton annihilates on a (background) proton, the neutron-to-proton ratio is not affected.
However, if it annihilates on a neutron instead, we effectively replace a neutron by a proton,
and thus, we have an effective interconversion process.
In the following, we will discuss step by step how to arrive at the required interconversion
rates. More details on what we have implemented in our numerical scheme can be found in
appendix A.
11We neglect the tiny but non-zero branching ratio into kaonic final states in nucleonic annihilations.
– 9 –

The contribution of the injected nucleon-antinucleon pairs to the total conversion rate
of the background neutron and protons can be written as
dnp
dt

n¯n,p¯p
=− dnn
dt

n¯n,p¯p
=

⟨σv⟩ ¯p
n→pn¯pnn − ⟨σv⟩ ¯n
p→nn¯nnp

,(3.11)
where the superscript of the cross section denotes the hadron going into the reaction and the
subscript indicates the induced process (in this case corresponding to the processes 2. and 4.
listed above). To solve this equation, the anti-baryon number densities are required.
The Boltzmann equation for the anti-baryon number densities, in turn, can be written
as
dn¯n
dt + 3Hn¯n=S ¯n− ⟨σv⟩ ¯n
n→nnn − ⟨σv⟩ ¯n
p→nnp (3.12)
There are analogous expressions for the anti-protons. Using the fact that dynamical equilib-
rium is a very good approximation, as described above, this implies for the number density
nde
¯n = S¯n
⟨σv⟩ ¯nn→nnn +⟨σv⟩ ¯np→nnp
,(3.13)
Note that actually solving this equation requires the knowledge ofn n andn p, so that we have
a coupled system of equations. Given that the annihilation cross sections are very similar,
a good first estimate can be obtained by setting the cross sections equal, in which case the
expression only depends on the known baryon number densityn b =n n +n p. We show the
cross sections in appendix A figure 18 (left bottom). We will discuss how to fully solve the
system of equations later.
Secondary pions:These annihilation processes will, in general, also inject pions into the
plasma.12 For proton-antiproton annihilations, we can find an approximate value of 1.55
π+π− pairs per process in the literature [61, 62]. From the latter reference, we can also infer
that ¯nnannihilations are approximately identical. Furthermore, we can extend that symme-
try to ¯pnand ¯npannihilations, respectively (modulo charge conjugation). From table II of the
same paper, we can extract an approximate number of 2.18π− (2.18π+) and 1.18π+ (1.18π−)
for ¯pn(¯np) annihilations.13 From these numbers, we can already predict that typically, these
secondary pions will be subleading to the main pion source coming from hadronisation, but
for completeness, we will still add them in our full calculation. Adding all the different
contributions, the source terms for pions originating from anti-baryon annihilations can be
expressed as
S¯n+¯p
π+,ann = 1.55⟨σv⟩ ¯n
n→nn¯nnn + 1.55⟨σv⟩¯p
p→pn¯pnp + 2.18⟨σv⟩¯n
p→nn¯nnp + 1.18⟨σv⟩¯p
n→pn¯pnn
(3.14)
S¯n+¯p
π−,ann = 1.55⟨σv⟩ ¯n
n→nn¯nnn + 1.55⟨σv⟩¯p
p→pn¯pnp + 1.18⟨σv⟩¯n
p→nn¯nnp + 2.18⟨σv⟩¯p
n→pn¯pnn .
(3.15)
We will come back to this (potentially asymmetric) source term of pions below.
12We neglect the small non-zero branching ratio into kaons [60].
13We have neglected branching ratios of less than 0.01% which should change the average number of pions
per annihilation at most at the percent level.
– 10 –

3.1.3 Kaons
In this section, we will consider the effect of injected neutral and charged kaons. Let us start
the discussion with the charged ones.
K±
While both types of charges participate equally in decays and annihilation, there is a major
difference in the nuclear scattering: the positively charged kaons donotinteract with the
nucleons (as long as they are stopped efficiently). Firstly, note that the “direct” conversions
K± +n/p→K 0/ ¯K0 +p/nhave an energy threshold of 5.2 MeV, which forbids the process at
early times where energy loss is efficient. 14 Secondly, the way to actually have thresholdless
interconversions is via higher baryonic resonances, which then quickly decay to nucleons (and
typically, accompanying pions). Since there are no baryons with positive strangeness, these
processes are only available to negatively charged kaons. 15 We will follow the discussion of
[55] to accurately track the injection of kaons.
Let us now investigate the exact channels that are available. Kinematically, only Σ ±,0
and Λ can be produced in the low-energy collisions we are considering:
K− +p→Σ ±π∓,Σ 0π0,Λπ 0 (3.16)
K− +n→Σ −π0,Σ 0π−,Λπ − (3.17)
with the corresponding decay channels 16
Σ+ →
(
pπ0 51.47%
nπ+ 48.43% ,(3.18)
Σ− →nπ − 99.85%,(3.19)
Σ0 →Λγ100%,(3.20)
Λ→
(
pπ− 64.1%
nπ0 35.9% .(3.21)
To arrive at the effective interconversion cross section induced by charged kaons, these pro-
cesses need to be summed over, weighted with the corresponding branching ratios. We show
the resulting effective cross sections in figure 18 (top left) in appendix A. The contribution
ton/pis then given as
dnp
dt

K−
=− dnn
dt

K−
=

⟨σv⟩ K−
n→pnK−nn − ⟨σv⟩ K−
p→nnK−np

.(3.22)
14While we will start our simulation at sufficiently high temperatures such that the threshold could be
overcome, we discard this possibility since we are only interested in the later stages of then/pevolution.
Furthermore, [57] demonstrated that the inverse case withK L in the initial state is allowed but typically has
a smaller cross section than the processes including hyperons.
15Of course, anti-baryons can have positive strangeness, but production of those would require even higher
threshold energies.
16Compared to previous work, we have updated some of the branching ratios with their recent PDG values
[47].
– 11 –

Secondary pions:We note that the upscattering into hyperons and their subsequent decays
always produce two pions. We should therefore take this into account as a source of secondary
pions, weighted according to the cross sections and branching ratios. Charge conservation
implies
K−n→n π 0π− (3.23)
K−n→p π −π− (3.24)
K−p→p π 0π− (3.25)
K−p→n π +π−, n π0π0 (3.26)
We see that only for the last process there is any ambiguity. As discussed above, theπ 0 is
irrelevant for the interconversion processes, so we will concentrate on the charged pions. We
will follow [15, 59] and weight the individual hyperon channels with the respective number
of pions, calculating specific pion-yield cross sections. The corresponding contribution to the
pion source term can be written as
SK−
π+,nuc =⟨σv⟩ K−
p→π+npnK− (3.27)
SK−
π−,nuc =⟨σv⟩ K−
p→π−npnK− +⟨σv⟩ K−
n→π−nnnK− .(3.28)
Note that there is only one contribution to theπ + source term asK − +ncan never produce
π+. The pion production cross sections can also be found in figure 18 (top right). In contrast
to the nucleons, kaons can also decay, which provides an additional source of pions. The
relevant hadronic branching ratios are given by [47]
K± →
(
π±π0(π0),22.43%
π±π+π− ,5.583% ,(3.29)
which implies that we get additional pion source terms by calculating the average number of
charged pions per decay process.
SK±
π+,dec = ΓK [(0.2243 + 2×0.05583)n K+ + 0.05583nK−] (3.30)
SK±
π−,dec = ΓK [(0.2243 + 2×0.05583)n K− + 0.05583nK+] (3.31)
with Γ K = 1/τ K. Especially at later times, when decays typically dominate the kaonic
processes, this is the dominant source of secondary pions from kaons.
Finally, we should also consider kaon annihilations, which were studied in [59]. While
subleading, we include this term here for completeness because the dynamical equilibrium
equations can still be solved analytically. Using a 2:1 splitting forπ +π− overπ 0π0 final states
for low-energy annihilations [59] we obtain
SK±
π+,ann =S K±
π−,ann = 2
3 ⟨σv⟩ K
annnK+nK− with⟨σv⟩ K
ann ≃17.23 mb.(3.32)
Now that we know all important processes for kaons, let us also discuss their dynamical
– 12 –

equilibrium abundance. Starting off from the Boltzmann equation, we find
dnK+
dt + 3HnK+ =S K − nK+
τK
− ⟨σv⟩ K
annnK+nK− (3.33)
dnK−
dt + 3HnK+ =S K − nK+
τK
− ⟨σv⟩ K
annnK+nK− − ⟨σv⟩ K−
p→nnpnK− − ⟨σv⟩ K−
n→pnnnK−
(3.34)
⇒n de
K− = SK
ΓK + ΓN +⟨σv⟩ Kannnde
K+
andn de
K+ = ΓK + ΓN
ΓK
nde
K− (3.35)
⇒n de
K− = 2SK
(ΓK + ΓN)
q
1 + 4⟨σv⟩Kann
(ΓK+ΓN)ΓK
SK + 1
 ,(3.36)
where we have defined Γ N =⟨σv⟩ K−
p→nnp +⟨σv⟩ K−
n→pnn. We have written the final result in a
way which makes it apparent that it will fall back to the simple expected result in case of
⟨σv⟩ K
ann →0.
K0
L
Similar to the case of charged kaons, we have the following interconversion channels available
KL +p→Σ +π0,Σ 0π+,Λπ + (3.37)
KL +n→Σ ±π∓,Σ 0π0,Λπ 0 ,(3.38)
where the subsequent decays are given in eq. (3.21). We then just have to combine the cross
sections with their nucleon yield to determine the effective interconversion cross sections. In
full analogy to eq. (3.22) we find
dnp
dt

KL
=− dnn
dt

KL
=

⟨σv⟩ KL
n→pnKLnn − ⟨σv⟩ KL
p→nnKLnp

.(3.39)
Secondary pions:To estimate the production of pions, we once more calculate an effective
cross section as for the charged kaons, based on the pionic final states of the processes,
including the hyperon decays. We thus find
SKL
π+,nuc =⟨σv⟩ KL
p→π+npnKL +⟨σv⟩ KL
n→π+nnnKL (3.40)
SKL
π−,nuc =⟨σv⟩ KL
p→π−npnKL +⟨σv⟩ KL
n→π−nnnKL .(3.41)
For more details on the interconversion and pion production cross section, we refer to figure 18
(centre panel). For decays, it is completely straightforward to infer the source terms once we
determine the pionic branching ratios. Focusing on the most important modes, we find
KL →
(
π± +X ,67.59%
π+π− +X ,12.54% ,(3.42)
which allows us to write
SKL
π+,dec =S KL
π−,dec = ΓKL(0.6759/2 + 0.1254)nKL .(3.43)
– 13 –

Finally, the annihilation term is the simplest if we assume the same ratio of final-state
charged/neutral pions and the same cross section [59]
SKL
π+,ann =S KL
π−,ann = 2
3 ⟨σv⟩ K
annn2
KL .(3.44)
Regarding dynamical equilibrium, we find in complete analogy to the case of charged kaons
above (now considering self-annihilations)
dnKL
dt + 3HnKL =S KL − nKL
τKL
− ⟨σv⟩ K
annn2
KL − ⟨σv⟩ KL
p→nnpnKL − ⟨σv⟩ KL
n→pnnnKL (3.45)
⇒n de
KL = 2SKL
(ΓKL + ΓN,L)
r
1 +
4⟨σv⟩KannSKL
(ΓKL+ΓN,L)2 + 1
 ,(3.46)
defining the quantities in analogy to the charged case.
3.1.4 Pions
Pions provide a very important contribution to interconversions via
π−p→nX(3.47)
π+n→pX(3.48)
withX=π 0, γ. For the corresponding interconversion cross sections, we find much smaller
values compared to the other cases, as shown in figure 18 (bottom right) in appendix A.
Let us finally come to the pion dynamical equilibrium abundance. Note that the source
term is generally asymmetric, as discussed in the previous sections. In analogy to the previous
mesons, we write17
dnπ+
dt + 3Hnπ+ =S π+ − nπ+
τπ
− ⟨σv⟩ π
annnπ+nπ− − ⟨σv⟩ π+
n→pnnnπ+ (3.50)
dnπ−
dt + 3Hnπ− =S π− − nπ−
τπ
− ⟨σv⟩ π
annnπ+nπ− − ⟨σv⟩ π−
p→nnpnπ− (3.51)
⇒n de
π− = Sπ−
Γπ +⟨σv⟩ πannnde
π+ + Γp
(3.52)
nde
π+ = (Sπ+ −S π−) + (Γπ + Γp)nde
π−
Γπ + Γn
,(3.53)
where we have introduced the total source term
Sπ± =S ϕ
π±,inj +
X
p,t
Sp
π±,t .(3.54)
Here,S ϕ
π±,inj denotes the pions sourced by the relic andp∈[K ±, KL,¯n,¯p] andt∈[ann,nuc,dec]
(depending onp). Solving the ensuing quadratic equation for the pion density is straightfor-
ward but leads to tedious expressions which are not very enlightening. However, a numerical
17For the annihilation cross section, we use the result from [63]
⟨σv⟩ π
ann =

1.07631 + 0.0944817
 T
MeV

mb.(3.49)
– 14 –

implementation is straightforward. The pions will then affect the neutron and proton abun-
dance in the following way
dnp
dt

π±
=− dnn
dt

π±
=

⟨σv⟩ π+
n→pnπ+nn − ⟨σv⟩ π−
p→nnπ−np

.(3.55)
3.1.5 Numerical scheme for all mesons
In this section, we want to discuss a numerical scheme that allows us to track all meson
contributions in a simple dynamical equilibrium approach. This relies on the assumption
that the precise value of the neutron-to-proton ratio does not impact the results too much.
The main goal is to implement this scheme intoAlterAlterBBN, i.e. to calculate the
rate at which the neutrons and protons approach the dynamical equilibrium value. Since
we have not discussed the dynamical equilibrium of neutrons and protons yet, let us quickly
consider
dYn
dt =−Γ n→p
had Yn + Γp→n
had Yp (3.56)
dYp
dt =− dYn
dt (3.57)
⇒Y de
p = Γn→p
had
Γp→n
had
Y de
n ,(3.58)
where we have encoded all the conversion rates in a total rate Γ had, i.e.
Γn→p
had =⟨σv⟩ π+
n→pnde
π+ +⟨σv⟩ KL
n→pnde
KL +⟨σv⟩ K−
n→pnde
K− +⟨σv⟩ ¯p
n→pnde
¯p (3.59)
Γp→n
had =⟨σv⟩ π−
p→nnde
π− +⟨σv⟩ KL
p→nnde
KL +⟨σv⟩ K−
p→nnde
K− +⟨σv⟩ ¯n
p→nnde
¯n .(3.60)
Combining this with the evolution of the (comovingly conserved) baryon number density, we
can calculate the dynamical-equilibrium nucleon number density.
Let us now describe in greater detail how we explicitly implement this in the code.
The challenge is to merge the direct time evolution ofAlterAlterBBNwith the dynamical
equilibrium where all time derivatives vanish and the time evolution is just driven by the slow
changes in source terms and the baryon number density. Therefore, we want to calculate the
rate at which the nucleon abundances are driven towards equilibrium at every time step in
the code. We apply the following prescription:
1. we use the initial value (or the result of the previous evolution step inAlterAlterBBN)
as our initial guess for the equilibrium neutron and proton abundance. We then use
these to calculate the kaon and anti-nucleon abundances according to dynamical equi-
librium (cf. eqs. (3.13), (3.35), (3.36), and (3.46))
2. we calculate the source term for pions, made up of the original source term as well as
the secondary pions from kaons and anti-nucleons. This allows us to also estimate the
pion number densities (cf. eqs. (3.52) and (3.53)),
3. with all these number densities, we calculate the nucleon number densities required to
enforce the dynamical-equilibrium condition as in eq. (3.58),
– 15 –

10−1100
Temperature T [MeV]
10−3
10−1
101
103
105
107
109
1011
1013
1015
1017
1019
1021
1023
1025
Number density n [cm−3]
φ → e+e− mφ = 100 GeV
τφ = 1 s
Yφ = 10−12
π−
π+
K−
K+
KL
n ¯n
p ¯p
nφ
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
10−1100
Temperature T [MeV]
10−20
10−18
10−16
10−14
φ → e+e−
mφ = 100 GeV
τφ = 1 s
Yφ = 10−12
π+
π−
Sp
π±,t/Sπ±
φ, inj
K±, ann
K±, dec
K±, nuc
KL, ann
KL, dec
KL, nuc
¯n + ¯p, ann
Figure 3:Left:Dynamical equilibrium number densities for a benchmark point. We also
show the relic abundance as a dashed black line.Right:Relative contribution to the total
source term for the pions.
4. we take these new nucleon abundances as an input for another iteration. We repeat
this process until we have converged on the consistent dynamical equilibrium result, 18
5. using theoriginalnucleon number densities and the consistent dynamical-equilibrium
meson and anti-nucleon abundances, we calculate the interconversion rates towards dy-
namical equilibrium (cf. (3.56)) which we feed back into the main loop ofAlterAlterBBN.
This method allows us to incorporate the idea of dynamical equilibrium into the standard
cosmological evolution ofAlterAlterBBN. In particular, it is still functional when the weak
rates are competitive with the hadronic ones. In figure 3 (left), we show the number densities
as used in our code for a benchmark point withm ϕ = 100 GeV,τ ϕ = 1 s, andY ϕ = 10−12.
We further show the relic number density to demonstrate that the hadrons just make up a
tiny fraction of their source. As expected, over a wide range of temperatures, the pions are
the most abundant particles due to their larger injection rate (cf. section 4). As secondary
injections are small, the pion injection is very symmetric with a larger asymmetry only at
the highest temperatures considered here. This difference stems from the much larger kaon
asymmetry, driven by the fact that we do not consider the interactions ofK + with the
background nucleons.19 As the lifetime of the relic dictates the period of interconversions,
we see an exponential cutoff towards the times of BBN. In that regime, the weak interaction
has already dropped out of equilibrium, and the neutrons now experience an “hadronic freeze-
out”. We should further note that for all injected hadrons, only a fraction participates in
interconversions, especially for the mesons, where the small lifetime reduces the interacting
fraction significantly. As a cross-check, we refer to appendix B for a validation against a
direct numerical solution of the Boltzmann equations for hadron injections.
We further show the relative contributions to the pion source term in figure 3 (right) for
the same benchmark point as in the right figure. We explicitly use the quantityS p
π±,t/Sπ±,
18We have found that requiring a relative change of less than 10 −6 in the neutron and proton abundances
gives an excellent compromise between accuracy and runtime.
19In reality, at these high temperatures such processes are possible, but as we see that the asymmetry is
quickly washed out at lower temperatures, we conclude that this approximation is justified.
– 16 –

i.e. the ratio of the individual source terms (now also including the relic decay:p=ϕ,
t= inj) divided by the sum of all source terms. Since pions are typically the most numerously
injected hadron, the direct injections dominate the total budget. As expected, at late stages,
kaon decays become particularly relevant as they do not depend on temperature, while the
kaon annihilation and nuclear rates drop significantly. Throughout all temperatures, kaon
annihilations are completely negligible (note the break in the y-axis!). However, for much
larger relic abundances this contribution could grow in importance due to its quadratic scaling
with relic density [59]. The largest asymmetry is induced by the charged kaons, where an
already asymmetric abundance decays and scatters in a way that also injects pions with a bias.
Of course, annihilation injections are perfectly symmetric; the marginal difference between
the dashed and solid meson annihilation curves is just due to the different normalisation,
i.e. differentS π±. The same holds true for primary injections from the relic and allK L except
for nuclear scattering, wheren/pleads to different scattering probabilities for neutrons and
protons.
3.2 Hadrodisintegration
Once hadrons are no longer thermalised immediately after injection, the kinetic energy can be
high enough to disintegrate the previously synthesised light elements. As this process starts
to become effective fort≳10 2s, it generally proceeds at the same time as the standard BBN
processes. Below, we will discuss how we technically implement these reactions, where the
approach is similar to the one in our previous paper [36], in which we discussed the impact
of introducing hadrons following thermal BBN. The topic of hadrodisintegration has been
extensively covered in [7, 19], and more recently in [6, 64]. However, as no public code exists
for accounting for the effect of injecting hadrons, we performed an independent calculation
based on these publications. In the present study, we have expanded the effects of hadrodis-
integration to earlier times, which required specific modifications to theAlterBBNcode, as
detailed in appendix. C. We refer the reader to [19, 36] for a comprehensive description of
our formalism; here, we summarise only the key points.
Let us briefly introduce the main parameters that we need in order to account for
the effect of hadrodisintegration. We first define two quantitiesξ n/p
X [nj](T, K) for each light
elementX∈p, n,D,T, 3He, 4He. This quantity encodes the net number of nucleiXproduced
(or destroyed, if negative) by the injection of a single neutron or proton with kinetic energyK
at temperatureT, and it explicitly depends on the background abundancesn j withj=p, 4He.
The corresponding Boltzmann equation for hadrodisintegration can then be written as
dnX
dt

hadro
=
X
y=n,p
Z ∞
0
dK ξ y
X[nj](K) d2ninj
y
dtdK (K),(3.61)
where d2ninj
y /(dtdK) denotes the injection rate of hadrons per unit time and kinetic energy.
In order to solve this equation, we further make the following two simplifications:
1. An equal amount of protons and neutrons is injected.
2. We approximate the full injection spectrum by a single,averagekinetic energy and the
total injection rate.
– 17 –

Under these assumptions, eq. (3.61) simplifies to
dnX
dt

hadro
≃
X
y=n,p
 
ξy
X[nj](Kinj
hd )dninj
hd
dt
!
.(3.62)
A key difference with respect to [36] is that we consider relic lifetimesτ ϕ ≤10 4 s such
that significant hadronic injections occur already during the early stages of BBN. While at
t≲10 2 s all injected mesons and nucleons are efficiently stopped, this is no longer the case
for neutrons already att >10 2 s. As a consequence, hadrodisintegration does not “factorize”
with the standard BBN evolution. This requires a simultaneous treatment of the cascade
and nuclear network from early times, including the computation of the hadrodisintegration
rates. This is achieved by incorporating the matrix formalism developed in [19, 36] within
AlterAlterBBN(see appendix C for details). This way, we can consistently evolve the nuclear
abundances during early times, where thermal and non-thermal effects are intertwined. The
resulting abundances fromAlterAlterBBNare then used as initial conditions forACROPOLIS,
which takes over the late-time evolution, and accounts for both hadrodisintegration and the
onset of photodisintegration processes that become relevant att≳10 4 s.
A note on anti-nucleonsIn our analysis, we neglect the contribution of anti-baryons,
as their impact is subleading in the parameter space of interest. Since we consider decays
that conserve baryon number, baryons and anti-baryons are produced in equal amounts.
These injections have been studied in [6]. From figure 6 of [6], one can observe that the effect
of anti-neutrons (denoted by “ξ Hi,n”) exceeds that of protons (“ξ Hi,p”) only at very high
energies, well beyond the regime relevant for our work. Furthermore, due to a lack of data,
[6] also does not truly handle direct hadronic disintegration but just the hadronic cascade
initiated by elastic anti-nucleon scatterings on background protons.
A note on meson-induced hadrodisintegrationThe literature has studied the
disintegration effects of mesons (in addition to interconversions), e.g. in [55]. As mentioned
before, we ignore those here as we always expect to have accompanying nucleons in all decay
channels, unlike the reference which treats purely mesonic injections. For all of the injections
treated in this work, the number of mesons (in particular pions) is larger than the number
of nucleons, and the disintegration cross sections are typically similar. Naively, this seems
to imply that mesonic hadrodisintegration should also dominate in our setup. However,
we further need to account for the fact that mesons will decay rapidly (cf. figure 2). In
particular, even if the mesons interact before thermalisation, where the cross sections can
be enhanced by the ∆-resonance, there will only be few interactions. Let us quantify this
effect: for mesonic disintegration to be efficient, we would like it to happen more rapidly
than the decays. From [55] we take amaximumdisintegration cross section ofσ π
dis ≲200 mb.
Then we estimate the 4He abundancen 4He ∼η bnγ. The disintegration rate is therefore
roughly given as Γ π,dis ∼σ π
dis β n4He ≲0.12 s −1(T /10 keV)3, assuming that the pions are
fully relativistic (β= 1). Even this most optimistic guess is much smaller than the inverse
lifetime of all mesons. Even with relativistic time dilation, e.g. a pion would need to have
E=m π/(Γπ,disτπ)∼4.5·10 7 GeV to compensate for the decay rate at rest.
3.3 Photodisintegration
The injection of high-energy electromagnetic (EM) particles – namely electrons, positrons,
and photons – initiates an EM cascade, resulting in a spectrum of non-thermal photons (see
e.g. [19, 24, 29, 65]). These photons can efficiently photodisintegrate light nuclei once their en-
ergies exceed the corresponding nuclear binding thresholds,E γ > E th
N , thereby modifying the
– 18 –

primordial abundances. At the same time, the photon energy cannot be arbitrarily large: for
sufficiently high energies,E γ ≳E th
ee ≃m 2
e/(22T), interactions with the background photons
lead to efficiente +e− pair production, rapidly depleting the high-energy photon population.
As a consequence, photodisintegration can only proceed efficiently ifE th
N < E th
ee. This con-
dition defines, for each element, the maximum temperature below which photodisintegration
becomes effective, implying that in practice this process is only relevant forT≲O(keV),
when SBBN has already finished, so that the two processes simply factorise.
For relatively high energy, there is another useful simplification we can make: if the
energy of the particles initiating this cascade is above the electron pair-creation threshold,
i.e.E 0 ≫E th
ee, any photon produced during this cascade with an energy above this threshold
is rapidly depleted. In this case, it is well known that the cascade produces a universal
spectrum of non-thermal photons, which is well approximated by [65] 20
fγ,univ(T, E)≃ Sem(T)
Γγ(T, E) ×



K0(E/EX)−3/2 , E < E X ,
K0(E/EX)−2 , E X < E < E th
ee ,
0, E > E th
ee .
(3.63)
Here,K 0 =E 0E−2
X

2 + ln(Eth
ee /EX)
−1,E X =m 2
e/(80T), Γ γ is the total scattering rate of
non-thermal photons with the background, andS em is the source-term describing the total
amount of injected EM material. Additionally, the distribution function f γ is defined to be
differential in energy instead of momentumf γ, with the two being related via
fγ(T, E) =g γ
Ep
2π2 fγ(T, p).(3.64)
Here,g γ = 2 is the number of photon degrees of freedom. To evaluate eq. (3.63) for our
scenario, we have to compute the source termS em originating from the cascade. It can be
written as
Sem(T) =ζ em(mϕ)2∆nϕ
∆t ,(3.65)
where ∆n ϕ is the number density ofϕparticles decaying during the interval ∆t, andζ em
parameterises the fraction of the injected energy transferred to the electromagnetic cascade
(cf. section 4). Note that we include the entire output of the shower process inside this term; in
particular, it also contains the tree-level contributions in electron-positron or photon-photon
injections.
After the EM cascade, the non-thermal photons originating from the EM cascade, i.e. the
ones encoded in f γ,univ, will initiate photodisintegration reactions, e.g.γD→npamong
others. The Boltzmann equations governing these reactions can be written as [35] (dropping
thet/Tdependence for convenience)
dnX
dt

photo
=
X
j
njNjγ→X
Z ∞
0
dEf γ(E)σjγ→X (E)−n X
X
j′
Z ∞
0
dEf γ(E)σXγ→j ′(E).
(3.66)
20For the highly energetic injections considered in this work, we expect that the universal spectrum is always
a good approximation. Therefore, we do not have to explicitly solve the equations governing the EM cascade
to obtain the spectrum (cf. e.g. [22, 66])
– 19 –

Here, fγ = fγ,univ,Xdenotes any of the light nuclei under consideration, andN jγ→X is
the number ofXnuclei produced in the reactionjγ→X. The quantitiesσ jγ→X (σXγ→j ′)
represent the cross sections for the reactions that create (destroy)X, and can be found in [35].
Given an expression forS em(T), one could in principle use either the most recent stable
versionv1.3.2or the updated development versionv2.0.0-devofACROPOLIS 21 to compute
fγ,univ and solve eq. (3.66), thereby obtaining the final light-element abundances after pho-
todisintegration. However, since hadrodisintegration is also effective at early times, we must
first runAlterAlterBBN. Only after obtaining the resulting abundances canACROPOLISbe
applied. In other words, the initial abundances used inACROPOLISare the final products of
AlterAlterBBN.
We can then combine eq. (3.66) with eq. (3.61), to get the total Boltzmann equation
governing non-thermal BBN (NBBN):
dnX
dt

NBBN
=
dnX
dt

photo
+
dnX
dt

hadro
.(3.67)
3.4 Effects on the background cosmology
The injection of additional energy into the SM thermal bath modifies the effective number of
relativistic species at recombination,N eff, which is constrained via CMB observations [46].
This can be expressed as:
Neff = 8
7
11
4
4/3 ρrad −ρ γ
ργ

≡

3 + ∆Neff(trec)
11
4
4/3 Tν(trec)
T(t rec)
4
,(3.68)
whereρ rad is the total radiation energy density andργ is the photon energy density. If the relic
ϕdecays into EM particles after neutrino decoupling, as is the case forϕ→e +e−, it injects
entropy into the SM plasma without heating the neutrino sector, as long as injections happen
after neutrino decoupling. This alters the ratioT ν/T, reducing the neutrino temperature
relative to the photon temperature. As a consequence, the value ofN eff at recombination
is suppressed in this case, yieldingN eff <3.04 (for a recent and more detailed discussion,
see [67]). However, for many SM final states, the injection will be into both the photon and
the neutrino sectors. The exact determination of theN eff bounds requires a more detailed
treatment of the injections. In particular, it requires accounting for the injection of neutrinos
into the plasma (increasingN eff) while at the same time tracking the EM energy loss of
charged particles before their decay (which will decreaseN eff). As neutrinos typically do
notinteract with the background plasma [36, 68], this part is relatively straightforward.
However, for general injections, the decomposition into EM and neutrino energy depositions
is non-trivial to extract. Let us discuss muons as a prime example. Muons, when injected,
will eventually decay into an electron and two neutrinos. On average, we can assume that the
energy is split equally among the three effectively massless particles. However, if the muon
is stopped in the plasma (cf. figure 2), it will give most of its kinetic energy into the EM
plasma before decaying so that the neutrinos resulting from the decay will only carry 2/3
of the rest mass, potentially much below the initial kinetic energy. Thus, the decomposition
of the injection is highly dependent on the temperature at injection, the injected particle,
and the relic mass as well. This consideration is analogous for many more particles, in
21The difference between the two versions lies in the implementation of hadrodisintegration in version
v2.0.0-dev.
– 20 –

particular those with hadronic final states. In the following, we will therefore only show the
Neff limits forϕ→e +e−, with the understanding that for other decay channels the limits
will be somewhat weaker due to partial cancellations. However, as our direct BBN bounds
are so much stronger than theN eff constraints, this simplified treatment will not impact our
final results.
The injection of additional particles around BBN can also affect the neutrino decoupling
temperature [69–72]. In general, neutrinos remain in thermal equilibrium with the electro-
magnetic plasma through weak interactions with electrons and positrons. The interaction
rate scales as Γ ν ∼G 2
F T 5, while the Hubble expansion rate during radiation domination
scales asH∼T 2. Neutrino decoupling occurs when Γ ν ≃Hwhich fixes the decoupling
temperatureT ν,dec. We work under the assumption of instantaneous decoupling, a common
approach which is known to be a very good approximation [73]. Within this approximation,
we take a decoupling temperature of
Tν-dec, SM ≃1.3 MeV,(3.69)
where the numerical value is chosen to reproduceN eff ≃3.04 within our code.
In the presence of an additional relic, the expansion rate is modified,H→H ′. The
decoupling condition Γ ν(Tν-dec)∼H ′(Tν-dec) then implies
G2
F T 5
ν-dec ≃H ′(Tν-dec).(3.70)
Taking the ratio with the Standard Model case, and using the same conditionG2
F T 5
ν-dec, SM ≃
HSM(Tν-dec, SM ), we obtain
 Tν-dec
Tν-dec, SM
5
≃ H ′(Tν-dec)
HSM(Tν-dec, SM ) .(3.71)
from which:
Tν-dec
Tν-dec, SM
≃
 H ′(Tν-dec)
HSM(Tν-dec, SM )
1/5
.(3.72)
This expression follows directly from the temperature scaling of the interaction rates, Γν ∝T 5,
and provides a consistent estimate within the instantaneous-decoupling approximation.
The neutrino decoupling temperature has a direct effect on the light-element abundances
through its impact on the weak interaction rates that govern neutron–proton interconversion.
A shift inT ν-dec modifies the temperature at which the neutron-to-proton ratio departs from
equilibrium, which in turn modifies the neutron-to-proton ratio, finally affecting the 4He
abundance.
3.5 Treatment of the errors
Let us also quickly comment on the handling of the theoretical errors entering the determina-
tion of the light-element abundances. We consider (i) the errors in the nuclear reaction rates
used inAlterAlterBBN, (ii) the errors in our calculation ofξ y
X, which amount toϵ ξ ≈20%
[6, 19, 36], and (iii) the errors in the interconversion rates which we also estimate as a±20%
relative change for all rates. 22 A detailed treatment of the error propagation on the final
22The literature [57] does not provide us with error bars, and so we estimate them to be similar to the
hadrodisintegration rate uncertainty.
– 21 –

abundances would require a Monte-Carlo approach, running the code many times for a single
data point and varying the parameters within their errors.
This approach is prohibitively time-consuming for the large scans that we perform, and
thus, we use a simpler, well-established approach to estimate the uncertainties. In order to do
so, we runAlterAlterBBNwith high, mean, and low values for all relevant rates, specifically
the interconversion, reaction, and disintegration rates.
This yields three sets of abundancesY Γ,high,0
X ,Y Γ,mean,0
X , andY Γ,low,0
X which we use as
initial values forACROPOLIS. Evolving these through eq. (3.67) inACROPOLIS, we obtain the
corresponding final abundancesY Γ,high
X ,Y Γ,mean
X , andY Γ,low
X .23
Additionally, since hadrodisintegration is also part ofACROPOLIS, we solve eq. (3.67)
with the central resultY Γ mean,0
X as initial conditions, varying once more the disintegration
parametersξ y
X {(1 +ϵ ξ),(1−ϵ ξ)}to obtain two more sets of final abundancesY ξ,high
X and
Y ξ,low
X , which represents the uncertainty arising in hadrodisintegration fromACROPOLIS. We
then calculate the theoretical error on the different abundancesY X as the minimal difference
between the central result and the high/low result for the sets [Y Γ,high
X , Y Γ,mean
X , Y Γ,low
X ] and
[Y ξ,high
X , Y ξ,mean
X , Y ξ,low
X ].24 To arrive at the final result, we add up both contributions in
quadrature. Finally, this theoretical uncertainty is combined with the observational uncer-
tainties on the abundances presented in section 2 to derive the overall exclusion limits. In
light of the mild tension in the theory predictions for D/ 1H [74], let us quickly quote the
results that our code provides in SBBN:
D/1H = (25.23±0.53)×10 −5 ,(3.73)
Yp = (0.2472±0.0008),(3.74)
3He/D = (0.410±0.003).(3.75)
This result makes immediately clear that the deuterium error budget is dominated by theory
uncertainty even in the SBBN scenario. The comparatively large uncertainties on the non-
thermal rates will further enhance the theoretical error. As long as the uncertainties from
non-thermal sources dominate the total error budget we can be certain that the tension in
the SBBN prediction of D/ 1H does not impact our results.
4 From decays to final-state particles utilisingPYTHIA
Having discussed the leading effects of generic injections, we now focus on the case of a
relic decaying into a pair of SM particles. To this end, we usePYTHIAto shower an initial
two-particle state whose centre-of-mass energy is set equal to the relic mass. This procedure
captures two distinct physical effects. First, it hadronises coloured initial states — such
as quarks or gluons — yielding a final state composed of electromagnetically interacting
particles, mesons, baryons, and neutrinos. 25 Second,PYTHIAautomatically incorporates the
leading final-state radiation (FSR) corrections to the primary spectrum, so that even purely
electromagnetic decay channels such ase +e− can give rise to hadronic and neutrino final
states.
23For small relic lifetimes this last step is not necessary.
24Note that in this notationY Γ,mean
X =Y ξ,mean
X .
25We retain only those particles that are (meta-)stable on the timescales of interest, allowing all others to
decay; in particular, we include all other hadrons not treated explicitly above.
– 22 –

A priori, the relic particle could be of scalar or vector nature, in general with different
coupling structures to left- and right-handed SM particles. When initialising the final state
inPYTHIAwhich is to be showered, one has to make a corresponding choice. For definiteness,
we have chosen a scalar relic, but we have checked that when assuming equal couplings
to left- and right-handed states, the results for scalar and vector relics are identical within
uncertainties, so our results apply to both cases. 26 A major difference between the two cases
comes from the degrees of freedom (1 for a real scalar compared to 3 for a massive vector).
In the limit plots we show below, this is already absorbed into the yieldY ϕ, so that both
limits are identical.
As we have seen in the previous section, we need the following quantities to cover all
effects relevant to the light-element abundances:
•ζ EM, i.e. the fraction of EM energy in the final state, 27
•N n/p andK n/p,avg, i.e. the typical number of baryons per decay and their average kinetic
energy, which we use to approximate the injection spectrum of neutrons and protons
•N m withm=π ±, K±, K0
L, i.e. the number of mesons per decay .
Let us now discuss on a more technical level how we extract these numbers. For a given
pair of SM particles that we want to analyse, we utilise theVINCIAmodule ofPYTHIA8.3to
obtain the relevant particles after final-state radiation and showering. We initialise an.lhe
file with events of the tree-level decay as input forPYTHIAand then read out all quantities
of interest from the output and average them over all events. We adjust the numberNof
considered events to the case of interest: a low mass relic with mass below the weak scale
decaying intoe +e− has only very suppressed final-state radiation and thus requires a large
number of events (of the order of 10 7) to get reasonable statistics for all relevant quantities,
such as the number of pions,N π. For heavier particles, we can lower the number of events
as FSR gets more likely, which improves the statistics. In fact, if coloured particles appear
at tree-level, it is helpful to further reduce the number of generated events, in particular for
heavy relics: the large energies available for the shower lead to an enormous multiplicity,
significantly slowing down the code. Note also that for showers close to the mass threshold
of coloured particles,PYTHIAceases to give reliable results due to a number of complicating
effects, which is why we only show constraints where the relic particle is sufficiently heavier
than the considered final state.
To demonstrate our results, we show the average electromagnetic component after FSR
and hadronisation for all injections we probe in figure 4, including the benchmark cases
e+e−,u¯u, andγγ. As expected, starting with an electromagnetic final state (before FSR)
will also typically lead to a mostly EM state after showering. For a hadronic setup, we
see that typically a relatively constant (w.r.t. the relic mass) value is reached soon after
the kinematic threshold is crossed. We find that, excluding threshold effects, the relic mass
dependence of the electromagnetic fraction is relatively mild for all particles in the range of
[10,10 4] GeV which we consider for the constraints. Since the unstable charged leptons tend
to produce neutrinos in their decay chain, they have the smallest EM fraction. At this point,
it should be emphasised once more that for the heavier quarks the results too close to the
26Of course, a vector particle could not decay into massless vectors such as photons or gluons directly.
27Since photodisintegration only becomes relevant at late times, we also let all mesons decay since we do
not expect them to lose their energy into the EM sector by scattering down (c.f. section 3.4). Thus, we count
all electrons, positrons, and photons after mesonic decays intoζ EM.
– 23 –

100 101 102 103 104 105 106
mφ [GeV]
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
ζEM
e+e−
u¯u
γγ
gg
µ+µ−
τ +τ −
b¯b
t¯t
ZZ
W W
hh
Figure 4: Average fraction of injected EM energy for different SM final states at late times,
i.e. after decays of intermediate mesons.
mass threshold are not reliable. Therefore, we do not consider these cases in our analysis of
the constraints.
Let us now turn to the hadronic components, which we present in figure 5. We focus
on the three benchmark casese +e−,u¯u, andγγ, indicating the various final-state hadrons
with different linestyles. In our convention, the lines denote individual particles’ species, so
Nπ± =N π+ =N π− is the number of charged pions,N K± =N K+ =N K− the number of
charged kaons, andN b =N p =N ¯p=N n =N ¯nthe number of (anti-) protons and neutrons
individually. We see clearly that pions are consistently the most numerous hadrons in any
final state. We further see that the number of kaons is largely identical betweenK +,K −,
andK L and that nucleons are the least abundant species. We refer to appendix E for the
other injection channels.
Finally, let us briefly discuss the mass dependence of the kinetic energy of the different
injections. As a rule of thumb, we find that (sufficiently far away from all mass thresholds),
there is an approximately linear trend withK b ∼0.01m ϕ for all final states.
5 Results & Discussion
In this section, we present the resulting limits for particles decaying into different final states
over all lifetimes relevant for BBN, ranging fromτ ϕ = 10−2 s toτ ϕ = 1011 s, where the lower
end is motivated by an exponential loss in sensitivity for lifetimes below neutrino decoupling,
while the upper end is motivated by the expected takeover of CMB bounds [75]. We examine
– 24 –

100 101 102 103 104 105 106
mφ [GeV]
10□6
10□5
10□4
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
101
102
103
Nhadronic
Nπ±
NK ±
NKL
Nb
e+e−
u¯u
γγ
Figure 5: Hadronic final states fore +e−,u¯u, andγγinjections. We focus on the (meta-)
stable particles relevant to our analysis and let all other hadrons decay immediately.
all two-body decays into SM final states except the case of decays into neutrinos, which we
leave for a future study.28
5.1 Decay intoe +e−
In this section, we will discuss the constraints one +e− injections in detail. This discussion
will not only clarify the shape and strength of these particular bounds but also help in
understanding the constraints on other decay channels better.
However, before we discuss the bounds in the full parameter space, let us discuss the
full evolution of the light elements in figure 6. Let us begin with one of the two benchmark
points (dotted line,m ϕ = 10 GeV,τ ϕ = 1 s,Y ϕ = 10 −5 for injections ofe +e−). For these
early injections, disintegration is negligible, and the dominant effect is due to the change in
the neutron-to-proton ration/pdriven by interconversion processes. This becomes clear from
the deviation of the neutron abundance from the SM prediction. The neutron abundance is
then mostly transferred into the 4He abundance, which also strongly deviates from the SM
prediction now. We further note that the other abundances feel the effect of the change in
n/pas well, but due to the high precision of the 4He abundance measurement, it remains the
leading bound for this benchmark point.
For the second parameter point we have chosenm ϕ = 10 GeV,τ ϕ = 3·10 4 s, andY ϕ =
10−9. We have selected this point as it decays sufficiently late so that the strongest bounds
28We have explored decays into neutrinos with longer lifetimes in [36]. However, the case of early decays
requires us to consider additional effects that are beyond the scope of the present work.
– 25 –

10□410□310□210□1100101
T [MeV]
10□6
10□5
10□4
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
101
Nuclear abundances
Yp|obs.
D/1H|obs.
3He/D|obs.
mφ = 10 GeV, φ → e+e−
n/1H
D/1H
(T+3He)/D
Yp
SM
τφ = 3 · 104 s, Yφ = 10 −9
τφ = 1 s, Yφ = 10 −5
Figure 6: Evolution of the light-element abundances form ϕ = 10GeV for two benchmark
points, with one demonstrating the impact of interconversions (dotted) while the other cap-
tures both hadro- and photodisintegration effects (dashed).
are dominated by disintegration (and not interconversions) while still decaying early enough
to have significant hadrodisintegration happening in bothACROPOLISandAlterAlterBBN.
Furthermore, this point lies close to the transition between D/ 1H over- and underproduction
due to the advent of photodisintegration around these lifetimes. For better visibility, we
have zoomed into the transition region belowT≈100 keV. Early on, deuterium is produced
by 4He hadrodisintegration, but later on, the trend is inverted, and deuterium is mostly
photodisintegrated. We further note that 4He is barely affected in this scenario as its overall
abundance is much larger than the rest of the light elements (except for protons), so that
converting a tiny fraction of 4He already leads to a massive change in D, T, and 3He.
Let us now focus on the regime where interconversions dominate the bounds. Unlike
hadro- and photodisintegration, where only few different particles drive the constraints (neu-
trons/protons and photons, respectively), many different hadrons contribute to the bounds
by interconverting the nucleons before BBN. To provide a better understanding on the pion,
kaon, and nucleon contribution, we show them individually in figure 7 for two benchmark
points (ϕ→e +e−,m ϕ = [10,1000] GeV). In both cases, we see that pions are leading the
bounds at the lowest lifetimes because they are the most abundant particle in the injection
shower (cf. figure 5). However, as their lifetime is similar to the kaon lifetimes, but their
interconversion cross sections are lower, they will become increasingly less relevant for larger
– 26 –

10−3 10−1 101
τφ [s]
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV]
Neff,ee
φ → e+e−
mφ = 10 GeV
Total
N ¯N
π
K0
L
K−
10−3 10−1 101
τφ [s]
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV]
Neff,ee
φ → e+e−
mφ = 1 TeV
Total
N ¯N
π
K0
L
K−
Figure 7:Left: Decomposition of the individual interconversion bounds forϕ→e +e− and
mϕ = 10 GeV.Right: Same but form ϕ = 1 TeV.
lifetimes, where temperatures at the injection are lower and thus decays are more relevant.
In this case, the charged kaons take over as they profit from their larger interaction rate.
Neutral kaons, however, are always subleading which further justifies our treatment lined out
in section 3.1. Finally, all three meson contributions become weaker than theN eff bound
form ϕ = 10 GeV and hit the irreducible background cosmology bounds. The case for the
antinucleon-nucleon pairs is the exact opposite. Due to their low injection rate, they are con-
sistently weaker than the (charged) meson contributions for short lifetimes. However, as they
are stable on the timescales considered here, the constraints do not suffer a suppression with
increasing relic lifetime, unlike the mesons where their short lifetime prevents efficient inter-
conversion processes. This leads to the nucleons dominating the overall limit up to lifetimes
ofτ ϕ ∼10 2 s where the hadrodisintegration bounds take over. Due to the larger hadronic
branching ratio, all individualm ϕ = 1 TeV bounds are overall stronger and in particular,
they are always stronger than the background cosmology bounds. We expect these results to
qualitatively hold for all injections with similar ratios of pion, kaon, and nucleon injections.
We will discuss the special case ofτ +τ − in more detail later. Finally, let us emphasise again
the confirmation of our assumption that the interconversions, independently of the type of
hadron, tend toincreasen/pdue to the larger proton abundance in the SM, cf. our discussion
at the beginning of section 3.1.
In figure 8, we show the effect of accounting separately for hadrodisintegration and
photodisintegration, again for the benchmark case ofϕ→e +e− and masses ofm ϕ =
[10,1000] GeV. In the former case, hadrodisintegration constitutes the leading limit up until
τϕ ∼10 4 s, after which photodisintegration dominates. We note the cancellation between
the regime of deuterium over- and underproduction. For 1 TeV instead, hadrodisintegration
bounds are stronger until approximately 10 6 s where once again photodisintegration takes
over. As both bounds independently become relatively flat in that regime, the cancellation is
much more pronounced for this relic mass. Incidentally, the points where photo- and hadro-
disintegration cancel each other is close to the point where 3He/D becomes the dominant
bound, driven by the photodisintegration of 4He.
– 27 –

103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
mφYφ [GeV]
Neff,ee
φ → e+e−
mφ = 10 GeV
Total
Only hadrodisintegration
Only photodisintegration
103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
mφYφ [GeV]
Neff,ee
φ → e+e−
mφ = 1 TeV
Total
Only hadrodisintegration
Only photodisintegration
Figure 8:Left: Decomposition of the photodisintegration and hadrodisintegration bounds
forϕ→e +e− andm ϕ = 10 GeV.Right: Same but form ϕ = 1 TeV.
With this detailed understanding of the individual contributions, we show the resulting
constraints in them ϕYϕ −τ ϕ plane in figure 9. To emphasise the findings of the last two para-
graphs, we highlight the contributions from the different elements that drive the constraints
in the casem ϕ = 10 GeV (left figure). For shorter lifetimes, approximatelyτ ϕ ≲10 2 s, the
limits come from the efficient neutron-proton interconversions driven by the injected hadrons,
as discussed in 3.1, and are dominated by a too high value ofYP which is “inherited” from the
increased neutron abundance compared to the SM scenario. Forτ ϕ ≳10 2 s, injected neutrons
are no longer immediately stopped in the plasma and can start to disintegrate 4He efficiently,
leading to an overproduction of D/1H. For lifetimesτ ϕ ≳10 4 s, photodisintegration processes
become important, as the universal spectrum contains photons with high enough energy to
deplete deuterium. At later times, even higher energies are possible, allowing photons to
effectively destroy the more abundant 4He and to drive the overproduction of D and 3He.
Not all regions in the (m ϕYϕ, τϕ) plane are physically realisable. Even if the primordial
abundance ofϕis assumed to vanish, inverse decays and related freeze-in processes from the
thermal bath generically produce a minimal irreducible abundance. For decays into electrons,
ϕ→e +e−, the inverse decay processe +e− →ϕyields approximately [76]
YFI
ϕ ≃ 135g ϕ
8π3 1.66g ∗s
√g∗
MPl
m2
ϕτϕ
,(5.1)
up toO(1) corrections from quantum statistics and the temperature dependence ofg ∗.
In fact, for a fixed lifetimeτ ϕ, the freeze-in abundance is largely independent of the specific
decay channel. Although inverse decays into e.g. coloured particles receive additional colour
multiplicities, these factors are already encoded in the total decay width Γ ϕ =τ −1
ϕ . Conse-
quently, the minimal freeze-in abundance is approximately determined only bym ϕ andτ ϕ,
up to small corrections which will also apply to other cases discussed below. The production
is dominated at temperaturesT∼m ϕ, and thereforeg ∗ andg ∗s should be evaluated around
that epoch. We indicate the corresponding freeze-in floor in the (m ϕYϕ, τϕ) plane; regions
below this line are not populated in standard cosmology.
– 28 –

10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
mφYφ [GeV]
D/1H high
D/1H high
D/1H low
3He/D high
YP high
YP low
φ → e+e−
mφ = 10 GeV
↑ Neff,ee < 2.65
↓Below freeze-in abundance
10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff,ee
φ → e+e−
mφ = 10 GeV
mφ = 100 GeV
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
Figure 9:Left:BBN constraints from the different elements from the decayϕ→e +e− for
mϕ = 10 GeV. Coloured regions indicate parameter space excluded by bounds on individual
elements, as labelled. The correspondingN eff constraint is shown in grey. We also indicate
the region where the irreducible freeze-in abundance is above the assumed value ofm ϕYϕ and
can therefore not be consistently reached in standard cosmology. We show it for both a vector
relic (solid) and a scalar relic (dashed).Right:Overall BBN constraints for different masses
mϕ (solid, different colours). In addition, we also show the correspondingN eff constraint for
mϕ = 10 TeV (blue dashed).
In the right panel of figure 9, we show the resulting constraints for masses between
10 GeV and 10 TeV.29 We see that for heavier relics, above the electroweak scale, the structure
of the bumps is mildly modified. The behaviour is the same as the one we found in [36]:
once theZ-boson production is no longer kinematically suppressed, hadron production from
electrons and positrons increases significantly (cf. figure 5). Since 4He is much more abundant
than D, its destruction and the ensuing deuterium production are able to outperform the
direct photodisintegration of deuterium more and more, shifting the transition towards larger
lifetimes. Ultimately, the 3He constraints become dominant, before any region of parameter
space can be excluded solely by deuterium underproduction.
A general feature of EM injections is that the bounds tend to become independent of
the mass of the relic towards large lifetimes (assuming the same energy density). This is
due to the universal spectrum, which is only sensitive to the total injected energy and not
the injection spectrum. This explains the convergence of the bounds towards a universal
constraint for large lifetimes. Since we expect the amount of EM energy and the number
of hadrons not to change too much for very high energies, the other limits will also become
very similar. In the hadronically dominated regime, we make the interesting observation that
the bounds tend to decrease again form ϕ ≳1 TeV. Especially in the interconversion region,
this can be explained using figure 5: at low masses, the growth of the number of hadrons
is typically larger than linear, especially when crossing the EW scale. However, eventually
this growth decreases and becomes less than linear. In that case, for fixedm ϕYϕ, we find
29This range is motivated by the breakdown ofPYTHIAat too low and too high masses. Furthermore, we
expect the bounds to rapidly vanish with the mass approaching the threshold for hadron production.
– 29 –

10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
mφYφ [GeV]
D/1H high
3He/D high
YP high
YP low
φ → u ¯u
mφ = 10 GeV
↑ Neff,ee
↓Below freeze-in abundance
10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff,ee
φ → u ¯u
mφ = 10 GeV
mφ = 100 GeV
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
Figure 10: Same as figure 9 but forϕ→u¯u. Note that theN eff limit is only indicative as
described in the text.
asmallernumber of hadrons injected, thus decreasing the limits (mildly). For the region
where hadrodisintegration is most relevant, there is a more complicated interplay of effects
since both the number of baryons and their energy influence the bounds. Overall, we find a
net reduction in the constraints also in this regime.
5.2 Decay intou¯u
Let us now discuss the case of hadronic injections. We focus onu¯uinjections, which we
present in figure 10. In this case, the bump structure among different masses is mostly
identical, and generally, the bounds become weaker for larger masses. Only for the 10 GeV
case, we observe a somewhat different shape of the limit. Compared to the case ofe +e−, the
bounds are significantly stronger for lifetimes where interconversions and hadrodisintegration
set the leading limits due to the larger injected hadronic energy form ϕ below the electroweak
scale. In fact, the limits are so strong that even the irreducible freeze-in abundance is fully
excluded for lifetimes 0.1s≲τ ϕ ≲10 5s form ϕ = 10 GeV.30
For low lifetimes, the constraints are again driven by an overabundance of 4He, due to
the efficient interconversion of protons into neutrons. As expected these bounds are signifi-
cantly stronger than for thee +e− decay channel, as the hadronic component is unsuppressed
(cf. figure 5). Also in this case, forτ ϕ >10 2 s, the injected nucleons disintegrate 4He, leading
to an overproduction of D/ 1H, as can be seen in figure 10.
5.3 Decay intoγγ
Before we start to discuss the other SM injections in a briefer format, let us investigate the
injection of photons with more scrutiny, as the scattering of high-energy photons on the back-
ground photons can lead toγ+γ BG →π +π−, which sources pion-driven interconversions
as studied in ref. [19]. This process could appear relevant as the photon is the only back-
ground particle (except neutrinos) that still has a large thermal population at temperatures
30This conclusion could be avoided with very low reheat temperatures.
– 30 –

100 101 102 103 104 105 106
mφ [GeV]
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
101
102
Nπ±
FSR
γγBG, T = 0.1 MeV
γγBG, T = 1 MeV
γγBG, T = 10 MeV
Figure 11: Comparison of the average number of pions per double photon injection from
FSR (red) and from scattering with the background photons (blue) for different injection
temperatures.
∼100 keV, where interconversions dominate the resulting constraints. To evaluate whether
this process could ever be relevant, let us investigate the corresponding pion-production cross
section. Following [19], we only consider the primary scattering of an injected pair of pho-
tons, which implies that the average number of pions per injected photon pair is two times
the ratio of the thermally averaged pion-production cross section and the total cross section
nγγ
π ≃2 ⟨σv⟩ γγ→π +π−
⟨σv⟩ γγ,tot
≃2 ⟨σv⟩ γγ→π +π−
⟨σv⟩ γγ→e+e− +⟨σv⟩ γγ→µ+µ− +⟨σv⟩ γγ→π +π−
.(5.2)
We can evaluate this ratio numerically using results from e.g. [77]. We find that the pion
cross section is significantly smaller than the leptonic ones. Overall, the number of pions in
these processes always remains below 0.05. When comparing this to the injection due to FSR
(see figure 11), we see that it is clearly subdominant in the interesting temperature range,
i.e. briefly before the fusion processes start.
We observe that there is an exponential (kinematic) cutoff which drops with temperature
as expected. At the temperatures of relevance, we can thus conclude that pions from this
source would never be relevant to our phenomenology, and we can neglect this process. Having
clarified the case of photon injections, we show the constraints derived in our framework in
figure 12 (left). The bounds are found somewhere between the hadronic and EM benchmark,
as would also be expected from figure 5. We see the typical three-bump structure we have
encountered before, where interconversion dominance transitions into hadrodisintegration of
4He, which is eventually overcome by photodisintegration of 4He.
5.4 Decay into other channels
In this section, we will briefly summarise the remaining SM decay channels, pointing out the
difference to the two benchmark cases when necessary.
– 31 –

10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff,ee
φ → γγ
mφ = 10 GeV
mφ = 100 GeV
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff,ee
φ → gg
mφ = 10 GeV
mφ = 100 GeV
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
Figure 12:Left:Same as figure 9 but forϕ→γγ.Right: Same but forϕ→gg.
Let us start off with an injection of gluons as shown in figure 12 (right). The bounds
are almost identical to the ones foru¯uinjections. In fact, we find that all channels with
significant branching ratios into quarks or gluons will lead to very similar bounds.
For the other charged leptons shown in figure 13, it is not directly clear if all relevant
effects are captured in our approach. In particular, for small relic masses where FSR is
subleading, the additional neutrinos associated with the leptonic decay chains might have
an effect that is unaccounted for in this work. Ref. [78] investigated the neutrino-driven
interconversions of protons and neutrons via ¯νe/νe +p/n→n/p+e ±. Comparing our limit
plots to their figure 2 we observe that their bounds could only potentially be relevant for
muon decays. However, at the times relevant for interconversions, muons quickly thermalise
and will decay at rest, so that the neutrinos in the final state will have energies well below
100 MeV. Comparing the figures then makes it evident that our limits are about an order-
of-magnitude stronger, and neutrino-driven interconversions are not relevant for the regions
of parameter space we consider.
At large lifetimes, theµ +µ− bounds are mildly weaker than thee +e− ones, since these
limits are dominated by photodisintegration and the EM injections are suppressed by the
increase of neutrinos in the final state (cf. figure 5). For aτ +τ − injection at relic masses
beyond 1 TeV, the bounds driven by hadrons become universal, like for the other leptons.
However, at lower relic masses, the large pionic branching ratio of theτdecay gives the
bounds a “head start” compared to the other leptons. With the increasing relevance of FSR,
we then approach the universal bounds. Since the overall EM fraction is the smallest out of
all the charged leptons, so are the bounds for the largest lifetimes.
One particularity of theτinjection is the gap between interconversions and photo-
disintegration form ϕ = 10 GeV. The enormously large pion injection leads to very strong
interconversion bounds for low lifetime, whereas the photodisintegration only picks up at
τϕ ∼10 4 s. Only in a small region of the parameter space, between approximatelyτ ϕ ∼10 3 s
andτ ϕ ∼10 4 s, hadrodisintegration governs the limits with deuterium overproduction, even-
tually leading to a small cancellation in the region where photodisintegration becomes active
and starts to destroy deuterium. In fact, the baryon injection is identical for all charged lep-
– 32 –

10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff,ee
φ → µ +µ −
mφ = 10 GeV
mφ = 100 GeV
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff,ee
φ → τ+τ−
mφ = 10 GeV
mφ = 100 GeV
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
Figure 13:Left:Same as figure 9 but forϕ→µ +µ−.Right: Same but forϕ→τ +τ −.
10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff,ee
φ → b¯b
mφ = 100 GeV
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff,ee
φ → t¯t
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
Figure 14:Left:Same as figure 9 but forϕ→b ¯b.Right: Same but forϕ→t ¯t.
tons, but the large interconversion effects can barely be overcome by the hadrodisintegration
bounds, unlike in the case ofe ± andµ ±.31
We have explicitly checked that the exact type of quark barely plays a role in our
setup. The only major difference is the mass threshold around which the bounds deviate
from universality. In particular, the shower inPYTHIAis unreliable too close to the mass
threshold. As one example, we showb ¯bin figure 14 (left). The differences tou¯uare hardly
visible as we refrain from showing the 10 GeV bound where we cannot trust the results.
However, we find deviations also for higher masses, albeit at a much smaller level. We
31With such a large discrepancy between pion and nucleon injection, pionic hadrodisintegration could be-
come dominant. However, as the disintegration of 4He is cumulative from all sources, we conservatively neglect
it here.
– 33 –

10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff,ee
φ → ZZ
mφ = 200 GeV
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff,ee
φ → W+W−
mφ = 200 GeV
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
Figure 15:Left:Same as figure 9 but forϕ→ZZ.Right: Same but forϕ→W +W −.
10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
mφYφ [GeV] Neff
φ → hh
mφ = 300 GeV
mφ = 1 TeV
mφ = 10 TeV
Figure 16: Same as figure 9 but forϕ→hh.
make the same conclusion fortquarks, where we only show the bounds starting from 1 TeV
(figure 14, right).
For the massive vector bosons, we find bounds that are typically dominated by the
hadronic injections, as is expected from their decay channels. We show the results forZZ
andW +W − injections in figure 15 (left and right, respectively). AsPYTHIAis expected to
handle the decays of the massive vectors without problems, we also show the results here
closer to the mass threshold.
Finally, let us also briefly discuss the injection of a pair of Higgs bosons as shown in
figure 16. Expectedly, also here the bounds are mostly hadronic due to the large branching
ratio of the Higgs into the heavy quarks.
– 34 –

10−3 10−1 101 103 105 107 109 1011
τφ [s]
10−17
10−15
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
mφYφ [GeV]
mφ = 1 TeV
Kawasaki et al. (2018)
This work
φ → u ¯u
φ → e+e−
φ → u ¯u
φ → e+e−
Figure 17: Comparison of our findings (solid line) to previous literature [6] (dashed line). In
dark red and dark blue, we show their two benchmark injections ofu¯uande+e−, respectively.
5.5 Comparison with previous literature results
Before we conclude our work, we want to discuss the differences we find with the previous
literature for the two benchmark injectionse +e− andu¯u. We show these differences in fig-
ure 17 as solid (this work) and dashed (ref. [6]). 32 For long lifetimes, we find a qualitative
agreement, but still, our results diverge from the literature for both benchmarks. For the
electrons, this is most likely due to the different modelling of photodisintegration in the
different works, which makes it hard to pinpoint the exact difference. Also, the hadrodisinte-
gration yields different results since our formalism is different from the original proposal (for
a discussion we refer to appendix C and ref. [36]). We should emphasise that there are even
some changes here beyond the treatment of the hadrodisintegration: since the publication of
[6], new measurements for the light-element abundances and fusion rates became available.
Furthermore, we have checked that the new 4He measurement improves the interconversion
bounds significantly.
We observe that at low lifetimes, our bounds are much stronger than the previous
results. We assume that this is due to the new interconversion rates (especially foru¯u) and
the use ofPYTHIAfor the FSR (especially fore +e−, where interconversions do not seem to
have been considered at all in [6]). Especially the latter finding leads to clear deviations
wherever hadrodisintegration is relevant fore +e−. For a detailed discussion, we refer to
section 5.1 and in particular figure 7.
6 Conclusions
In this work, we have presented updated and improved BBN constraints on heavy decaying
relics, covering a comprehensive set of SM two-body decay channels. Our analysis builds
on and substantially extends the framework of earlier studies through a series of important
refinements, which we summarise here.
32Ref. [6] cut their data atm ϕYϕ = 10−6 GeV which is why we only show this range.
– 35 –

We have implemented new cross sections forp↔ninterconversion processes [57],
incorporating kaon-induced channels that were previously neglected in parts of the literature.
In conjunction with this, we have implemented a detailed treatment of hadronic abundances
within the dynamical-equilibrium approximation, carefully tracking the full composition of
the hadronic injection products. This allows for a more faithful description of the early-time
interconversion epoch and its interplay with standard BBN.
A central methodological achievement of this work is the unification of hadronic and elec-
tromagnetic injection effects into a single, self-consistent pipeline. Hadronic interconversions
and hadrodisintegration during the BBN epoch are handled withinAlterAlterBBN, while
late-time hadrodisintegration and photodisintegration are computed withACROPOLIS. The
two stages are carefully interfaced, ensuring that the handoff between regimes is physically
consistent and free of double-counting disintegration processes. This integrated approach
improves upon our earlier analysis [36] (focusing on neutrinos), where we had to restrict the
lifetime range to only cover hadrodisintegration after BBN has concluded. This innovation
enables a uniform treatment across the full range of relic lifetimes, masses, and abundances
considered here.
On the observational side, we have incorporated up-to-date primordial-abundance mea-
surements, most notably the revised 4He abundance from ref. [31], alongside updated nuclear
reaction rates for standard BBN. The tightened helium constraint in particular has a signifi-
cant impact on the resulting bounds, especially at short lifetimes where 4He overproduction
via interconversions is the dominant signal. Furthermore, we have performed a systematic
study of final-state radiation and hadronisation usingPythia 8, treating these effects con-
sistently across all decay channels. This provides us with all relevant parameters to describe
interconversion and disintegration processes, in particular the fraction of EM energy, the
number of injected hadrons, and the kinetic energy of the baryonic injections, relevant for
hadrodisintegration.
Finally, we have corrected an error in the electromagnetic energy-loss curve that we had
already noted in [36], leading to artificially enhanced hadrodisintegration rates by energetic
protons. This correction reduces the predicted disintegration yields at intermediate and long
lifetimes and softens constraints in the corresponding parameter regions. We have also refined
the treatment of elastic nucleon scattering in the hadronic cascade, following [37–39], which
even further reduces the disintegration power.
Taken together, these improvements constitute a state-of-the-art treatment of BBN
constraints on decaying relics, and yield updated exclusion regions across a wide range of
massesm ϕ and lifetimesτ ϕ for each considered decay channel. The results are presented in
section 5, where we also provide comparisons with previous literature. We expect our analysis
to serve as a useful reference for constraining specific BSM models, whose particle content
includes heavy, long-lived states decaying to SM final states. In particular, we find that
constraints on colored particles likeu¯ucan be strong enough to even rule out abundances as
small as the irreducible freeze-in abundance. Extensions of this framework via the inclusion
of neutrino injection channels and a more careful treatment of lighter, MeV-scale relics are
left to future work.
Acknowledgments
We thank the authors of [57] for helping us out with questions on the new interconversion cross
sections and in particular for sharing their updated results with us. SB and JF thank Nicolas
– 36 –

Grimbaum Yamamoto for many discussions throughout different stages of this project. JF
thanks CERN TH for their hospitality and in particular Maksym Ovchynnikov and Miguel
Escudero for useful discussions. This work is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG) through Germany’s Excellence Strategy — EXC 2121 “Quantum Universe” —
390833306. JF is supported by an ERC StG grant (“AstroDarkLS”, Grant No. 101117510).
The work of MH is supported by the Belgian IISN convention 4.4503.15 as well as by the
Brussels laboratory of the Universe - BLU-ULB.
– 37 –

10−1 100 101
T [MeV]
0
20
40
60
80
100⟨σv⟩[mb]
K− + p → p + X
K− + p → n + X
K− + n → p + X
K− + n → n + X
2510.23695
2411.00931
10−1 100 101
T [MeV]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350⟨σv⟩[mb]
K− + p → π+ + X
K− + p → π− + X
K− + n → π− + X
2510.23695
2411.00931
10−1 100 101
T [MeV]
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0⟨σv⟩[mb]
KL + p → p + X
KL + p → n + X
KL + n → p + X
KL + n → n + X
2510.23695
2411.00931
10−1 100 101
T [MeV]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120⟨σv⟩[mb]
KL + p → π+ + X
KL + p → π− + X
KL + n → π+ + X
KL + n → π− + X
2510.23695
2411.00931
10−1 100 101
T [MeV]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140⟨σv⟩[mb]
¯p + p → X
¯p + n → X
¯n + p → X
¯n + n → X
2510.23695
2411.00931
10−1 100 101
T [MeV]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0⟨σv⟩[mb]
π− + p → n + π0/γ
π+ + n → p + π0/γ
2510.23695
2411.00931
Figure 18: Comparison of the previous literature cross sections (dashed lines) with the
updated results from [57] (full lines). Note the different scales on they-axes.Top:Updated
effective interconversion cross sections for charged kaons (left) and effective pion production
cross section for charged kaons (right). The respective interconversion processes are indicated
in the figures.Centre: Same but forK L.Right: Updated effective interconversion cross
sections for injected nucleon-antinucleon pairs (left) and pions (right). Note that the pion
cross sections have been updated w.r.t. the initial publication in [57].
– 38 –

A Updated interconversion cross sections
In this section, we will present the relevant thermally-averaged interconversion cross sections
[57] compared to the previous literature [15, 55, 59]. We have implemented both in order to
allow for a cross-check of the dynamical-equilibrium description (cf. appendix B).
In the top row of figure 18, we present the effective interconversion cross sections (left)
as well as the effective pion-production cross section (right) for charged kaons. These can be
inferred from a weighted average taking into account the various hyperon cross sections and
branching ratios from results presented in [57]. Note that theK − +ninitial state cannot
produce anyπ +, so that the effective cross section vanishes.
In the middle row of figure 18, we show the same effective cross sections for the case
of neutral long-lived kaons. Note the degeneracy in the previous literature, where it was
assumed that all interconversion processes are identical. The same assumption leads to the
two-fold degeneracy in the right plot, where the production ofπ + from protons andπ − from
neutrons is the same, as well as the two remaining processes, respectively.
For the (anti-)nucleonic processes, we show the cross sections in the bottom row of
figure 18 (left). We note the degeneracies in the cross sections: for the new results, all
but the ¯p+pare (approximately) the same, while for the older results the identical and
non-identical particle initial states (¯pp/¯nnand ¯pn/¯np, respectively) are identical modulo the
Coulomb enhancement.
Finally, let us discuss the interconversion cross sections of the pions. 33 We find them to
qualitatively agree with previous literature at low temperatures as presented in the bottom
right panel of figure 18.
B Checking dynamical equilibrium against full-time evolution
In this section, we will check the dynamical-equilibrium approximation against the full evo-
lution code of refs. [59, 63]. This code was originally written for lighter relics and focuses
more on the impact of the additional neutrinos from mesonic processes on neutrino decou-
pling. Thus, we consider am ϕ = 5 GeV relic with a low initial abundance ofY ϕ = 10−8, so
that the background cosmology is barely impacted by the presence and decay of the relic.
Due to the different focus of our code and [63], we further need to deactivate all weak rates
and fusion processes inAlterAlterBBN. Finally, instead of the updated cross sections from
[57], we need to implement matching cross sections from the previous literature [15, 55] to
ensure consistency between the results. In agreement with the literature, we assume that
for the old rates, the thermally-averaged cross sections are identical to the threshold cross
sectionsσv(without thermal average) fors→(m 1 +m 2)2 withm 1/2 being the masses of
the incoming particles. In this regime, we expect the typical nuclear cross section to behave
likeσ∝1/vfor decreasing velocity. Therefore, the thermal average⟨σv⟩is trivial for the
non-relativistic velocities considered in this context. Our main observables are the neutron
and proton number densities at around the 100 keV range when BBN begins.
We choose to investigate the pre-implemented “Toy model kaons” in which for every
decaying particle, aK +K− pair is injected. This scenario will capture all the important
aspects of the dynamical equilibrium. In particular, it comes with a direct source term for
the kaons and a “clean” secondary sourcing of pions. To reproduce this model, we need
33We are deeply thankful to the authors of [57] who have provided us with corrected pion cross sections in
private communication. Please consult the article once updated for more information.
– 39 –

10−1100
T [MeV]
10−1
100
Yx
tﬁn = 100 s
tini ≈ 0.03 s mφ = 5 GeV
Yφ = 10−8 Yp,SM
Yn,SMYn, 2411.00931
Yp, 2411.00931
Yn, ABBN
Yp, ABBN
τφ = 10 s
τφ = 1 s
τφ = 0.1 s
Figure 19: Temperature evolution of the neutron/proton (red/blue) abundances in [63]
compared to the dynamical equilibrium approach, which we implemented inAlterAlterBBN
(darkred/darkblue). We see good agreement for a set of different lifetimes:τ ϕ = 10 s (solid),
1 s (dashed), and 0.1 s (dotted) in the relevant area beyond the grey shading.
to manipulate the injection (cf. section 4): We choose the injection of electron-positron
pairs. The electromagnetic component will be irrelevant at these high temperatures and low
abundances, and so is the number of injected baryons at this low mass. We then rescale the
charged-kaon injection term to one pair per decay and set all other mesonic injection rates
to 0.
In figure 19, we show the results of our implementation contrasted against the results
from [63]. We have modified the code of [63] minimally to let the time evolution run for
longer. To be precise, we have sett fin = 100 s (instead of 10τ ϕ) for better comparability
between the different benchmark points. We show the neutron and proton abundances in
red and blue for the literature result and in darker shades for our approach. The different
lifetimes are shown as different linestyles.
We see that our implementation agrees well with the literature result in the relevant
temperature range.34 For the longer lifetime, we find the largest discrepancy with an asymp-
34The reason is probably that at later times, the meson abundances are dominated by decays, which makes
their and the nucleon abundances less inter-dependent and thus more robust (cf. figure 3).
– 40 –

totic relative deviation of a little more than 1% for the neutron abundance. Overall, we
expect the uncertainty in the rates to have a much bigger effect than the systematic un-
certainty introduced in the dynamical-equilibrium approximation. To guide the eye to the
relevant temperature range, we have coloured the regions that have a negligible impact on
the fusion of the light elements in grey.
We should keep in mind that this comparison is strictly meant as a consistency check of
theimplementationof the hadronic interconversions and does not correspond to a physical
point. In reality, the electroweak reactions as well as fusion processes will also enter the
evolution. The important takeaway is that the relevant temperature region around the deu-
terium bottleneck is accurately modelled in the dynamical-equilibrium approach. We also
show the SM abundances as semi-transparent lines for comparison.
C Implementing hadrodisintegration intoAlterAlterBBN
In this appendix, we will discuss a few of the technicalities when integrating hadrodisintegra-
tion into our previous version ofAlterAlterBBN. We further describe the matching procedure
withACROPOLIS. We use the framework presented in [6, 19] and implemented (with minor
modifications) in [36]. To conform with the base code ofAlterBBNwe port this code toC. For
details on the framework, the interested reader can consult the aforementioned references.
Thus, we will not elaborate on the details of the formalism here but rather summarise the
specific changes required to merge it into the main code.
As discussed in section 3.2, to determine the rate of hadrodisintegration, we need two
key ingredients: the first one being the injection spectrum of hadronic material, which we
approximate by using the average kinetic energy, and the total injection rate (cf. also sec-
tion 4). However, this needs to be convoluted with the “efficiency” of the disintegration,
which we measure using theξ-parameters, which determine the number of light elements
produced/destroyedperinjected nucleon, whose calculation requires the actual hadrodisin-
tegration code as shown in eq. (3.61).
Let us summarise how we previously tackled the hadrodisintegration inACROPOLIS: all
photodisintegration rates are perfectly linear in the number density (or the yieldYx =n x/nb).
We can therefore write a linear system
dY
dT =R(T)Y,(C.1)
whereYis the vector of abundances andR(T) is a matrix with the corresponding rates. We
immediately see that the solution to this equation can be written as
Y(T) = exp
Z Tmin
T
dT ′ R(T ′)

Y0 (C.2)
withY 0 being the initial conditions inferred from running a BBN code. This elegant solution
is fully based on the fact thatRdoesnotdepend onY. In the case of theξ-parameters, this
is not the case anymore. However, we realised that we can find a good linear approximation
– 41 –

of eq. (3.61)
dnX
dt

hadro
=
X
y=n,p
Z ∞
0
dK ξ y
X[nj](K) d2ninj
y
dtdK (K) (C.3)
≃
X
y=n,p
 
ξy
X[nj](Kinj
hd )dninj
hd
dt
!
(C.4)
withξ y
X[nj](T, K)≃
ξy
X[n0
j](T, K)
n0
A(X)
×n A(X)(T),(C.5)
see ref. [36] for more details. In the first step, we have again made use of the approximation of
mono-energetic hadron injections. Furthermore, we have expanded theξ-parameter linearly
around the SM abundance for the background protons and4He which we have checked to be a
good approximation. In these expressions, we usedA(X) =pifX∈ {p, n}andA(X) = 4He
otherwise. This is the key step for the linearisation because it transforms hadrodisintegration
into a “linear” process which allows us to remain within theACROPOLISframework.
In the case ofAlterAlterBBN, we cannot use the same method: BBN naturally has
many non-linear reactions. In fusion processes, there is often a higher multiplicity of nuclei
in the initial and/or final state. Nevertheless, we can still use linear algebra methods to
solve the system, 35 but we need to do this on smaller time/temperature intervals because,
simply speaking, the correspondingRfor the fusion rates will now depend strongly on the
light-element abundances, and thus we cannot just integrate up the system as in eq. (C.2).
To linearise the resulting expressions we can writeR lin(T) = [R x(T, Yx)/Yx(T)]×Y x(T)
for every time step. We have tested this prescription and found it to run efficiently and
produce robust results. For the technical details on how to solve such a system efficiently
and a deeper discussion of the linearisation technique, we refer to [33, 34].
As a final step, we need to match the two codes together consistently. To do so, we
need to find a sweet spot in temperature where photodisintegration is not relevant yet while
all the fusion rates have already become subdominant. The reason is that thermal BBN is
exclusively handled inAlterAlterBBN, which, however, cannot handle photodisintegration,
while photodisintegration is handled inACROPOLIS, which cannot handle nuclear fusion; yet,
both codes are able to perform hadrodisintegration. We have foundT= 5 keV to be a good
compromise for the transition from one code to the other as fusion rates are already low
and the universal spectrum starts to contain photons sufficiently energetic to disintegrate
deuterium atT= 5.34 keV. In particular, we have checked that the final result varies only
weakly under a change of the transition temperature and the abundances connect smoothly.
To demonstrate that this procedure connects the two evolution periods sufficiently
smoothly, we can revisit the full evolution of the light elements in figure 6, which makes
it evident that the matching does not introduce any artefacts. We emphasise this point by
showing two other benchmark points in figure 20 ([m ϕ = 100 GeV,τ ϕ = 105 s,Y ϕ = 10−11]
and [mϕ = 100 GeV,τ ϕ = 1 s,Y ϕ = 10−6], respectively).
As a final note of this section, let us briefly mention one additional update that we have
implemented inAlterAlterBBNandACROPOLIS. To improve upon the elastic scattering that
drives the hadronic cascade [6, 19, 36], we have updated the so-called slope parameter with
results from [37–39]. This parameter determines the outgoing energies in scattering between
35Note that the typical fusion reactions are power laws in the abundances, so that linearisation is straight-
forwardY n
x =Y n−1
x ×Y x.
– 42 –

10□410□310□210□1100101
T [MeV]
10□6
10□5
10□4
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
101
Nuclear abundances
Yp|obs.
D/1H|obs.
3He/D|obs.
mφ = 100 GeV, φ → e+e−
n/1H
D/1H
(T+3He)/D
Yp
SM
τφ = 10 5 s, Yφ = 10 −1
τφ = 1 s, Yφ = 10 −6
Figure 20: Evolution of the light-element abundances with matching between
AlterAlterBBNandACROPOLISfor two benchmark points.
injected nucleons and the background protons. We show the effect in figure 21 where we
see that the changes in elastic scattering make the hadronic cascade less efficient in terms of
disintegration for both protons and neutrons.
D An improved numerical scheme
In this section, we will discuss our numerical approach for the time/temperature evolution
of the background cosmology in detail. This procedure is improving upon the time evolution
explained in our previous work [36], leveraging the fact that we do not have to track the
neutrino cascade, which provides us with additional options and significantly shortened run
times. Tracking the background cosmology is highly relevant to correctly determining the
injections, which depend on the evolution of the relic abundance.
To simplify the discussion, we will first discuss our upgrades in the case of standard
ΛCDM. However, it is instructive to discuss the time-temperature relation in the general
case. From energy conservation across all sectors, we can derive
dT
dt =− ˙ρϕ + 3H(ρϕ +ρ SM +P SM)
dρSM
dT
= ˙qϕ −3H(ρ SM +P SM)
dρSM
dT
T≥T ν,dec ,(D.1)
where we denote the energy-injection rate of the relic as ˙qϕ =ρ ϕ/τϕ. We note that this is valid
until neutrino decoupling, which we model as instantaneous. Below neutrino decoupling, the
– 43 –

102 103 104
Eini [MeV]
0
1
2
3ξD
T = 4 keV
Yp = 0.25
η = 6.1 × 10−10
Current work
Old slope parameter
Kawasaki et al. (2018)
ξn
D
ξ p
D
ξn
D
ξ p
D
102 103 104
Eini [MeV]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8ξHe4
T = 4 keV
Yp = 0.25
η = 6.1 × 10−10
Current work
Old slope parameter
Kawasaki et al. (2018)
ξn
4He
ξ p
4He
ξn
4He
ξ p
4He
Figure 21: Comparison of our code with (solid) and without (dashed) the new slope param-
eter against the literature result (dotted).Left:Deuterium yield per injected neutron (red)
and proton (blue-green) for fixed temperature compared to the literature results.Right:
Destructionof 4He. Note that in this panel, we have flipped the sign ofξ y
4He in order for it
to be positive.
νsector is completely independent of the SM one. 36 We thus find
dT
dt = ˙qϕ −3H(ρ EM +P EM)
dρEM
dT
dTν
dt =−HT ν
T < T ν,dec ,(D.2)
where only the remaining electromagnetic particles contribute to the time-temperature rela-
tion of the electromagnetic bath. The neutrinos just redshift down from the time of decou-
pling with the initial conditionT ν(Tν,dec) =T ν,dec. We have discussed how to determine the
temperature of neutrino decoupling in a modified background cosmology, cf. eq. (3.72).
We will now introduce a numerical scheme based on the midpoint method to solve
the time-temperature evolution. To ensure high precision and stability, we use the implicit
version of this method. We determine the next temperature point for a fixed time step as
Tn+1 =T n + dT
dt
 tn +t n+1
2 , Tn +T n+1
2

.(D.3)
We note that in the pure SM case of ˙qϕ = 0, the term on the right-hand side only depends on
the temperature. To get accurate results, we iterate over differentT i
n+1, starting withT 0
n+1 =
Tn until (T i+1
n+1 −T i
n+1)/T i
n+1 < ϵ T ≪1 where we can chooseϵ T to find a good compromise
between run time and precision. 37 We will generalise this later on to also include non-SM
cases. At this point, we should emphasise that this implicit method generally provides better
36We ignore possible reheating effects due to large relic abundances as well as the neutrinos following from
the FSR.
37For early times when we do not have to track injections, we useϵ T = 10−8 while later on we reduce the
precision to 10 −5 to improve the run time.
– 44 –

results than the explicit counterpart; however, it requires additional (iterative) evaluations
of the derivative in eq. (D.3).
We have confirmed the accuracy of this method against the evolution of the SM. We were
able to reproduce the exact solution to withinO(10−4) for time steps as large asδt= 10 −2/H.
We further want to track the scale factorRin our code, in particular in the case of a
non-vanishing relic density ofϕ. Nevertheless, it is instructive to once again discuss the SM
scenario first. For the time evolution, we are then confronted with two possible avenues. Let
us begin with the more restrictive, but simple, method of entropy conservation
˙s=−3Hs⇒s∝R −3 ⇒R n+1 =R n
 s(Tn)
s(Tn+1)
1/3
.(D.4)
This approach is the preferred choice in the case of strict entropy conservation in the SM
because it is an exact solution of the evolution equations. If we have solved the time-
temperature evolution with sufficient precision, this method will always provide an excellent
approximation of the functionR(t). Alternatively, we can also use the first Friedmann
equation to find
˙R
R =H(t)⇒R(t) =R 0e
R t
t0 dt′H(t ′) .(D.5)
We see that this approach requires us to solve an integral to determine the time evolution.
To find a suitable numerical scheme, we write
Rn+1 =R ne
R tn+1
tn dt′H(t ′) (D.6)
Z tn+1
tn
dt′H(t ′)≃
Z tn+1
tn
dt′

H(t n) + dH
dt (tn)
 
t′ −t 0

(D.7)
=H(t n)(tn+1 −t n) + dH
dt (tn) (tn+1 −t n)2
2 .(D.8)
Under the integral, we have expanded the Hubble rate to first order to allow for higher
precision. In particular, the second Friedmann equation provides the quadratic term (in the
time step) for free
¨R
R =− 4πG
3 (ρ+ 3P) (D.9)
⇒ dH
dt =
 ¨R
R −
˙R2
R2
!
=−4πG(ρ+P),(D.10)
where we have introducedρandPas the total energy density and pressure of the Universe,
respectively. We can evaluate this expression atT(t n) and same goes, of course, forH(T(t n)).
The complete evaluation scheme therefore is
Rn+1 ≃R neH(t n)(tn+1−tn)−2πG[ρ(tn)+P(t n)] (tn+1−tn)2
2 .(D.11)
We find these two methods to be efficient and fast in reproducing the correct SM results.
However, note that we have not made any reference to entropy conservation for the “Hubble
method”. It is therefore also valid in the case of non-zero entropy injection. We should clarify
– 45 –

that the appearance of the density and pressure is to be understood as the total density and
pressure, including the relic. 38
Before we continue with the implementation of non-SM effects, let us quickly analyse
the accuracy of the method. Since in the case of vanishing injection, the entropy conservation
method is exact, we have compared the Hubble method to the simple relation in eq. (D.4).
In particular, we have found that it is important to take into account the expansion of the
Hubble rate to the quadratic term in eq. (D.8). We have ensured that the method is stable
and provides sub-percent precision for time steps withδt= 10 −2/H.
Now, let us try to make the implementation “BSM-friendly”. For that, it is clear that
the scale factor is easier to describe. In the Hubble method explained above, we just need
to add the density of the relic in the current time step (since we do not rely on an implicit
method there). Updating the relic abundance is then straightforward
ρϕ,n+1 ≃ρ ϕ,n
 Rn
Rn+1
3
e
−
tn+1−tn
τϕ .(D.12)
For the time-temperature relation, however, we require the SM heating rate, ideally evaluated
at the midpoint. The heating rate must be proportional toρϕ itself. We can therefore evaluate
the injection term at the midpoint via
˙qϕ
 tn +t n+1
2

≃˙qϕ(tn)
 R(tn)
R((tn+1 +t n)/2)
4
e
−
tn+1−tn
2τϕ (D.13)
R( (tn+1 +t n)/2 )≃R(t n)eH(t n)(tn+1−tn)/2−2πG[ρ(tn)+P(t n)] (tn+1−tn)2
4 .(D.14)
We can use this expression, as well as the density evaluated via this method, to implicitly
determine the change in temperature. In particular, a relic with extremely high initial density
may reheat the SM bath, which is captured in this formalism.
We should disclaim that the main goal of our code is to accurately describe the back-
ground cosmology in the case where hadronic and EM injections have the leading impact on
BBN and its products, so that even approximating the SM entropy to be exactly conserved
is an excellent approach for large parts of the parameter space. Nevertheless, we have two
secondary goals which require the code to also be reliable elsewhere. First of all, we would
like to make sure that there are no cancellations between background cosmology and “direct”
disintegration/interconversion effects. To this end, we also need to consistently reproduce
background-cosmology bounds, which are typically weaker than the latter and thus require
the correct treatment of larger injections. Secondly, towards very short lifetimes, we expect
that all bounds eventually have to disappear. In our approximation of instantaneous neutrino
decoupling, the effect of a particle decaying is parametrically suppressed by exp(−t ν,dec/τϕ).
Thus, even for large hadronic branching ratios, we require a large initial relic abundance to
overcome the exponential suppression.
D.1 A note on the effective degrees of freedom around neutrino decoupling
In our initial temperature evolution, we were confronted with localO(10%) errors in the
time temperature evolution, which we tracked back to our tabulated values for the degrees
of freedom. Therefore, we needed to find more precise values for the effective degrees of
freedom below∼5 MeV. Fortunately, at these low temperatures, we are just left with photons,
38In our scenario of a cold relic only the totalenergy densityis impacted.
– 46 –

electrons/positrons, and neutrinos. Further, we can assume that all chemical potentials are
0. Photons have the simplest behaviour as they neither decouple nor have a mass. For
electrons, we can write for the effective degrees of freedom [79]
g∗,ρ,e =
m4
2π2
R ∞
1 dy y2
√
y2−1
eym/T +1
π2
30 T 4 = 15
π4
 m
T
4Z ∞
1
dy y2p
y2 −1
eym/T + 1 ,(D.15)
and analogous for the pressure and entropy DoFs. The great advantage of this approach
is that we can easily evaluate the derivative of the DoFs on any arbitrary grid without the
problem of inducing additional errors from taking derivatives on discretised data.
Now, we should also discuss the neutrinos. In a pure SM scenario, we can always link
the electromagnetic and neutrino degrees of freedom via entropy conservation after neutrino
decoupling. In particular, we find that
sν(T)
sEM(T) = const. = sν(Tν,dec)
sEM(Tν,dec) (D.16)
⇒ gνT 3
ν
gνT 3
ν,dec
= [gγ +g ∗,s,e(T)]T 3
[gγ +g ∗,s,e(Tν,dec)]T 3
ν,dec
⇔T ν =
 (gγ +g ∗,s,e(T))
(gγ +g ∗,s,e(Tν,dec))
1/3
T ,(D.17)
where we have used the fact that there are no additional injections of entropy for the two
different sectors. We can therefore write
g∗,ρ,ν = 6· 7
8
π2
30 T 4
ν
π2
30 T 4 = 6· 7
8
 (gγ +g ∗,s,e(T))
(gγ +g ∗,s,e(Tν,dec))
4/3
(D.18)
g∗,P,ν = 6· 7
8
π2
90 T 4
ν
π2
90 T 4 = 6· 7
8
 (gγ +g ∗,s,e(T))
(gγ +g ∗,s,e(Tν,dec))
4/3
(D.19)
g∗,s,ν = 6· 7
8
2π2
45 T 3
ν
2π2
45 T 3 = 6· 7
8
(gγ +g ∗,s,e(T))
(gγ +g ∗,s,e(Tν,dec)) ,(D.20)
where the 6 stands for the number of left-handed (active) neutrinos (3 flavours, particles and
anti-particles) and the 7/8 stems from the fermionic nature of the neutrinos. In the presence
of non-negligible entropy injections, this straightforward rescaling, which only depends on
the temperature, cannot be applied anymore. Nevertheless, since we are accurately tracking
the neutrino temperature throughout our code, we do not have to work much harder in the
general case. 39 As the ratioT ν/Tis always available, it is straightforward to determine
the effective neutrino contribution to the total SM DoFs. Finally, let us note that these
expressions are only valid after neutrino decoupling, whereas before, all the neutrino DoFs
are constant (6·7/8 = 21/4).
E More detailed results fromPYTHIA
In this brief section, we quickly discuss the hadronic injection of the other SM channels,
beginning withgg,µ +µ−, andτ +τ − (figure 22, left). We find the gluon injection to be very
similar to the quark injection, as we have already seen from the constraints. The charged
39Note, however, that using pre-tabulated values cannot describe the neutrino degrees of freedom anymore
in this scenario.
– 47 –

100 101 102 103 104 105 106
mφ [GeV]
10□6
10□5
10□4
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
101
102
103
Nhadronic
Nπ±
NK ±
NKL
Nb
gg
µ+µ−
τ +τ −
100 101 102 103 104 105 106
mφ [GeV]
10□6
10□5
10□4
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
101
102
103
Nhadronic
Nπ±
NK ±
NKL
Nb
b¯b
t¯t
ZZ
Figure 22:Left:Same as figure 5 but forgg,µ +µ−, andτ +τ −.Right: Same but forb ¯b,
t¯t, andZZ.
100 101 102 103 104 105 106
mφ [GeV]
10□6
10□5
10□4
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
101
102
103
Nhadronic
Nπ±
NK ±
NKL
Nb
W W
hh
100 101 102 103 104 105 106
mφ [GeV]
10□2
10□1
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
Kb [GeV]
4He disintegration threshold
e+e−
u¯u
γγ
gg
µ+µ−
τ +τ −
b¯b
t¯t
ZZ
W W
hh
Figure 23:Left:Same as figure 5 but forW +W − andhh.Right: Kinetic energy of the
injected baryons as a function of relic mass.
leptons, however, show a universal behaviour: the muon results are identical to the electron
ones within the statistical uncertainty in this approach. For theτ, this is only true for the
baryons as there are direct kaonic and pionic decay channels which populate the hadronic
sectorbeyondFSR.
In the right panel of figure 22, we can observe the injected hadrons forb ¯b,t ¯t, and
ZZ. For the colored particles, we once more find a universal behaviour (away from the mass
thresholds). However, theZboson also shows a very similar behaviour with only mildly lower
hadronic injections due to the large hadronic branching ratios. It is useful to remember that
the results close to the mass threshold are not reliable.
We close the discussion on the hadronic injections with figure 23 (left). The remaining
particles areW +W − andhh, which, once again, are similar to “pure QCD” injections because
of their significant branching ratios into quarks.
As a last point, let us quickly discuss figure 23 (right), which shows the average kinetic
energy of the injected nucleons. We see that the function is approximately linear inm ϕ with
a factor∼0.01 between it and the kinetic energy.
– 48 –

References
[1] R.V. Wagoner, W.A. Fowler and F. Hoyle,On the Synthesis of elements at very high
temperatures,Astrophys. J.148(1967) 3.
[2] D.N. Schramm and R.V. Wagoner,Element production in the early universe,Ann. Rev. Nucl.
Part. Sci.27(1977) 37.
[3] K.A. Olive, G. Steigman and T.P. Walker,Primordial nucleosynthesis: Theory and
observations,Phys. Rept.333(2000) 389 [astro-ph/9905320].
[4] F. Iocco, G. Mangano, G. Miele, O. Pisanti and P.D. Serpico,Primordial Nucleosynthesis: from
precision cosmology to fundamental physics,Phys. Rept.472(2009) 1 [0809.0631].
[5] C. Pitrou, A. Coc, J.-P. Uzan and E. Vangioni,Precision big bang nucleosynthesis with
improved Helium-4 predictions,Phys. Rept.754(2018) 1 [1801.08023].
[6] M. Kawasaki, K. Kohri, T. Moroi and Y. Takaesu,Revisiting Big-Bang Nucleosynthesis
Constraints on Long-Lived Decaying Particles,Phys. Rev. D97(2018) 023502 [1709.01211].
[7] K. Jedamzik,Big bang nucleosynthesis constraints on hadronically and electromagnetically
decaying relic neutral particles,Phys. Rev. D74(2006) 103509 [hep-ph/0604251].
[8] J.R. Ellis, J.S. Hagelin, D.V. Nanopoulos, K.A. Olive and M. Srednicki,Supersymmetric Relics
from the Big Bang,Nucl. Phys. B238(1984) 453.
[9] S. Weinberg,Cosmological Constraints on the Scale of Supersymmetry Breaking,Phys. Rev.
Lett.48(1982) 1303.
[10] J.R. Ellis, G.B. Gelmini, J.L. Lopez, D.V. Nanopoulos and S. Sarkar,Astrophysical constraints
on massive unstable neutral relic particles,Nucl. Phys. B373(1992) 399.
[11] R.H. Cyburt, J.R. Ellis, B.D. Fields and K.A. Olive,Updated nucleosynthesis constraints on
unstable relic particles,Phys. Rev. D67(2003) 103521 [astro-ph/0211258].
[12] A. Boyarsky, O. Ruchayskiy and M. Shaposhnikov,The Role of sterile neutrinos in cosmology
and astrophysics,Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci.59(2009) 191 [0901.0011].
[13] C. Gross, A. Mitridate, M. Redi, J. Smirnov and A. Strumia,Cosmological Abundance of
Colored Relics,Phys. Rev. D99(2019) 016024 [1811.08418].
[14] E.W. Kolb and A.J. Long,Cosmological gravitational particle production and its implications
for cosmological relics,Rev. Mod. Phys.96(2024) 045005 [2312.09042].
[15] M.H. Reno and D. Seckel,Primordial nucleosynthesis: The effects of injecting hadrons,Phys.
Rev. D37(1988) 3441.
[16] S. Dimopoulos, R. Esmailzadeh, L.J. Hall and G.D. Starkman,Is the Universe Closed by
Baryons? Nucleosynthesis With a Late Decaying Massive Particle,Astrophys. J.330(1988)
545.
[17] M. Kawasaki and T. Moroi,Gravitino production in the inflationary universe and the effects on
big bang nucleosynthesis,Prog. Theor. Phys.93(1995) 879 [hep-ph/9403364].
[18] K. Jedamzik,Lithium 6: A Probe of the early universe,Phys. Rev. Lett.84(2000) 3248
[astro-ph/9909445].
[19] M. Kawasaki, K. Kohri and T. Moroi,Big-Bang nucleosynthesis and hadronic decay of
long-lived massive particles,Phys. Rev. D71(2005) 083502 [astro-ph/0408426].
[20] L. Forestell, D.E. Morrissey and G. White,Limits from BBN on Light Electromagnetic Decays,
JHEP01(2019) 074 [1809.01179].
[21] K.M. Nollett and G. Steigman,BBN And The CMB Constrain Light, Electromagnetically
Coupled WIMPs,Phys. Rev. D89(2014) 083508 [1312.5725].
– 49 –

[22] V. Poulin and P.D. Serpico,Nonuniversal BBN bounds on electromagnetically decaying
particles,Phys. Rev. D91(2015) 103007 [1503.04852].
[23] M. Hufnagel, K. Schmidt-Hoberg and S. Wild,BBN constraints on MeV-scale dark sectors.
Part I. Sterile decays,JCAP02(2018) 044 [1712.03972].
[24] M. Hufnagel, K. Schmidt-Hoberg and S. Wild,BBN constraints on MeV-scale dark sectors.
Part II. Electromagnetic decays,JCAP11(2018) 032 [1808.09324].
[25] P.F. Depta, M. Hufnagel, K. Schmidt-Hoberg and S. Wild,BBN constraints on the
annihilation of MeV-scale dark matter,JCAP04(2019) 029 [1901.06944].
[26] N. Sabti, A. Magalich and A. Filimonova,An Extended Analysis of Heavy Neutral Leptons
during Big Bang Nucleosynthesis,JCAP11(2020) 056 [2006.07387].
[27] P.F. Depta, M. Hufnagel and K. Schmidt-Hoberg,Robust cosmological constraints on axion-like
particles,JCAP05(2020) 009 [2002.08370].
[28] M. Kawasaki, K. Kohri, T. Moroi, K. Murai and H. Murayama,Big-bang nucleosynthesis with
sub-GeV massive decaying particles,JCAP12(2020) 048 [2006.14803].
[29] P.F. Depta, M. Hufnagel and K. Schmidt-Hoberg,Updated BBN constraints on electromagnetic
decays of MeV-scale particles,JCAP04(2021) 011 [2011.06519].
[30] C. Giovanetti, M. Lisanti, H. Liu and J.T. Ruderman,Joint Cosmic Microwave Background
and Big Bang Nucleosynthesis Constraints on Light Dark Sectors with Dark Radiation,Phys.
Rev. Lett.129(2022) 021302 [2109.03246].
[31] T.-H. Yeh, K.A. Olive, B.D. Fields, E. Aver, R.W. Pogge, N.S.J. Rogers et al.,The LBTY p
Project V: Cosmological Implications of a New Determination of Primordial 4He,2601.22239.
[32] T. Sj¨ ostrand, S. Ask, J.R. Christiansen, R. Corke, N. Desai, P. Ilten et al.,An introduction to
PYTHIA 8.2,Comput. Phys. Commun.191(2015) 159 [1410.3012].
[33] A. Arbey,AlterBBN: A program for calculating the BBN abundances of the elements in
alternative cosmologies,Comput. Phys. Commun.183(2012) 1822 [1106.1363].
[34] A. Arbey, J. Auffinger, K.P. Hickerson and E.S. Jenssen,AlterBBN v2: A public code for
calculating Big-Bang nucleosynthesis constraints in alternative cosmologies,Comput. Phys.
Commun.248(2020) 106982 [1806.11095].
[35] P.F. Depta, M. Hufnagel and K. Schmidt-Hoberg,ACROPOLIS: A generiC fRamework fOr
Photodisintegration Of LIght elementS,JCAP03(2021) 061 [2011.06518].
[36] S. Bianco, P.F. Depta, J. Frerick, T. Hambye, M. Hufnagel and K. Schmidt-Hoberg,Photo-
and Hadrodisintegration constraints on massive relics decaying into neutrinos,2505.01492.
[37] J. Cugnon, J. Vandermeulen and D. L’Hote,Simple parametrization of cross-sections for
nuclear transport studies up to the GeV range,Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B111(1996) 215.
[38] T. Falter, W. Cassing, K. Gallmeister and U. Mosel,Hadron attenuation in deep inelastic
lepton-nucleus scattering,Phys. Rev. C70(2004) 054609 [nucl-th/0406023].
[39] A.B. Larionov,Cumulative proton production inpdcollisions,2509.22433.
[40] E. Aver, K.A. Olive and E.D. Skillman,The effects of He Iλ10830 on helium abundance
determinations,JCAP07(2015) 011 [1503.08146].
[41] T. Hsyu, R.J. Cooke, J.X. Prochaska and M. Bolte,The PHLEK Survey: A New Determination
of the Primordial Helium Abundance,Astrophys. J.896(2020) 77 [2005.12290].
[42] R.J. Cooke, M. Pettini and C.C. Steidel,One Percent Determination of the Primordial
Deuterium Abundance,Astrophys. J.855(2018) 102 [1710.11129].
– 50 –

[43] E.O. Zavarygin, J.K. Webb, V. Dumont and S. Riemer-Sørensen,The primordial deuterium
abundance at zabs = 2.504 from a high signal-to-noise spectrum of Q1009+2956,Mon. Not.
Roy. Astron. Soc.477(2018) 5536 [1706.09512].
[44] J. Geiss and G. Gloeckler,Isotopic Composition of H, He and Ne in the Protosolar Cloud, in
Solar System History from Isotopic Signatures of Volatile Elements, R. Kallenbach,
T. Encrenaz, J. Geiss, K. Mauersberger, T.C. Owen and F. Robert, eds., vol. 16, pp. 3–18,
Jan., 2003, DOI.
[45] R.H. Cyburt, B.D. Fields and K.A. Olive,An Update on the big bang nucleosynthesis prediction
for Li-7: The problem worsens,JCAP11(2008) 012 [0808.2818].
[46]Planckcollaboration,Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters,Astron. Astrophys.
641(2020) A6 [1807.06209].
[47]Particle Data Groupcollaboration,Review of particle physics,Phys. Rev. D110(2024 and
2025 update) 030001.
[48] A. Korn,The ups and downs of inferred cosmological lithium,EPJ Web Conf.297(2024)
01007 [2406.09974].
[49]GALAHcollaboration,The GALAH Survey: A new constraint on cosmological lithium and
Galactic lithium evolution from warm dwarf stars,Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.497(2020)
L30 [2006.05173].
[50] S. Gariazzo, P. F. de Salas, O. Pisanti and R. Consiglio,PArthENoPE revolutions,Comput.
Phys. Commun.271(2022) 108205 [2103.05027].
[51] O. Pisanti, G. Mangano, G. Miele and P. Mazzella,Primordial Deuterium after LUNA:
concordances and error budget,JCAP04(2021) 020 [2011.11537].
[52] I. Tiˇ sma, M. Lipoglavˇ sek, M. Mihoviloviˇ c, S. Markelj, M. Vencelj and J. Vesi´ c,Experimental
cross section and angular distribution of the 2H(p,γ) 3He reaction at Big-Bang nucleosynthesis
energies,Eur. Phys. J. A55(2019) 137.
[53] A. Tumino, R. Spart` a, C. Spitaleri, A.M. Mukhamedzhanov, S. Typel, R.G. Pizzone et al.,
New Determination of the 2H(d,p)3H and 2H(d,n)3He Reaction Rates at Astrophysical
Energies,The Astrophysical Journal785(2014) 96.
[54] V. Mossa et al.,The baryon density of the Universe from an improved rate of deuterium
burning,Nature587(2020) 210.
[55] M. Pospelov and J. Pradler,Metastable GeV-scale particles as a solution to the cosmological
lithium problem,Phys. Rev. D82(2010) 103514 [1006.4172].
[56] A. Boyarsky, M. Ovchynnikov, O. Ruchayskiy and V. Syvolap,Improved big bang
nucleosynthesis constraints on heavy neutral leptons,Phys. Rev. D104(2021) 023517
[2008.00749].
[57] T.H. Jung, T. Okui, K. Tobioka and J. Wang,New bounds on heavy QCD axions from big bang
nucleosynthesis,Phys. Rev. D113(2026) 055002 [2510.23695].
[58] A. Omar and A. Ritz,BBN constraints on the hadronic annihilation of sub-GeV dark matter,
Phys. Rev. D113(2026) 035004 [2510.11791].
[59] K. Akita, G. Baur, M. Ovchynnikov, T. Schwetz and V. Syvolap,Dynamics of metastable
standard model particles from long-lived particle decays in the MeV primordial plasma,Phys.
Rev. D111(2025) 063542 [2411.00931].
[60]Crystal Barrelcollaboration,Anti-proton - proton annihilation at rest into two-body final
states,Z. Phys. C58(1993) 175.
[61] E. Klempt, C. Batty and J.-M. Richard,The Antinucleon-nucleon interaction at low energy :
Annihilation dynamics,Phys. Rept.413(2005) 197 [hep-ex/0501020].
– 51 –

[62] E.S. Golubeva, J.L. Barrow and C.G. Ladd,Model of¯nannihilation in experimental searches
for¯ntransformations,Phys. Rev. D99(2019) 035002 [1804.10270].
[63] M. Ovchynnikov,Metastable-dynamics, Feb., 2025. 10.5281/zenodo.14882777.
[64] L. Angel, G. Arcadi, M.M.A. Paix˜ ao and F.S. Queiroz,Updated BBN Bounds on Hadronic
Injection in the Early Universe: The Gravitino Problem,2501.09120.
[65] M. Kawasaki and T. Moroi,Electromagnetic cascade in the early universe and its application to
the big bang nucleosynthesis,Astrophys. J.452(1995) 506 [astro-ph/9412055].
[66] V. Poulin and P.D. Serpico,Loophole to the Universal Photon Spectrum in Electromagnetic
Cascades and Application to the Cosmological Lithium Problem,Phys. Rev. Lett.114(2015)
091101 [1502.01250].
[67] M. Escudero, M. Ovchynnikov and N. Weiner,What does it take to haveN eff <3at CMB
times?,2603.22391.
[68] A. Boyarsky, M. Ovchynnikov, N. Sabti and V. Syvolap,When feebly interacting massive
particles decay into neutrinos: The Neff story,Phys. Rev. D104(2021) 035006 [2103.09831].
[69] M. Escudero,Neutrino decoupling beyond the Standard Model: CMB constraints on the Dark
Matter mass with a fast and preciseN eff evaluation,JCAP02(2019) 007 [1812.05605].
[70] M. Escudero Abenza,Precision early universe thermodynamics made simple:N eff and neutrino
decoupling in the Standard Model and beyond,JCAP05(2020) 048 [2001.04466].
[71] J. Froustey and C. Pitrou,Incomplete neutrino decoupling effect on big bang nucleosynthesis,
Phys. Rev. D101(2020) 043524 [1912.09378].
[72] J.J. Bennett, G. Buldgen, M. Drewes and Y.Y.Y. Wong,Towards a precision calculation of the
effective number of neutrinosN eff in the Standard Model I: the QED equation of state,JCAP
03(2020) 003 [1911.04504].
[73] P.F. de Salas and S. Pastor,Relic neutrino decoupling with flavour oscillations revisited,JCAP
07(2016) 051 [1606.06986].
[74] M. Escudero Abenza, C. Garcia-Perez and M. Ovchynnikov,Nucleosynthesis and CMB bounds
on photophilic ALPs: a fresh look,Eur. Phys. J. C86(2026) 500 [2511.00157].
[75] V. Poulin, J. Lesgourgues and P.D. Serpico,Cosmological constraints on exotic injection of
electromagnetic energy,JCAP03(2017) 043 [1610.10051].
[76] L.J. Hall, K. Jedamzik, J. March-Russell and S.M. West,Freeze-In Production of FIMP Dark
Matter,JHEP03(2010) 080 [0911.1120].
[77] S.J. Brodsky, T. Kinoshita and H. Terazawa,Two Photon Mechanism of Particle Production by
High-Energy Colliding Beams,Phys. Rev. D4(1971) 1532.
[78] S. Chang, S. Ganguly, T.H. Jung, T.-S. Park and C.S. Shin,Constraining MeV to 10 GeV
Majorons by big bang nucleosynthesis,Phys. Rev. D110(2024) 015019 [2401.00687].
[79] M. Drees, F. Hajkarim and E.R. Schmitz,The Effects of QCD Equation of State on the Relic
Density of WIMP Dark Matter,JCAP06(2015) 025 [1503.03513].
– 52 –