Title: Radial redistribution of stellar orbits in FIRE simulations of Milky-Way-mass galaxies
Authors: Matthew A. Bellardini, Fiona McCluskey, Andrew Wetzel, Cecilia Steel, Sarah R. Loebman, Jorge Moreno
Published: 2026-05-07
Categories: astro-ph.GA, astro-ph.SR

Version May 11, 2026
Preprint typeset using LATEX style openjournal v. 09/06/15
RADIAL REDISTRIBUTION OF STELLAR ORBITS IN FIRE SIMULATIONS OF MILKY-WAY-MASS GALAXIES
Matthew A. Bellardini 1, Fiona McCluskey1, Andrew Wetzel 1, Cecilia Steel1, Sarah R. Loebman 2, and Jorge Moreno 3
1 Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
2 Department of Physics, University of California, Merced, CA 95343, USA and
3 Department of Physics & Astronomy, Pomona College, Claremont, CA 91711, USA
Version May 11, 2026
ABSTRACT
A central question in galactic dynamics and galactic archeology is: how much do the orbits of stars redistribute
(migrate) after birth? We use the FIRE-2 cosmological zoom-in simulations of 11 Milky Way-mass galaxies to
quantify the change in the orbital specific angular momentum,𝑗 𝜙, orbital radius,𝑅 orbit, and azimuthal velocity,
𝑣 𝜙, of stars from birth to today. We examine the dependences on stellar age, present-day𝑅 orbit, and birth
𝑅orbit, characterizing both the median (net) change,Δ𝑅 orbit, and its scatter,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit). We comprehensively
compare five ways of measuring orbital radius; we find generally consistent trends, but only when measuring
radius today and radial redistribution self-consistently. Stars selected by theirbirth𝑅 orbit typically decreased in
𝑅orbit,𝑗 𝜙, and𝑣 𝜙 since birth. The trend for stars at a given𝑅 orbit todaydepends on age: those younger than
≈5 Gyr generally decreased in𝑅 orbit,𝑗 𝜙, and𝑣 𝜙 since birth, while those older generally increased in𝑅 orbit,𝑗 𝜙,
and𝑣 𝜙 since birth.𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit), a standard metric of radial redistribution, increases with stellar age only up to
≈3 Gyr; it saturates at𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit) ≈2 kpc for older stars. This saturation contradicts a common expectation of
a monotonic increase with age. Our results broadly agree with recent observational inferences ofΔ𝑅 orbit and
𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)in the Milky Way. Across our FIRE-2 sample, the timing of disk formation does not correlate with
𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit), but it correlates with (net)Δ𝑅 orbit.
1.INTRODUCTION
The stars within a galaxy provide a record of its formation
over cosmic time, including its cosmological assembly and its
dynamical evolution. A key goal of galactic archeology of the
Milky Way (MW) is to use the observed positions, velocities,
elemental abundances, and ages of its stars today to reveal
its history and understand the physical processes underlying
galaxy formation (for example Freeman & Bland-Hawthorn
2002; Rix & Bovy 2013; Deason & Belokurov 2024). The ad-
vent ofGaia(Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016), along with spec-
troscopic surveys such as APOGEE (Majewski et al. 2017),
LAMOST (Cui et al. 2012), GALAH (De Silva et al. 2015;
Buder et al. 2018), and now SDSS-V Milky Way Mapper
(SDSS Collaboration et al. 2025), have ushered in a golden
age of MW studies, by measuring millions-to-billions of stars
across the MW. However, connecting the MW’s present state
to its past remains challenging, in large part because of ‘radial
redistribution’: stars currently may reside at galactocentric
radii,𝑅, far from where they formed. Such changes to the
orbital𝑅of a population of stars scrambles our record of a
galaxy’s history, in particular, of its star-forming interstellar
medium (ISM), which sets the conditions of stars at birth. As
we discuss below, many studies have sought to understand the
radial redistribution of stars, both as a dynamical process in its
own right, and to reverse its effects on the spatial and velocity
distributions of stars today to uncover stars’ birth conditions
and infer the formation history of the MW.
We commonly describe the orbits of stars in terms of (1)
specific angular momentum (or azimuthal action),𝑗 𝜙, which
fixes the ‘guiding center radius’,𝑅 𝑗, which is the radius of
a circular orbit with the same𝑗 𝜙, and (2) radial and verti-
cal actions,𝑗 𝑅 and𝑗 𝑍. The latter two set the amplitude of
epicyclic excursions around𝑅 𝑗 and perpendicular to the disk
plane, respectively. Radial excursions (from eccentric orbits)
alone will cause a star’sinstantaneousradius,𝑅 phys, to vary
Corresponding author: Andrew Wetzel
awetzel@ucdavis.edu
throughout its orbit, even absent dynamical evolution of its or-
bit. However, more important are changes to the actual orbits
of stars.
One can divide radial redistribution into changes in random
energy (or eccentricity) and changes in𝑗 𝜙 (or𝑅 𝑗). During
their lifetimes, stars undergo repeated scattering interactions
with perturbations within the disk, such as giant molecular
clouds (GMCs; Spitzer & Schwarzschild 1951; Wielen 1977;
Lacey 1984), spiral arms (Barbanis & Woltjer 1967; Carlberg
& Sellwood 1985; Minchev & Quillen 2006), and bars (Saha
et al. 2010; Grand et al. 2016), and outside the disk, such as
satellite or merging galaxies (Quillen et al. 2009; Bird et al.
2012; Carr et al. 2022). These interactions can increase the
random energy of a star’s orbit and/or alter𝑗 𝜙. Sellwood &
Binney (2002) showed that scattering at the corotation reso-
nance of transient spiral arms could drive significant changes
in𝑗 𝜙 withoutincreasing random energy. This mechanism
implies that radial redistribution might not leave a dynamical
signature in terms of an increase in random energy (eccentric-
ity). Later works found that resonant overlap, be it spiral-spiral
or bar-spiral (Minchev & Famaey 2010; Minchev et al. 2012),
and the formation and subsequent slowing of the bar (Chiba
et al. 2021; Haywood et al. 2024; Khoperskov et al. 2024)
can drive even more substantial changes in𝑗 𝜙, and in certain
cases, maintain or even increase orbital circularity.
To clarify our terminology, throughout we refer toany
changes to galactocentric radius,𝑅, as ‘radial redistribution’.
In the literature, many works refer to ‘radial migration’, as
Sellwood & Binney (2002) introduced, but some works use it
as a general term for any radial displacement, others use it as
a shorthand for shifts in𝑅 𝑗 that broadly conserve circularity,
and others use it to refer to the specific case of corotation scat-
tering off of spiral-arms. We use ‘cold torquing’ (Daniel et al.
2019) to refer to changes in𝑅 𝑗 that broadly conserve circu-
larity (do not significantly change𝑗 𝑅 or𝑗 𝑍), a scenario also
called ‘churning’ (Sch¨onrich & Binney 2009a). We refer to
‘heating’ as changes in radial and/or vertical action,𝑗𝑅 and/or
𝑗𝑍, a scenario also called ‘blurring’. (Though, a change to ra-
arXiv:2605.06781v1  [astro-ph.GA]  7 May 2026

2 Bellardini et al.
dial action also could ‘cool’ an originally non-circular orbit.)
Of course, many dynamical perturbations can produce both
torquing and heating at the same time.
In an ideal scenario, one can approximate cold torquing and
heating as diffusion processes. Here, a population of stars
born at the same time and𝑅can experience perturbations that
drive both inward and outward radial redistribution, broaden-
ing the resultant distribution about its birth𝑅(Wielen 1977;
Brunetti et al. 2011; Sellwood 2014). However, simulations
and analytic studies show that stellar populations also can un-
dergo coherent net shifts inward or outward (Halle et al. 2015;
El-Badry et al. 2016; Khoperskov et al. 2020). Importantly,
in this work, we examine both the diffusive and coherent (net)
aspects of radial redistribution.
Stellar abundances provide long-lived birth records: in gen-
eral, the metallicity of the ISM, and of stars at birth, increases
over time within a galaxy, and many disk galaxies have neg-
ative radial gradients in metallicity. Therefore, in principle,
within a disk galaxy without radial redistribution, one would
expect fairly tight relations between metallicity, age, and𝑅. In-
stead, the solar neighborhood shows little correlation between
metallicity and age (Edvardsson et al. 1993), and also con-
tains relatively old stars with super-solar metallicities (Grenon
1989; Castro et al. 1997). The cold (near circular) orbits ob-
served for most of these stars, including the old metal-rich
populations, limit the extent of their radial excursions. Sell-
wood & Binney (2002) showed that cold torquing could ad-
dress this tension between galactic elemental evolution mod-
els and observations of the solar neighborhood, specifically,
if these stars changed𝑅without substantially increasing their
radial actions. Subsequent work confirmed the presence of
cold torquing in baryonic (including hydrodynamics) simula-
tions (Roˇskar et al. 2008), and its ability to account for the
dispersion in the relation between stellar age and metallicity
(for example Haywood 2008; Casagrande et al. 2011; Carrillo
et al. 2023), supersolar metallicity stars in the solar neighbor-
hood (Kordopatis et al. 2015; Anders et al. 2017; Feuillet et al.
2018), and the skewness of the metallicity distribution as a
function of𝑅(for example Hayden et al. 2015; Loebman et al.
2016; Martinez-Medina et al. 2016).
Nevertheless, the literature shows little consensus on the
strength of radial redistribution, its dependence on age, and its
impact on galactic properties today. Some works claim that
radial redistribution is a major driver of various aspects of the
MW’s structure (Sch¨onrich & Binney 2009b; Hayden et al.
2015; Ratcliffe et al. 2023), including the local prominence
of the bimodality in𝛼elements (Sharma et al. 2021b), while
others find that it likely induces only slight changes around
formation driven trends (Spitoni et al. 2015; Haywood et al.
2019; Khoperskov et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2023; Graf et al.
2025a).
This lack of consensus is in large part because almost all
inferences of the strength of radial redistribution in the MW
require significant assumptions about the properties of the
MW in its past. A galaxy’s present-day structure – in terms
of the dynamics, ages, and metallicities of its stars – is the
convolution of two effects: the state of its star-forming ISM
over time and the subsequent dynamical evolution of its stars.
Because we do not know either one independently, most works
impose assumptions about the past ISM conditions, for exam-
ple, that the metallicity always declined with𝑅and/or with
minimal azimuthal variations, the past star formation history,
and the time and spatial dependences of radial redistribution
(Frankel et al. 2018; Ratcliffe et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2025).
However, different assumptions can produce dramatically dif-
ferent conclusions. For example, Sch¨onrich & Binney (2009a)
highlighted the degeneracy between the strength of the ISM
metallicity radial gradient and the strength of cold torquing:
the steeper the metallicity gradient in the ISM, the smaller
the effect of cold torquing. Implicit in many models is that
the MW’s present state broadly represents its earlier state, for
example, that stars formed in (near) circular orbits within a dy-
namically cold (thin) disk throughout much/all of the MW’s
history, and that scattering interactions were primarily driven
by spiral arms, bars, and GMCs, with properties broadly sim-
ilar to their current values (for example Minchev et al. 2018;
Frankel et al. 2020; Sharma et al. 2021a).
In contrast, observations of high-redshift galaxies indi-
cate that the progenitors of MW-mass galaxies were thicker,
clumpier, and more turbulent than their descendants today (for
example Kassin et al. 2012; Glazebrook 2013; Conselice 2014;
¨Ubler et al. 2019; Wisnioski et al. 2019; Danhaive et al. 2025),
with higher gas fractions, higher (and burstier) star formation
rates, more frequent mergers (for example Tacconi et al. 2013,
2020; Madau & Dickinson 2014; F ¨orster Schreiber & Wuyts
2020), and nearly flat radial gradients in ISM metallicity (for
example Wang et al. 2022; Ju et al. 2025; Sun et al. 2025).
Thus, thin, well-ordered disks as observed in the local Uni-
verse do not necessarily represent the states of galaxies earlier
in their history. Furthermore, while many previous works con-
sidered dynamical scattering via internal structures within a
disk, later works highlighted the role of external perturbers.
Simulations show that encounters with satellites and minor
mergers warp and flare disks (for example Sotillo-Ramos et al.
2023), while also driving strong redistribution: the median
amount of radial redistribution nearly doubles when disks are
perturbed by orbiting satellites (Bird et al. 2012), while minor
mergers can induce shifts of 3−5 kpc (Villalobos & Helmi
2008; Kazantzidis et al. 2008).
Indeed, much theoretical work indicates that radial redis-
tribution likely operated differently at earlier cosmic times.
For one, the efficiency of dynamical heating, and, to an even
greater degree, cold torquing, depends on the dynamical state
of a stellar population. Dynamically cold populations couple
strongly to nonaxisymmetric patterns and readily experience
cold torquing, whereas thick, dynamically hot populations are
much less responsive to such resonant perturbations (Vera-
Ciro et al. 2014; Daniel & Wyse 2015). In turn, the hotter dy-
namics of gas, and thus newly formed stars, observed at higher
redshifts may imply weaker radial redistribution. Similarly,
lower-mass/higher-redshift galaxies typically hosted weaker
spiral arms and bars, if at all (for example Melvin et al. 2014),
meaning the main drivers of radial redistribution in present-
day MW-mass galaxies may be less effective or even absent at
earlier times. However, other processes that drive radial redis-
tribution may be more prevalent at early times. For example,
in cosmological simulations of low-mass galaxies, bursty star
formation and its associated feedback drive rapid fluctuations
in the gravitational potential that displace stars by several kilo-
parsecs over repeated cycles and build diffuse, extended stellar
distributions (El-Badry et al. 2017; Wheeler et al. 2019).
Therefore, interpreting the present-day record of the MW
and MW-like galaxies requires models that incorporate their
cosmological evolution, including the formation and settling
of a disk, along with the associated changes in gas accretion,
star formation, and mergers. Cosmological zoom-in simula-
tions are well-suited tools for understanding the strength of

3
radial redistribution of stars, because they have sufficient res-
olution to self-consistently model the evolution of the clumpy,
multi-phase ISM and its evolving dynamics over cosmic time,
while also resolving individual star-forming regions and the
sources of dynamical perturbations, both internal and external,
that drive radial redistribution, all within a fully cosmological
context (Grand et al. 2017; Okalidis et al. 2022).
We use FIRE-2 simulations of 11 MW-mass galaxies to ex-
amine the strength of stellar radial redistribution, from birth
until today, in terms of changes to orbital radius, orbital veloc-
ity, and specific angular momentum. In particular, we quantify
how radial redistribution, both its net inward/outward motion,
Δ𝑅, and its scatter,𝜎(Δ𝑅), depend on stellar age and𝑅, both
at birth and today. We examine how these results depend on
the definition of orbital radius used.
2.METHODS
2.1.FIRE-2 simulations
We use cosmological zoom-in simulations from the Feed-
back In Realistic Environments (FIRE) project (Hopkins et al.
2018)1, all of which are publicly available (Wetzel et al. 2023).
We include 5 cosmologically isolated MW/M31-mass galax-
ies from theLattesuite (introduced in Wetzel et al. 2016)
and 6 Local Group-like MW+M31 pairs from the ‘ELVIS on
FIRE’ suite (Garrison-Kimmel et al. 2019a,b), which have
halo masses𝑀 200m =1−2×10 12 M⊙, where𝑀 200m is the
total mass within the radius within which the mean density is
200 times the mean matter density of the Universe. Following
Bellardini et al. (2021) and Bellardini et al. (2022), we exclude
3 galaxies from theLattesuite: m12r and m12z, because of
their low stellar masses, and m12w, because of its unusually
compact disk. Table 1 lists the galaxies that we analyze, along
with key properties today.
The initial conditions of the simulations are embedded in-
side periodic cosmological boxes with side length 70.4−
172 Mpc. We generated them at𝑧≈99 usingMUSIC(Hahn
& Abel 2011). Each simulation saved 600 snapshots to𝑧=0,
with a typical time spacing of≈25 Myr. Each simulation uses
a flatΛCDM cosmology with parameters generally consistent
with Planck Collaboration et al. (2020):ℎ=0.68−0.71,
ΩΛ =0.69−0.734,Ω m =0.266−0.31,Ω b =0.0455−0.048,
𝜎8 =0.801−0.82 and𝑛 s =0.961−0.97.
The initial baryon particle mass in theLattesuite is 7070 M⊙
(≈5000 M ⊙ today because of stellar mass loss), and the dark-
matter mass resolution is 3.5×10 5 M⊙. Mass resolution is
≈2×higher in the ELVIS simulations: Thelma & Louise
has initial baryon particle masses of 4000 M ⊙ and Romeo &
Juliet and Romulus & Remus have 3500 M⊙. The gravitational
force softening of star and dark-matter particles is fixed, with a
Plummer equivalent of𝜖star =4 pc and𝜖 dm =40 pc (comoving
at𝑧 >9, physical thereafter). Force softening for gas cells
is adaptive, matching the hydrodynamic kernel smoothing,
reaching a 1 pc minimum; the value in the typical interstellar
medium (ISM), at densities≈1 cm −3, is≈40 pc.
We ran all simulations with the Meshless Finite Mass hy-
drodynamics method (Hopkins 2015) and with the FIRE-2
model for star formation and stellar feedback (Hopkins et al.
2018). Gas cells experience metallicity-dependent radiative
heating and cooling processes across a temperature range
of 10−10 10K, including free-free, photoionization and re-
combination, Compton, photo-electric and dust collisional,
1 FIRE project web site: http://fire.northwestern.edu
TABLE 1
properties today of the 11 FIRE-2 galaxies we analyze
galaxy 𝑀★
90 𝑅★
90 𝑡lb
 𝑣 𝜙/𝜎 𝑣,3D >1 
name [1010 M⊙] [kpc] [Gyr]
m12m1 10.0 11.6 9.2
Romulus2 8.0 12.9 7.4
m12b3 7.3 9.0 7.4
m12f4 6.9 11.8 7.4
Thelma3 6.3 11.2 4.3
Romeo3 5.9 12.4 11.0
m12i5 5.3 9.8 6.7
m12c3 5.1 9.1 6.5
Remus2 4.0 11.0 7.9
Juliet3 3.3 8.1 4.4
Louise3 2.3 11.2 7.2
Note. — Galaxies are in decreasing order of stellar mass today. Columns
show: galaxy name;𝑀 ★
90 is the stellar mass within𝑅 ★
90;𝑅 ★
90 is the radius that
encloses 90% of the mass of all stars within±3 kpc of the disk midplane; the
lookback time to the onset of disk formation, defined in Table 1 of McCluskey
et al. (2024) as when𝑣 𝜙/𝜎 𝑣,3D >1 permanently for stars at birth. The
publication that introduced each simulation at this resolution is: Hopkins et al.
(2018)1, Garrison-Kimmel et al. (2019a)2, Garrison-Kimmel et al. (2019b)3,
Garrison-Kimmel et al. (2017)4, Wetzel et al. (2016)5.
cosmic ray, molecular, metal-line, and fine structure pro-
cesses, accounting for 11 elements (H, He, C, N, O, Ne, Mg,
Si, S, Ca, Fe). The simulations include a spatially-uniform
time-dependent cosmic ultraviolet background from Faucher-
Gigu`ere et al. (2009).
Star formation occurs only in gas that is self-gravitating,
Jeans-unstable, cold (𝑇 <10 4K), and molecular (following
Krumholz & Gnedin 2011). Once a gas cell becomes eligible
for star formation, it converts to a star particle on a local free-
fall time. A star particle inherits the mass of its progenitor
gas cell and represents a single stellar population, assuming
a Kroupa (2001) initial mass function. The FIRE-2 simula-
tions model time-resolved stellar feedback processes such as
continuous mass loss from stellar winds, core-collapse and
white-dwarf (Type Ia) supernovae, radiation pressure, pho-
toionization, and photoelectric heating. They model stellar
winds and their yields following a combination of models
(van den Hoek & Groenewegen 1997; Marigo 2001; Izzard
et al. 2004) synthesized in Wiersma et al. (2009). They use
core-collapse supernova rates fromStarburst99(Leitherer
et al. 1999) and white-dwarf supernova rates from Mannucci
et al. (2006). They use Nomoto et al. (2006) and Iwamoto
et al. (1999) for the nucleosynthetic yields of core-collapse
and white-dwarf supernovae, respectively. These simulations
explicitly model unresolved turbulent diffusion of metals in
gas (Hopkins 2017; Su et al. 2017; Escala et al. 2018).
Crucial to this analysis, FIRE-2 simulations self-
consistently model the multiphase ISM, including overden-
sities that can scatter the orbits of stars to drive radial redis-
tribution. For example, they resolve giant molecular clouds
(Benincasa et al. 2020; Guszejnov et al. 2020), the forma-
tion of (massive) star clusters (Ma et al. 2020; Grudi ´c et al.
2023; Sameie et al. 2023; Bhattarai et al. 2024), spiral arms
(Orr et al. 2023; Quinn et al. 2025), and bars (Ansar et al.
2025). The emergence of these structures within the FIRE-2
galaxies, in addition to cosmological effects like gas accretion,
galaxy mergers, and satellite interactions, together enables us
to explore stellar radial redistribution in a self-consistent cos-
mological context without being beholden to any assumptions
or analytic approximations regarding the evolution or impact
of these structures.

4 Bellardini et al.
2.2.Eras of Disk Formation
Various works quantified the formation histories of the MW-
mass galaxies in these FIRE-2 simulations, including when a
single primary progenitor galaxy emerged (Santistevan et al.
2020; Horta et al. 2024), disk formation and rotational motion
(Ma et al. 2017; Garrison-Kimmel et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2023),
the transition from bursty to smooth star formation (Yu et al.
2021; Gurvich et al. 2023), and their physical causes (Hopkins
et al. 2023). Most relevant for this work, McCluskey et al.
(2024) examined the orbital dynamics of stars across cosmic
time and argued that these disks form and settle in three distinct
eras: ‘pre-disk’ (ages≳8 Gyr) when stars formed on largely
dispersion-dominated orbits, ‘early-disk’ (age≈4−8 Gyr)
when a (thick) disk emerged, dominated by net rotation but
still dynamically hot (𝑣 𝜙/𝜎𝑣,3D >1), and ‘late-disk’ (ages
≲4 Gyr) when stars formed on thin-disk, near-circular orbits
((𝑣 𝜙/𝜎𝑣,3D ≳3). Throughout, we highlight trends for radial
redistribution in these 3 eras, given that many trends show
distinct behavior in each era.
McCluskey et al. (2024) also quantified the lookback time
to the onset of disk formation for each galaxy, when𝑣𝜙/𝜎𝑣,3D
of its stars at birth permanently rose above 1, which we list in
Table 1. This time represents when each galaxy ‘spun up’ and
transitioned from its pre-disk to early-disk disk era.
We are motivated in part by applications to the MW, and
several observational analyses suggest that the MW’s disk be-
gan to form unusually early,≈12 Gyr ago (for example Be-
lokurov & Kravtsov 2022; Conroy et al. 2022; Xiang & Rix
2022). Therefore, in some figures we show results separately
for Romeo, the galaxy in our sample whose disk began to form
the earliest and likely closest in time to the MW. As McCluskey
et al. (2024) showed, Romeo began to spin up (in terms of
𝑣 𝜙/𝜎𝑣,3D ≳1) 11−12 Gyr ago, likely within≈1 Gyr of the
MW. This early formation is likely because Romeo formed in
a Local Group-like environment (see Garrison-Kimmel et al.
2018; Santistevan et al. 2020).
2.3.Measuring orbital radius
We measure stellar orbits in a cylindrical coordinate system.
First, we calculate the center of each galaxy at each snapshot
using an iterative zoom-in method on all star particles that end
up within each MW-mass galaxy at𝑧=0 (see Wetzel et al.
2023). We then define the coordinate system with respect
to the center at each snapshot, using the moment-of-inertia
tensor of the youngest 25% of stars that encompass 90% of
the stellar mass within 10 kpc of the galaxy to define the disk
plane. We use young stars as a compromise between using
all stars and using gas, given that the morphology of old stars
is generally not disky, and the morphology of gas can change
rapidly during episodes of strong feedback.
Because stars are not on perfectly circular orbits, the defi-
nition of an ‘orbital radius’,𝑅orbit, is ambiguous, and various
works use different metrics (for example Halle et al. 2015; El-
Badry et al. 2018; Lian et al. 2022; Okalidis et al. 2022). To
comprehensively explore the effects on radial redistribution,
we investigate 5 metrics of𝑅 orbit:
•𝑅 phys: instantaneous physical radius
•𝑅 ⟨R⟩ : spatially-averaged orbital radius
•𝑅 ⟨t⟩ : time-averaged orbital radius
•𝑅 circ(𝐸): radius of a circular orbit with the same energy
•𝑅 circ(𝑗): radius of a circular orbit with the same angular
momentum:
𝑅phys is simply the instantaneous physical radius of a star
particle relative to the galaxy’s center.
We also measure thespatially-averaged orbital radius,
𝑅⟨R⟩ :
𝑅⟨R⟩ = 𝑅apo +𝑅 peri
2 (1)
where𝑅 apo is the apocenter of the orbit and𝑅 peri is the peri-
center. We calculate this by tracking the radius of each star
particle at each snapshot back to its birth and averaging adja-
cent apocenters and pericenters.
We also measure thetime-averaged orbital radius,𝑅 ⟨t⟩ :
𝑅⟨t⟩ = 1
𝑡2 −𝑡 1
∫ 𝑡2
𝑡1
𝑅(𝑡)d𝑡(2)
where𝑡 1 and𝑡 2 are the times of an adjacent apocenter and
pericenter (or vice versa).
Following Abadi et al. (2003), we also measure theradius
of a circular orbit with the same energy,𝑅 circ(𝐸):
Φ(𝑅 circ(𝐸)) + 1
2 𝑅circ(𝐸) 𝑑Φ(𝑅)
𝑑𝑅

𝑅=𝑅circ (𝐸)
=𝐸(3)
whereΦis the gravitational potential and𝐸is the sum of the
kinetic and potential energy. FIRE-2 simulations record the
gravitational potential at the location of each particle at each
snapshot. We calculate the potential at a given𝑅(azimuthally-
averaged) using the average potential of all star, gas, and dark-
matter particles within±0.3 kpc of the galactic disk midplane
at each snapshot, in radial bins of width 250 pc out to𝑅 ★
90
(see Bellardini et al. 2022). We tested using the azimuthally-
dependent potential and found variations in our inferred orbital
radii of typically≲5%. For the potential beyond𝑅 ★
90, we
extrapolate assuming a constant slope of the potential with
𝑅. We require the potential to increase monotonically with𝑅.
In rare instances (typically at early times) when the potential
decreases with𝑅, we set its value equal to the value in the
adjacent inner bin of𝑅. Using Equation 3, we calculate the
energy of a circular orbit at different𝑅. We solve for𝑅 circ(𝐸)
using the numerical solution to the total energy of a circular
orbit as a function of𝑅and the total energy of the star particle.
Our final metric is theradius of a circular orbit with the
same angular momentum,𝑅 circ(𝑗):
𝑅circ (𝑗)=𝑗 2/3
"
𝑑Φ(𝑅)
𝑑𝑅

𝑅=𝑅circ (𝑗)
# −1/3
(4)
where henceforth we use𝑗, where𝑗=𝑗 𝜙 =𝑣 𝜙 𝑅phys is the spe-
cific angular momentum along the disk midplane (or equiva-
lently, the azimuthal action). Importantly, we self-consistently
solve for the radial gradient of the potential following the same
procedure as for𝑅 circ(𝐸). We use Equation 4 to calculate
𝑗of a circular orbit at a given𝑅 phys, and we use this nu-
merical solution to find𝑅 circ(𝑗)for a given𝑗. Many works
start with the relation𝑗=𝑣 circ(𝑟)𝑅and use this to compute
𝑅circ(𝑗)given𝑗, but doing this generally requires measuring
𝑣 circ(𝑟)=
√︁
𝐺 𝑀tot (< 𝑟)/𝑟in spherical apertures, not just near
the disk midplane, so our use of Equation 4 based on the gra-
dient of the potential along cylindrical𝑅of the disk is more
accurate.𝑅 circ(𝑗)is the same as the ‘guiding center radius’

5
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
Rnow
orbit Rnow
phys [kpc]
Age = 0 - 1 Gyr
R R
R t
Rcirc(E)
Rcirc(j)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
Age = 5 - 6 Gyr
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
6
4
2
0
2
Age = 10 - 11 Gyr
Rnow
phys [kpc]
Fig. 1.—Comparing the 4 metrics of the orbital radius of stars today against their instantaneous physical radius.Lines show the mean and shaded
regions show the 68th percentile scatter across the 11 galaxies (8 for𝑅 circ (𝐸)and𝑅 circ (𝑗)). Panels show different age stellar populations, corresponding (from
left to right) to the late-disk, early-disk, and pre-disk eras (McCluskey et al. 2024). The different orbital radii are most similar at smaller𝑅 phys and for younger
stars, while they are consistently smaller than𝑅 phys at large𝑅 phys and at older ages. In general,𝑅 ⟨R⟩,𝑅 ⟨t⟩, and𝑅 circ (𝐸)yield similar results, while𝑅 circ (𝑗)is
systematically smaller.
Fig. 2.—Orbital angular momentum of stars today. Top: The median
angular momentum of young stars (ages<200 Myr), relative to the angular
momentum of a circular orbit at the same orbital radius, versus current orbital
radius,𝑅 now
orbit. By definition,𝑅 circ (𝑗)is unity. Stars at𝑅 now
orbit ≲1.5 kpc are
on less circular, and more bulge/bar-like, orbits. Beyond this radius, this ratio
is approximately flat and≳0.95; stars today form on nearly circular orbits.
Bottom: Same, but measuring orbits today for stars with ages 10−11 Gyr,
which formed mostly during the pre-disk era. This ratio increases with𝑅 now
phys,
indicating that old stars are on more circular orbits at larger radii, although
the median is always≲0.7.
used in the literature (for example Sch¨onrich & Binney 2009a;
Frankel et al. 2020).
Each of these metrics has advantages and disadvantages.
𝑅phys is straightforward to measure, and it most directly trans-
lates to the selection function of, for example, a magnitude-
limited observational survey of the MW. However, for a non-
circular orbit,𝑅 phys varies throughout the orbital phase, such
that a star would experience some radial redistribution along
a fixed orbit simply from its phase. As we show below, this
additional scatter from the orbital phase is important only for
young stars, because older stars have experienced sufficient
radial redistribution that the contribution from orbital phase is
minor.
The other four metrics are, in principle, independent of or-
bital phase (assuming no perturbations).𝑅circ (𝐸), and𝑅 circ(𝑗)
are instantaneous measurements, so we can measure them im-
mediately after a star particle forms (typically≈10 Myr after,
given our snapshot time spacing) and today, thus providing
full information about perturbations across a star particle’s
history. However, these two metrics rely on instantaneous
measurements of the (azimuthally average) gravitational po-
tential, which in reality changes over the timescale of an orbit.
Furthermore, observationally𝑅 circ(𝐸)and𝑅 circ(𝑗)are diffi-
cult to measure for stars, given uncertainties in the underlying
gravitational potential.
By contrast,𝑅 ⟨R⟩ and𝑅 ⟨t⟩ are independent of any approxi-
mations/assumptions about the potential or changes in orbital
properties, such as angular momentum or total energy. How-
ever, these two metrics require tracking/averaging a star par-
ticle across at least half of an orbit. Thus, when we present
these orbital radii for star particles ‘at birth’ or ‘today’, these
obfuscate any initial and final changes to an orbit that occurred
on a half-orbit timescale. Furthermore, one cannot measure
these two radii directly in observations.
We explore these 5 metrics of𝑅orbit, to understand how much
they affect inferences of radial redistribution, both in terms of
the𝑅 orbit used to measure radial redistribution and the𝑅 orbit
used to select stars today (or at birth). As we will show, most
of our results are broadly independent of the choice of metric
for𝑅 orbit,as long as one selects stars and measures radial
redistribution self-consistently.
2.4.Measuring changes to orbits
We measure each star particle’s change in orbital radius,
Δ𝑅orbit, specific angular momentum,Δ𝑗, and azimuthal veloc-
ity,Δ𝑣 𝜙, from its birth until today. Unless otherwise specified,
we then measure the median change of property𝑋across a
given population as
Δ𝑋=median(𝑋 now −𝑋 birth)(5)

6 Bellardini et al.
Fig. 3.—Evolution of specific angular momentum,𝑗.The median𝑗of
stars relative to that of a circular orbit at the same𝑅 now
orbit today, versus age, for
all stars at𝑅 now
phys =2−12 kpc (excluding the bulge region), averaged across
radial bins of width 1 kpc. The black line shows the mean, while shaded
regions show the 68th percentile and full scatter, across our 11 galaxies. The
dashed line shows Romeo, whose disk started to form the earliest,≈11 Gyr
ago, but which follows a similar trend as the median. The vertical bands
separate the pre-disk (age≳8 Gyr), early-disk (age≈4−8 Gyr), and late-
disk (age≲4 Gyr) eras. Stars born in the pre-disk era are generally on highly
eccentric orbits today. The ratio increases rapidly in the early-disk era, and it
flattens somewhat near unity during the late-disk era, when most stars were
born on near-circular orbits.
and we measure the half-width of the 68% scatter inΔ𝑋(about
the median change) as
𝜎(Δ𝑋)= 1
2 (percent(Δ𝑋,84) −percent(Δ𝑋,16) ) (6)
which equals the standard deviation for a normal distribution.
As we described in the Introduction, many analyses fo-
cus only on thescatterin changes to orbital properties, such
as𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit), under the expectation that the median (net)
change for a population is negligible (Sellwood & Binney
2002; Frankel et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2025). However, we
investigate changes to both the median and the scatter about
this, to highlight regimes when this common assumption does
not hold.
We emphasize that we compute themedian(not mean)
change in these quantities across all star particles within a
given galaxy. Stars can gain an arbitrary amount of𝑗but can
lose only a finite amount (neglecting scattering to retrograde
orbits). Thus, scattering can lead to an asymmetric change,
with a smaller number of stars each gaining a larger𝑗, from a
larger number of stars each losing a smaller𝑗.
The formation radius of a star born ‘ex situ’, in another
galaxy that then merged into the host galaxy, is ill-defined.
Therefore, we include only stars that formed ‘in situ’. Fol-
lowing Bellardini et al. (2022), we define in-situ stars as those
born within 30 kpc comoving of the center of the main (most
massive) progenitor of the MW-mass galaxy. As Table 1 of
Bellardini et al. (2022) showed, the ex situ fraction of stars
within this radius today is small: 2−8% across our sample.
We measure these quantities for each galaxy and show most
results averaged across our 11 galaxies. One simulation, Ro-
mulus & Remus, does not have the gravitational potential
stored in its snapshots, so we cannot measure𝑅 circ(𝑗)and
𝑅circ(𝐸)accurately for those two galaxies. Therefore, we
show results for𝑅circ(𝑗)and𝑅 circ(𝐸)averaged over 9 galaxies
instead of 11.
3.RESULTS
3.1.Comparing metrics of orbital radius
We first compare our metrics of orbital radius,𝑅 orbit. Fig-
ure 1 shows the difference relative to the instantaneous radius,
𝑅now
orbit −𝑅 now
phys, versus𝑅 now
phys, for the four other metrics of𝑅 orbit
and for stars of different ages. Stars on perfectly circular orbits
would show no difference, while stars on more eccentric orbits
would show larger differences. For all metrics, the youngest
stars agree best with𝑅 now
phys, because these stars are on the most
circular orbits, especially at𝑅 now
phys ≲10 kpc. The difference
becomes more negative at larger𝑅 now
phys, where stars are more
likely to be near their orbital apocenter, such that𝑅now
phys is max-
imal. By contrast,𝑅 now
orbit can be larger than𝑅now
phys at small𝑅 now
phys,
where stars are preferentially closer to pericenter.
These trends persist at all stellar ages, though the discrep-
ancies generally increase with age, reflecting the different eras
of disk formation (McCluskey et al. 2024). The oldest stars
formed in the pre-disk era with the least circular orbits, while
younger stars formed with increasingly coherent rotation.
These trends are generally similar across the 4 metrics for
𝑅orbit. However,𝑅 circ(𝑗)is systematically the smallest at all
ages. This is because orbits generally have non-zero eccentric-
ity, but𝑅 circ(𝑗)is sensitiveonlyto𝑗, not to any non-circular
motion. In fact,𝑅 circ(𝑗)tends to be similar (within a factor of
≈2) to the pericenter distance,𝑅 peri, because𝑗completely de-
termines𝑅 circ(𝑗)and𝑗largely determines𝑅 peri. (Considering
limiting cases: for a circular orbit,𝑅 peri =𝑅 circ(𝑗), and for a
maximally eccentric Keplerian orbit,𝑅 peri =𝑅 circ(𝑗)/2.) By
contrast,𝑅 circ(𝐸)tends to be the largest, because it depends
only on the orbital energy and, unlike the others, is insensitive
to𝑗or eccentricity.𝑅 ⟨t⟩ and𝑅 phys tend to skew closer to
apocenter, because an orbit spends more time near apocenter,
and𝑅 phys is essentially a random sampling across time of the
phase of an orbit. As a result,𝑅 ⟨R⟩ , which is insensitive to
time sampling, is generally smaller than𝑅 ⟨t⟩ .
As an additional comparison of the impact of the metric of
𝑅orbit, in Appendix A we examine the radial profiles of metal-
licity for mono-age stellar populations today. In summary,
these population profiles depend only weakly on the choice of
𝑅orbit. While the different metrics for𝑅 orbit somewhat change
the normalization of the metallicity at a given𝑅orbit, they have a
negligible effect on the radial gradient (the change with𝑅orbit)
for mono-age stars.
3.2.Evolution of angular momentum
Next, we examine how each metric of𝑅orbit affects the profile
of specific angular momentum,𝑗, for stars today. Figure 2 (top)
shows the ratio of𝑗to that of a circular orbit at the same𝑅 now
orbit,
versus𝑅 now
orbit, for young stars (age<200 Myr). By definition,
this is unity for𝑅 circ(𝑗). For all other metrics,𝑗/𝑗 circ is near
unity at𝑅 now
orbit ≳1.5 kpc, indicating that young stars in these
FIRE-2 simulations generally formed on near-circular orbits
(see also Yu et al. 2021; McCluskey et al. 2024), at least beyond
the inner (bulge) region.
Figure 2 (bottom) shows the same but for old stars (ages
10−11 Gyr). Now, for all metrics of𝑅 orbit other than𝑅 circ(𝑗),
𝑗/𝑗 circ increases with𝑅 now
orbit, likely because older stars at larger
𝑅now
orbit were scattered to larger𝑗(as we explore below). Fur-
thermore, Figure 2 shows the general trend that, at a given

7
150
100
50
0
50
100
150
200
j [kpc km s 1]
 Mean
Romeo
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Rphys [kpc]
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
v  [km s 1]
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25j/|jform|
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6Rphys/Rform
phys
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
v /|vform|
Age [Gyr]
Fig. 4.—Dynamical changes to stars from birth to today across the galaxy.The change in specific angular momentum,𝑗(left), physical radius,𝑅 phys
(middle), and azimuthal velocity,𝑣 𝜙 (right), for all stars at𝑅 now
phys =2−12 kpc (excluding the bulge region). Solid lines show the mean and the shaded regions
show the 68th percentile and full scatter across our 11 galaxies. The dashed line shows Romeo, which has the earliest-forming disk that started to form≈11 Gyr
ago. The vertical bands separate the pre-disk, early-disk, and late-disk eras.Top row: The median (net) change. Stars that formed during the pre-disk era
generally gained𝑗, while stars that formed during the late-disk era generally lost it. Stars that gained (lost)𝑗typically did so through an increase (decrease) inboth
𝑅phys and𝑣 𝜙.Bottom row: Same, but for the fractional change relative to the valueat birth, which shows more distinctive behavior in each era and diminishes
in magnitude over time, being negative but near zero during the late-disk era. Stars that formed in the pre-disk and early-disk eras generally ‘spun up’ afterwards,
while stars that formed in the late-disk era generally ‘spun down’ afterwards. Romeo shows weaker changes at old ages, given its early-forming disk, though it
experiences a stronger reduction in𝑗and𝑅 phys during the early- and late-disk eras.
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
j / |jnow|
Rnow
orbit = 4±0.25 kpc
Rphys
RR
Rt
Rcirc(E)
Rcirc(j)
Rnow
orbit = 8±0.25 kpc Rnow
orbit = 12±0.25 kpc
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75( j / |jnow|)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Age [Gyr]
Fig. 5.—Fractional changes to orbital angular momentum of stars, from birth to today, versus age, relative to the value today, averaged over our galaxies.
Columns show stars at different𝑅 now
orbit (±0.25 kpc), and each line shows a different metric for𝑅 now
orbit. The vertical bands separate the pre-disk, early-disk, and
late-disk eras.Top: The median (net) fractional change. Older stars and stars at larger𝑅 now
orbit generally experienced the most significant increase. By contrast,
younger stars or stars at smaller𝑅now
orbit are more likely to have lost𝑗since birth. If instead one selects stars at a givenbirthradius, they typically lost𝑗at almost all
ages (see Figure C1). The age of transition, from𝑗increasing to𝑗decreasing since birth, is younger for stars at smaller𝑅 now
orbit.Bottom: Same, but for the scatter
(half width of the 68th percentile) in the fractional change in𝑗. For all metrics of𝑅 now
orbit except𝑅 circ (𝑗), this scatter increases with age. For stars younger than
≈2 Gyr, all metrics of𝑅 now
orbit yield similar results, but for older stars, measuring using𝑅 circ (𝑗)generally leads to more increase in the median𝑗(top) but also the
smallest scatter (bottom).

8 Bellardini et al.
𝑅now
orbit,𝑗/𝑗 circ decreases with age, because of the combined
effects that younger stars formed on more circular orbits and
older stars experienced more scattering and dynamical heating
after birth (see McCluskey et al. 2024).
To quantify this dependence on age directly, Figure 3 shows
the median𝑗/𝑗 circ across𝑅 now
phys =2−12 kpc today as a func-
tion of stellar age. We select𝑅 now
phys >2 kpc to avoid the
bulge region, beyond which𝑗/𝑗 circ is essentially constant for
young stars, but we explore the impact of selection radii in
Appendix B.
The blue and green vertical bands demarcate the pre-disk
(right), early-disk (middle), and late-disk (left) eras, from Mc-
Cluskey et al. (2024), as in Section 2.2. The shape of the
evolution of𝑗/𝑗 circ correlates with the transitions, further sup-
porting the meaning of these eras, even as measured for stars
today. Stars born in the pre-disk era have negligible𝑗, stars
born in the early-disk era have rapidly evolving𝑗, and stars
born in the late-disk era are on nearly circular orbits.
Figure 3 separately shows Romeo, whose disk started to
settle the earliest in our FIRE-2 simulations,≈11 Gyr ago
(McCluskey et al. 2024). Even though Romeo has the earliest-
settling disk, its history as measured today is similar to the
median across our galaxies. This reinforces a key result from
McCluskey et al. (2024), that the present-day dynamical his-
tory, as one would measure from the orbits of stars today,
does not directly reflect the dynamics of stars at birth, because
orbits can change.
To quantify this, we next explore the change in𝑗of stars
across the galaxy since their birth. Figure 4 (top) shows the
median change in𝑗(left), as well as its components:𝑅 phys
(center), and𝑣 𝜙 (right). Again, we show the median of all
stars across𝑅 now
phys =2−12 kpc versus stellar age.
On average, stars born≳5.5 Gyr ago experienced a net
increasein𝑗, thus, they were torqued up. This results from
a net increase inboth𝑅 phys and𝑣 𝜙 since birth. Older stars
necessarily formed at systematically smaller𝑅(because the
galaxy was smaller) and are more likely to have scattered
to larger𝑅. The trend for𝑣 𝜙 likely results from disk spin-
up; during the pre-disk era, stars formed with little coherent
rotational velocity, but as the disk settled, old stars scattered
to larger𝑣 𝜙 (McCluskey et al. 2024). The increase inboth𝑣 𝜙
and𝑅 phys causes the net increase in𝑗since birth.
Stars≲5.5 Gyr old generally decreased in𝑗since birth,
while stars older than this increased in𝑗. This transition age
roughly corresponds to the middle of the early-disk era, when
the disk settled enough to become ‘thin’ (see also Figure 2), so
perturbations generally reduced the relatively high𝑗of stars
at birth. The middle and right panels show that these changes
in𝑗correspond to similar changes inboth𝑅 phys and𝑣 𝜙.
Interpreting absolute changes to these quantities can be dif-
ficult, given that typical values vary substantially across a
galaxy’s history, as its disk forms. Thus, Figure 4 (bottom
row) shows thefractionalchange with respect to the absolute
value at birth. Now, the trends with age correlate more clearly
with the eras of disk formation. Stars born in the pre-disk
era generally experienced a large (order unity) fractional in-
crease in𝑗,𝑅 phys, and𝑣 𝜙, because they formed with such
small initial values that even small perturbations can lead to
large fractional increases. During the early-disk era, as the
disk started to settle, the fractional changes were more mod-
est. Finally, in the late-disk era, stars formed on nearly circular
orbits and experienced weak reductions in these quantities.
Figure 4 separately shows Romeo: its transition from in-
creasing to decreasing𝑗,𝑅 phys, and𝑣 𝜙, occurred at earlier
ages, because its disk formed unusually early among our sam-
ple. Furthermore, as the bottom panels show, its older stars ex-
perienced less fractional increase in𝑗since their birth, largely
because its early disk onset caused its older stars to form with
higher𝑗at birth. Romeo’s weaker fractional increase in𝑗
since birth helps explain why its present-day history of𝑗/𝑗 circ
in Figure 3 is similar to the average galaxy in our sample,
despite its earlier disk onset.
Figure 4 (right) shows a sharp dip toΔ𝑣 𝜙 ≈0 at approxi-
mately 9 Gyr, which also manifests itself in𝑗(left). This likely
reflects the dramatic fluctuations during the pre-disk era, when
the galaxies did not have a well-defined and long-lived disk
about which to compute these quantities in well-defined cylin-
drical coordinates.
Figure 5 (top) is similar to Figure 4 (left bottom), except it
shows the fractional change in𝑗versus age for stars currently
at𝑅 now
orbit =4, 8, and 12 kpc (±250 pc). Here, we normalize
the fractional change relative to𝑗today, rather than at birth.
Our motivation is to inform studies of stars in the MW and
nearby galaxies, and to be consistent with now selecting stars
at a given𝑅 now
orbit. Thus, a value of 1 means that all of the
present-day𝑗of a star was gained after birth.
At all𝑅 now
orbit, older stars typically experienced the largest
fractional change (increase) to𝑗, because they formed with
the smallest𝑗, and they had the most time to experience re-
distribution. Indeed, stars born in the pre-disk era generally
gained most of their present𝑗since birth. Furthermore, for
all metrics of𝑅 orbit except𝑅 circ(𝑗), stars of a given age at
larger𝑅 orbit experienced a larger increase in𝑗since birth.
The transition between typically gaining and typically losing
𝑗occurred at older ages at smaller𝑅 orbit. This reflects the
inside-out radial growth of these galaxies (Graf et al. 2025b):
stars at large𝑅 orbit today are there because they gained (or did
not lose much)𝑗, whereas stars at small𝑅 orbit could have lost
substantial𝑗, regardless of when they formed.
Figure 5 (bottom) shows the half-width of the 68% scatter
(comparable to 1𝜎) about the median fractional change in𝑗,
which quantifies the diffusion of𝑗since birth. At a given age,
this fractional scatter decreases with𝑅 now
orbit, largely because
𝑗 now generally increases with𝑅 now
orbit, such that the scatter in
Δ𝑗depends only weakly on𝑗 form (similar to the trend that we
will show forΔ𝑅 orbit below). At a given𝑅 now
orbit, this fractional
scatter in𝑗generally increases with age.
Figure 5 shows broadly similar trends for all metrics of𝑅orbit,
especially for the youngest stars, consistent with Figure 1. The
exception is𝑅 circ(𝑗)for stars older than≈3 Gyr, which show
systematically larger fractional changes in𝑗. This is because
𝑅circ(𝑗)tends to be the smallest𝑅 orbit (Figure 1), and stars at a
given𝑅 circ(𝑗)have the maximum𝑗(among all of the metrics)
at that𝑅 orbit, so stars at a given𝑅 circ(𝑗)reflect the trends at
larger𝑅 orbit for the other metrics. Similarly, because𝑅 circ(𝑗)
is uniquely sensitive to𝑗, the scatter inΔ𝑗(bottom row) is
minimal and is nearly independent of age, because all stars at
that𝑅 circ(𝑗)have the same𝑗 now by definition.
In summary, when selecting stars today at a given𝑅 now
orbit,
regardless of the metric, older stars tend to have gained𝑗
while younger stars tend to have lost𝑗since birth. These
trends for𝑗emerge from similar changes inboth𝑅 phys and
𝑣 𝜙. All metrics of𝑅 orbit show similar fractional changes to
𝑗, with similar scatter, across all ages and all radii, except
for𝑅 circ(𝑗), which shows systematically larger gains in𝑗, and
with systematically smaller scatter given the direct mapping

9
between𝑗and𝑅 circ(𝑗).
That said, these trends are based on selecting stars at a given
𝑅now
orbit, as one would measure in the MW and nearby galaxies
today. However, in Appendix C we show trends selecting stars
at a given𝑅 form
orbit. This leads to significant differences, namely:
(1) stars at a given𝑅form
orbit generally lost𝑗since birth, regardless
of age, and (2) the trends for𝑅 circ(𝑗)are similar to the other
metrics of𝑅 orbit.
3.3.Radial redistribution
We next examine the changes to the orbital radius of stars
from birth to today,Δ𝑅 orbit =𝑅 now
orbit −𝑅 form
orbit. We first examine
the full distribution ofΔ𝑅 orbit for stars currently near the Solar
annulus. Figure 6 shows the normalized distribution ofΔ𝑅orbit
for stars at𝑅 now
orbit =8±0.25 kpc, at 3 ages, corresponding to
stars that formed in the late-disk, early-disk, and pre-disk eras.
We show the 5 ways of measuring𝑅 orbit, self-consistently
using the same metric to select stars today and to measure
radial redistribution.
Figure 6 (left) shows young stars today (ages<1 Gyr). The
distributions are similar for all metrics of𝑅 orbit: symmetric
and peaking near≈0 kpc, with no net inward/outward redis-
tribution. Different metrics show similar scatter (≈2.6 kpc),
except the scatter in𝑅 phys is≈2×larger, because young stars
have not experienced much change to their orbit, but𝑅 phys
has additional scatter from sampling phases of a non-circular
orbit.
Figure 6 (middle and right) shows radial redistribution for
older stars, which experienced increasingly net outward redis-
tribution toward larger𝑅 orbit. This follows from the combined
effects of the declining density profile of the galaxies (such
that more stars scattered to a given𝑅 now
orbit from smaller𝑅 form
orbit
than from larger𝑅 form
orbit), together with the significant dynam-
ical heating of orbits for old stars in these simulations (see
El-Badry et al. 2016). The distribution remains nearly sym-
metric at≈5 Gyr, but it is negatively skewed for the oldest
stars, for the reasons above. The width of the distribution is
larger than for young stars (left), but importantly, the width
(amount of diffusion) is essentially unchanged from≈5 to
≈10 Gyr, which we discuss more below.
3.4.Radial redistribution versus radius
We next examine trends of radial redistribution versus cur-
rent orbital radius. Figure 7 shows the medianΔ𝑅 orbit and
𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)of young, intermediate, and old stars (correspond-
ing to those born in the late-disk, early-disk, and pre-disk eras)
versus𝑅 now
orbit. When measured self-consistently like this, the
different metrics of𝑅 orbit broadly agree, as we discuss further
in Section 3.5 and Appendix D. This is in part because,if one
measuresΔ𝑅 orbit and𝑅 now
orbit self-consistently, with the same
metric for𝑅 orbit, as we do here, then at a given𝑅 now
orbit, the only
source of variation is𝑅 form
orbit.
At all ages, stars at smaller𝑅 now
orbit typically moved inward
since birth, while stars at larger𝑅 now
orbit generally redistributed
outward since birth. The orbital radius at which stars transition
from net inward to net outward redistribution is smaller with
increasing age. This reflects the inside-out radial growth of
these galaxies (Graf et al. 2025b): older stars necessarily have
smaller𝑅 form
orbit, so the only way for them to have large𝑅 now
orbit is
via outward redistribution. By contrast, younger stars had a
larger range of𝑅 form
orbit, so at a given𝑅 now
orbit, they are more likely
to have moved inward than older stars.
For stars younger than 1 Gyr, for all metrics except𝑅phys and
𝑅circ(𝑗),Δ𝑅 orbit ≈0 kpc.Δ𝑅 phys andΔ𝑅 circ(𝑗)show slight
inward redistribution≲0.2 kpc.𝑅 phys is uniquely sensitive
to the phase of the orbits, which is the dominant effect of
‘redistribution’ for young stars. The mild decline in𝑅 circ(𝑗)
since birth reflects the net loss of𝑗as in Section 3.2, because
stars were perturbed from their near-circular orbits at birth.
At older ages,Δ𝑅 orbit generally increases with𝑅 orbit, but the
shape/slope changes with age. Intermediate-age stars, formed
in the early-disk era while the disk was settling, show a com-
plex relation:Δ𝑅 orbit decreases with𝑅 now
orbit in the inner galaxy
and increases with𝑅 now
orbit at≳3 kpc. For the oldest stars,
formed in the pre-disk era, the relationship is nearly linear:
these stars all had small𝑅 form
orbit, soΔ𝑅 orbit ≈𝑅 orbit.
Figure 7 (bottom) shows𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit), the scatter about the
median, versus𝑅 now
orbit. This is the most common method
of quantifying radial redistribution: it reflects the combined
inward and outward diffusion of stars about their birth ra-
dius, under an often implicit assumption that the median/net
Δ𝑅orbit =0. Again,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)is generally consistent across
the metrics of𝑅 orbit, though again, it is systematically larger
for𝑅 phys for young stars because of the additional scatter from
sampling the phase of an orbit.
At a given age,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)generally increases with𝑅 now
orbit,
though again, the shape/slope depends on age. Given the
inside-out radial growth of these galaxies, younger stars had
a larger range of𝑅 form
orbit, but they also had less time to re-
distribute. For the youngest stars, this causes𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)to
increase strongly with𝑅 now
orbit. For the oldest stars,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)
is nearly flat with𝑅 now
orbit, because they all formed across a
small range of𝑅 form
orbit. For intermediate-age stars,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)
increases out to≈6 kpc, beyond which it is relatively flat.
Figure 7 shows results when selecting stars via𝑅 now
orbit, moti-
vated by analyses of the MW and nearby galaxies. Appendix C
presents similar results, but selecting stars via𝑅 form
orbit. These
trends are generally opposite to those in Figure 7 (top), sim-
ilar to the trends forΔ𝑗in Section 3.2: younger stars have
Δ𝑅orbit ≈0 or positive, and older stars generally have neg-
ativeΔ𝑅 orbit. Again, the reason for this difference is that
stellar density declines with𝑅: most stars with a given𝑅 form
orbit
moved inward, but when selecting stars by𝑅 now
orbit, more stars
moved outward to that𝑅 now
orbit rather than inward. That said,
Appendix C shows that the trends of𝜎(Δ𝑅orbit)are similar for
selecting stars via𝑅 now
orbit versus𝑅 form
orbit.
3.5.Radial redistribution versus age
Figure 8 shows trends in radial redistribution versus stellar
age, for stars at various𝑅now
orbit, and for various metrics of𝑅orbit.
This figure highlights our most important results, as we articu-
late below. Again, because we measureΔ𝑅orbit and select stars
via𝑅 now
orbit self-consistently for each metric, at a given𝑅now
orbit, the
only source of variation is𝑅 form
orbit.
Considering bothΔ𝑅 orbit (top) and𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)(bottom), the
different metrics of𝑅orbit lead to similar results. Thus,the pre-
cise definition of𝑅 orbit does not significantly affect the amount
of radial redistribution, if one measuresΔ𝑅orbit and𝑅 now
orbit self-
consistently. In Appendix D, we show that using the different
metrics forΔ𝑅 orbit while selecting stars only via𝑅 now
phys, anal-
ogous to a simple observational selection, leads to much less

10 Bellardini et al.
6
 4
 2
 0 2 4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Age = 0 - 1 Gyr
Rphys
R R
R t
Rcirc(E)
Rcirc(j)
8
 6
 4
 2
 0 2 4 6 8
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Age = 5 - 6 Gyr
6
 4
 2
 0 2 4 6 8 10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Age = 10 - 11 Gyr
Rnow
orbit Rform
orbit  [kpc]
Fig. 6.—Normalized distributionΔ𝑅 orbit of stellar orbits, from birth to today, for stars at𝑅now
orbit =8±0.25 kpc today, averaged across our galaxies. Because
we normalize all distributions to unity, the scale of the y-axis is arbitrary. Panels show stars of different ages today, which formed during the late-disk (left),
early-disk (middle), and pre-disk (right) eras. Each line shows a metric for𝑅 orbit (at both birth and today): these yield similar results, except that using𝑅 phys
leads to a larger scatter for the youngest stars. The medianΔ𝑅 orbit ≈0 for young stars, but older stars experienced more redistribution to larger radii. The width
of the distribution is smaller for younger stars and increases to intermediate ages but is essentially unchanged for older stars.
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Rnow
orbit Rform
orbit  [kpc]
Age = 0 - 1 Gyr 
Rphys
RR
Rt
Rcirc(E)
Rcirc(j)
1
0
1
2
3
4
Age = 5 - 6 Gyr 
0
2
4
6
8
Age = 10 - 11 Gyr 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
( Rorbit) [kpc]
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Rnow
orbit [kpc]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Fig. 7.—Radial redistribution of stellar orbits, from birth to today, versus current orbital radius,𝑅 now
orbit, averaged across our galaxies. Panels show stars
of different ages today, which formed during the late-disk (left), early-disk (middle), and pre-disk (right) eras. Each line shows a different metric for𝑅orbit (at both
birth and today).Top: Median (net) change in𝑅 orbit. Young stars typically moved slightly inward (≲100−200 pc), while for older stars, those at larger𝑅 now
orbit
experienced more outward redistribution. This is because older stars formed at systematically smaller𝑅 orbit (the galaxy progenitor was more compact), so those
at larger𝑅 now
orbit necessarily redistributed outward.Bottom: Same, but for the scatter (half width of the 68th percentile) ofΔ𝑅 orbit. At all ages, the scatter initially
increases with𝑅 now
orbit but tends to saturate, especially for older stars, again given that they systematically redistributed outward from an initially more compact
galaxy. When self-consistently using the same metric of𝑅 orbit to measure radial redistribution and orbital radius today, the different metrics yield similar results
(unlike in Figure D1), though𝜎is usually largest for𝑅 phys.
similarity among the metrics for𝑅 orbit.
Figure 8 (top) shows median (net)Δ𝑅 orbit versus stellar age
today, at various𝑅 now
orbit (±0.25 kpc). Generally,Δ𝑅 orbit is pos-
itive and increases with age. However, for the youngest stars
Δ𝑅orbit is negative and decreases with age until≈4 Gyr ago at
𝑅now
orbit =4 kpc (left) and until≈2 Gyr at 8 kpc (middle). This
decrease in𝑅 orbit for young stars follows from the decrease
in𝑗in Section 3.2, because young stars scattered from near-
circular orbits at birth. Again, the differing dependence on age
at different𝑅 now
orbit, and the general increase inΔ𝑅 orbit for older
stars, reflects the inside-out radial growth of these galaxies.
Older stars formed when the galaxy was smaller, so the only
way for them to end up at large𝑅now
orbit is via outward redistribu-
tion, including via breathing modes induced by feedback from
bursty star formation at early times (see El-Badry et al. 2016).
At small𝑅 now
orbit, young stars (formed in the late-disk era) could
have much larger𝑅form
orbit and have moved inward, while old stars
(formed in the pre-disk era) are more likely to have formed at
even smaller𝑅 form
orbit and moved outward.
Furthermore, because stellar density declines with𝑅, redis-
tribution of stars from a given𝑅 form
orbit generally causes more
stars at a given𝑅 now
orbit to have come from smaller (rather than
larger)𝑅 form
orbit, leading to net positive redistribution at a given

11
1
0
1
2
Rnow
orbit Rform
orbit  [kpc]
Rnow
orbit = 4±0.25 kpc
Rphys
RR
Rt
Rcirc(E)
Rcirc(j)
0
2
4
6
Rnow
orbit = 8±0.25 kpc
0
2
4
6
8
Rnow
orbit = 12±0.25 kpc
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0
1
2
3
( Rorbit) [kpc]
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Age [Gyr]
0
1
2
3
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0
1
2
3
Fig. 8.—Radial redistribution of stellar orbits, from birth to today, versus stellar age, averaged across our galaxies. Panels show stars at various𝑅 now
orbit.
The vertical bands separate the pre-disk, early-disk, and late-disk eras.Top: The median (net) change in𝑅 orbit. The youngest stars redistributed slightly inward,
while older stars redistributed increasingly outward with age; this transition occurred earlier for stars at smaller𝑅 now
orbit. If instead one selects stars at a givenbirth
radius, they typically decreased in𝑅 orbit at almost all ages (see Figure C1).Bottom: Same, but for the scatter (half width of the 68th percentile),𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit ).
Horizontal dotted lines show the average across all ages.𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit )initially increases with age up to≈2 Gyr, beyond whichthe scatter in radial redistribution
is approximately constant with age, and in fact decreases slightly for older stars. When self-consistently using the same metric of𝑅 orbit to select stars today and
measure redistribution, the different metrics yield similar results (unlike in Figure D1), though𝜎is systematically larger when using𝑅 phys for younger stars.
𝑅now
orbit. Indeed, as Appendix C shows, stars born at a given
𝑅form
orbit tend to have moved inward, not outward, opposite to the
general trends in Figure 8 (top), at least for𝑅 form
orbit ≳4 kpc.
Figure 8 (bottom) shows𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit), the scatter ofΔ𝑅 orbit
about the median.𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)is the most common metric
of radial redistribution (or ‘radial migration’), quantifying the
diffusion of stellar orbits about their birth𝑅. Young stars, born
during the late-disk era, experienced the least redistribution,
and𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)increases with age up to≈2 Gyr. However,
at ages≳3 Gyr,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)is relatively constant with age at
all𝑅 now
orbit.Appendix C shows that this flat dependence on age
also holds when selecting stars via𝑅 form
orbit, so it is not just a
byproduct of selecting stars at𝑅 now
orbit.
Overall, Figure 8 highlights a key complementarity in the
imprint of radial redistribution onΔ𝑅 orbit versus𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit),
according to the dynamical state of the disk when the stars
were born. For young stars, born during the late-disk era,
𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)increases quickly with age, whileΔ𝑅 orbit remains
about constant with age. This reflects the commonly expected
behavior in a thin-disk regime of stellar orbits diffusing about
their birth radii (for example Sellwood & Binney 2002). How-
ever, for stars born during the early-disk and pre-disk eras,
≳3−4 Gyr ago,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)is nearly independent of age,
whileΔ𝑅 orbit increases monotonically with age. Thus,for
stars at𝑅 now
orbit ≳8 kpcborn in the pre-disk era (before a long-
lived disk formed) and in the earliest part of the early-disk era
(when the disk was thick and dynamically hot), the primary
mode of radial redistribution, from birth to today, is a net
change in the median𝑅 orbit, rather than diffusion about the
median,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit).
3.6.Comparison to previous works
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Age[Gyr]
0
1
2
3
4
(Rnow
phys Rform
phys) [kpc]
Rform
phys
0.5R50 ± 1 kpc
1.050 ± 1 kpc
1.5R50 ± 1 kpc
2.0R50 ± 1 kpc
FIRE-2
Auriga (Okalidis+ 2022)
FIRE-2
Auriga (Okalidis+ 2022)
Fig. 9.—Comparing FIRE-2 against the Auriga simulations.Radial
redistribution,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit )(half width of the 68th percentile), versus stellar
age, in the FIRE-2 simulations (solid lines) and the Auriga simulations (dashed
lines) in Okalidis et al. (2022). Error bars show the 1𝜎scatter across the
simulation suite. We select stars as in Okalidis et al. (2022), matching their
selection in𝑅 form
phys via multiples of𝑅★
50 (see Bellardini et al. 2021, for additional
details). In FIRE-2, the typical𝑅 ★
50 ≈3 kpc today, so these lines span
𝑅form
phys ≈1.5−6 kpc. This selection via𝑅 form
phys at smaller radii leads to a
more monotonic increase with age than in Figure 8. Despite differences in
modeling the ISM, star formation, and feedback, radial redistribution in FIRE-
2 is broadly consistent (within the galaxy-to-galaxy scatter) with the Auriga
simulations, though overall there is slightly less redistribution in FIRE-2.
We next place our results in the context of previous theo-
retical work. We first compare with the results that Okalidis
et al. (2022) presented from the Auriga cosmological zoom-in

12 Bellardini et al.
simulations (Grand et al. 2017). This comparison provides
a useful benchmark for stellar radial redistribution in a set of
simulations that use significantly different models for the ISM,
star formation, and feedback.
Figure 9 compares𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys)in FIRE-2 to that measured
in Okalidis et al. (2022) (their Figure 7) from 17 Auriga MW-
mass galaxies. Here, we reproduce the methodology of Oka-
lidis et al. (2022), whose selection differs from ours in several
respects. First, and most crucially, we now select stars based
on birth radius,𝑅 form
phys. (We explore the impact of selecting via
𝑅form
orbit in more detail in Appendix C.) Second, we now select
stars at multiples of each galaxy’s present-day𝑅★
50, as opposed
to selecting based on fixed𝑅orbit across different galaxies, and
we now use a slightly smaller vertical range of|𝑍 now|<2 kpc
(instead of|𝑍 now|<3 kpc). Third, Okalidis et al. (2022)
sought to measure only stars in the dynamically cold, thin disk
and exclude stars in the bulge and halo, so we now impose
their cut on present-day orbital circularity,𝜖 >0.7. Finally,
we also match their larger age binning of 3 Gyr.
We tested how each of these new selection criteria impacts
our results, finding that selection via𝑅 form
phys has the largest im-
pact (see also Appendix C), leading to stronger dependence on
age. In other words,𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys)does not flatten as much with
age. The other selection effects lead to only slight quantitative
changes. The average𝑅 ★
50 of our FIRE-2 galaxies is≈3 kpc,
so their chosen radii (in multiples of each galaxy’s𝑅 ★
50) for
FIRE-2 probes𝑅 form
phys ≈1.5−6 kpc, on average smaller than the
radial ranges we explored previously, leading to both smaller
𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys)(because it increases with𝑅 orbit) and a stronger in-
crease with age. Including only stars with𝜖 >0.7 leads to
only a slight increase (5-8% on average) in𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys).
The key point of Figure 9 is that, when measuring radial
redistribution with the same selection, the results from the
FIRE-2 and Auriga simulations are broadly similar. Notably,
𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys)agrees within the 1𝜎galaxy-to-galaxy scatter at
most ages and𝑅 form
phys. However, FIRE-2 shows systematically
lessradial redistribution than Auriga. One possible origin
of this difference is the galaxies’ sizes: despite having similar
stellar masses, the average𝑅★
50 of FIRE-2 galaxies is smaller,≈
3 kpc, compared to≈4 kpc in Okalidis et al. (2022). Because
in both works𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys)increases with𝑅 orbit, this partially
could explain a discrepancy in normalization. Furthermore,
differences in modeling the ISM, star formation, and stellar
feedback in the simulations also likely plays a key role, such
that at early times, FIRE-2 simulations experience a clumpier
ISM, burstier star formation, and stronger fluctuations in the
gravitational potential, while conversely, at later times, bars
are stronger and more prominent in Auriga.
While Figure 9 compares𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys), we also verified that
the trends forΔ𝑅 phys are broadly similar between the two sim-
ulation suites, at least for younger stars. Okalidis et al. (2022)
found that in Auriga, stars currently at𝑅 < 𝑅★
50 generally expe-
rienced net inward redistribution (averageΔ𝑅 phys ≈ −1 kpc),
while stars currently at𝑅 > 𝑅 ★
50 generally experienced net out-
ward redistribution (averageΔ𝑅 phys ≈1 kpc), which generally
agrees with FIRE-2 in Figures 7 and 8.
We next compare our results with empirically-derived infer-
ences for the MW, specifically, the angular-momentum diffu-
sion model of Frankel et al. (2020) and the metallicity-based
reconstruction of stellar birth radii from Ratcliffe et al. (2025).
While measuring radial redistribution in simulations is rela-
0
2
4
6
Rnow
circ, j Rform
circ, j [kpc]
 FIRE-2, Rj=4 kpc
Ratcliffe 2025, Rj=4 kpc
FIRE-2, Rj=8 kpc
Ratcliffe 2025, Rj=8 kpc
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Age[Gyr]
0
1
2
3
( Rcirc, j) [kpc]
Frankel 2020
Fig. 10.—Comparing radial redistribution in FIRE-2 with estimates
for the MW, for changes to ‘guiding-center radius’,𝑅 circ (𝑗), versus stellar
age today. We select stars at𝑅 circ (𝑗)=4 and 8 kpc (±1 kpc) today. Solid
lines show the mean, and the shaded regions show the 68th percentile (for
𝑅circ (𝑗)=8 kpc) across our FIRE-2 galaxies.Top: Net redistribution, in
terms of medianΔ𝑅 circ (𝑗). Dashed lines show the semi-empirical estimates
for the MW from Ratcliffe et al. (2025), with agree well with our FIRE-2
results.Bottom: Same, but for𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ (𝑗) ), the half width of the 68th
percentile. In addition to Ratcliffe et al. (2025), we also compare with the
analytic model applied to the MW from Frankel et al. (2020). Again, FIRE-2
agrees well with Ratcliffe et al. (2025): both FIRE-2 and Ratcliffe et al. (2025)
show an increase with ages up to 3−4 Gyr and a saturation (and possible
decline) of𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ (𝑗) )≲2 kpc at older ages. The increase with age in
FIRE-2 is broadly consistent with Frankel et al. (2020) up to 3−4 Gyr, and
plausible even up to 6 Gyr (for𝑅circ (𝑗)=8 kpc), the age limit of the analysis
in Frankel et al. (2020). However, both FIRE-2 and Ratcliffe et al. (2025)
are inconsistent with any implied monotonic increase from anextrapolation
of the fit from Frankel et al. (2020) beyond 6 Gyr, as the lighter grey dotted
line shows.Overall, radial redistribution in FIRE-2 agrees well with these
observational estimates of the MW.
tively straightforward, any measurement in the MW must be in-
ferred indirectly from the present-day structure in metallicity-
dynamics of its stellar populations. Such reconstructions nec-
essarily rely on modeling assumptions about the past state of
the MW. Despite these uncertainties, recent efforts to ‘reverse
engineer’ the MW’s dynamical history provide valuable semi-
empirical constraints.
Frankel et al. (2020) developed a forward model to recon-
struct the MW’s radial redistribution history from the present-
day distribution of stars observed by Gaia and APOGEE.
In their framework, stars formed with a time- and radius-
dependent metallicity that traces the evolving ISM, and subse-
quently redistributed through the disk via a diffusion process
in guiding-center radius,𝑅 circ(𝑗). The model integrates these
prescriptions forward in time, generating the present-day joint
distribution of stellar ages, metallicities, and𝑅 circ(𝑗), which
they compare with the MW through Bayesian inference. Im-
portantly, Frankel et al. (2020) only considered the evolution
on the ‘thin’ (low-𝛼) disk, adopting a maximum age of 6 Gyr
for their model.
Ratcliffe et al. (2025) used a semi-empirical method to in-
fer stellar birth𝑅from age and metallicity, based on previous

13
frameworks (Minchev et al. 2018; Lu et al. 2022). Their model
links the observed scatter in [Fe/H] across age bins to the un-
derlying ISM metallicity gradient but incorporates a correc-
tion for the evolving width of the star-forming disk, calibrated
on MW-mass galaxies from the TNG50 simulation. Ratcliffe
et al. (2025) argued that this extension allows their method
to recover the evolution of the MW’s metallicity gradient and
reconstruct the redistribution of stars across the disk.
Figure 10 compares the FIRE-2 simulations with the MW
results of Frankel et al. (2020) and Ratcliffe et al. (2025).
The top panel shows the median change in ‘guiding-center
radius’,𝑅 circ(𝑗), versus stellar age today, comparing to just
Ratcliffe et al. (2025) (Frankel et al. 2020 did not infer this
quantity). The bottom panel shows the corresponding half-
width of the 68th-percentile,𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ(𝑗)), versus stellar age
today, comparing to both Frankel et al. (2020) and Ratcliffe
et al. (2025). We show two representative radial ranges
from Ratcliffe et al. (2025), 4 and 8 kpc, using a bin width
±1 kpc. Frankel et al. (2020) inferred only a single, radially-
independent𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ(𝑗)), so we show only one line for their
model. Furthermore, Frankel et al. (2020) presented an age-
dependent analytic fit only at ages<6 Gyr. So, we show their
results at these measured ages in dark black and an extrapola-
tion of their fit to older ages in lighter grey.
In Figure 10 (both panels), FIRE-2 agrees remarkably well
with Ratcliffe et al. (2025). NetΔ𝑅circ(𝑗)is minimal for young
stars, but at𝑅 circ(𝑗)=8 kpc today it increases toΔ𝑅 circ(𝑗) ≈
5 kpc at ages≳10 Gyr. Similarly, at𝑅 circ(𝑗)=4 kpc today,
both works show that young stars experienced slight inward
redistribution. In the bottom panel, both Ratcliffe et al. (2025)
and FIRE-2 show that𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ(𝑗))increases with age but
only up to≈4 Gyr, and for older stars it flattens (and possibly
decreases), saturating at≲2−2.5 kpc. Therefore, both FIRE-
2 and Ratcliffe et al. (2025) suggest that radial redistribution
in terms of𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ(𝑗))is most effective early in a star’s life
but does not continue to grow indefinitely with age.
Frankel et al. (2020) infer that𝜎(Δ𝑅circ(𝑗))increases mono-
tonically with age,𝜏, as𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ(𝑗))=2.6 kpc(𝜏/6 Gyr) 1/2.
A precise quantitative comparison with Frankel et al. (2020)
is difficult, because their model is radially independent. Nev-
ertheless, the overall amplitudes of FIRE-2 and Frankel et al.
(2020) (and Ratcliffe et al. 2025) are broadly similar at ages
≲4 Gyr, where our two𝑅bins in FIRE-2 bracket Frankel
et al. (2020). At𝑅 circ(𝑗)=8 kpc in FIRE-2, considering also
the galaxy-to-galaxy scatter, the trends in FIRE-2 are consis-
tent with Frankel et al. (2020) up to 6 Gyr, the age limit of
their analysis. Figure 10 also shows an extrapolation of the fit
from Frankel et al. (2020) to older ages (in lighter grey), to
emphasize that our results are not consistent with an extrap-
olated monotonic increase with age from their fit. Therefore,
one shouldnotassume that the strength of radial redistribu-
tion in terms of𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ(𝑗)) increases monotonically with
age indefinitely.
Ratcliffe et al. (2025), Frankel et al. (2020), and our FIRE-
2 simulations all agree that𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ(𝑗)) ≈2 kpc for stars
≈4 Gyr old, suggesting a characteristic amplitude of radial
diffusion in MW-like disks. This is broadly consistent with the
results of Lian et al. (2022), who found𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ(𝑗))=2.25
and 1.85 kpc at𝑅 circ(𝑗)=4±1 and 8±1 kpc in the MW
today for 3 Gyr old stars. In Section 4, we further discuss
these results in comparison to a variety of previous studies.
Finally, we acknowledge that the excellent agreement be-
tween FIRE-2 and Ratcliffe et al. (2025) for the MW in Fig-
ure 10 may be surprising, for a few reasons. First, our FIRE-2
galaxies were not selected to be exact MW analogs, and they
can differ from the MW in some key respects. FIRE-2 galax-
ies typically form disks later than the MW (Yu et al. 2023;
McCluskey et al. 2024), generally exhibit hotter kinematics in
both stars and gas (McCluskey et al. 2025), lack strong bars
(Ansar et al. 2025), and have higher late-time star formation
rates (Gandhi et al. 2022). Thus, the relative impact and timing
of various mechanisms that drive radial redistribution may dif-
fer in the FIRE-2 galaxies versus the MW. For example, in the
Pre-Disk Era, feedback-driven fluctuations in the gravitational
potential drove coherent net outward redistribution in these
FIRE-2 galaxies El-Badry et al. (2016), while some works ar-
gue that the formation and slow-down of the MW’s bar drove
substantial outward redistribution≈8 Gyr ago Haywood et al.
(2024).
Second, Ratcliffe et al. (2025) inferred the degree of radial
redistribution in MW via its effect on metallicity radial gra-
dients, and in their framework, the MW’s metallicity radial
gradient for stars at birth was steeper in the past than today.
By contrast, the metallicity radial gradients of stars at birth in
these FIRE-2 simulations were shallower in the past than today
(Bellardini et al. 2021; Graf et al. 2025a). To be clear, these
FIRE-2 galaxies do agree with the MW that the metallicity
radial gradient is shallower for older stars as measured today
(Graf et al. 2025a), but the interpretation of this trend is dif-
ferent. In FIRE-2, this observed trend in the MW qualitatively
reflects the evolution of the star-forming ISM, while Ratcliffe
et al. (2025) assumed that the increase in stellar radial redis-
tribution with age flattened what was a steeper gradient in the
star-forming ISM for the oldest stars, such that redistribution
inverts the trend with age, as measured today. Thus, it may be
surprising that our results agree so well with the inference for
the MW in Ratcliffe et al. (2025) in Figure 10, given that the
results in Ratcliffe et al. (2025) are based on their model for
the evolution of the MW’s metallicity radial gradient.
The resolution to this is unclear. One possibility is an offset
of competing effects. If the MW has an unusually early-
forming disk, it may have experienced stronger redistribu-
tion early on from the onset of structures like bars and spiral
arms. By comparison, for a later-forming disk, the dynamical
processes that keep a disk thicker and more turbulent longer
themselves may drive stronger dynamical heating and redis-
tribution of stellar orbits. In principle, these two scenarios
should imprint themselves differently in the nature of radial
redistribution, specifically in the amount of cold torquing ver-
sus heating, and we will explore this in Steel et al. (in prep.).
While more work is needed to understand in detail the rela-
tionship between radial redistribution and a disk’s dynamical
history, as a first step for FIRE-2, in the next Section, we
explore possible correlations between the strength of radial
redistribution and disk formation times in FIRE-2.
3.7.Correlations between radial redistribution and galaxy
properties
Finally, we test correlations between the amount of radial
redistribution experienced and various galaxy properties to-
day. These correlations can inform the mechanisms driving
radial redistribution, although we defer a detailed investigation
of the dynamical processes to future work.
Table 2 shows the Spearman rank correlations of the amount
of radial redistribution (both in terms of the median and the
scatter), using each metric of𝑅 orbit, for all stars currently
near the Solar neighborhood,𝑅 now
orbit =7−9 kpc, and for stars

14 Bellardini et al.
TABLE 2
correlations between galaxy properties and the amount of radial redistribution stars experienced
Radial metric
𝑡lb [ (𝑣 𝜙/𝜎 𝑣,3D )form >1] 𝑅★
90 𝑀★
90
𝑅=7−9 kpc𝑅=2−12 kpc 𝑅=7−9 kpc𝑅=2−12 kpc 𝑅=7−9 kpc𝑅=2−12 kpc
𝜌p-val𝜌p-val 𝜌p-val𝜌p-val 𝜌p-val𝜌p-val
Δ𝑅phys -0.69 0.02-0.53 0.09 -0.71 0.02 -0.76 0.01 -0.61 0.05 -0.67 0.02
Δ𝑅⟨R⟩ -0.68 0.02-0.47 0.15 -0.61 0.05 -0.79 0.01 -0.86 0.02 -0.63 0.04
Δ𝑅⟨t⟩ -0.77 0.01-0.41 0.22 -0.65 0.03 -0.75 0.01 -0.76 0.01-0.56 0.08
Δ𝑅circ (𝐸) -0.71 0.03-0.20 0.60 -0.59 0.09 -0.65 0.06 -0.80 0.01-0.37 0.33
Δ𝑅circ (𝑗) 0.01 0.98 -0.63 0.07 -0.26 0.50-0.79 0.01 0.08 0.83-0.80 0.01
𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys) 0.11 0.75 0.14 0.68 0.82 0.01 0.64 0.04 0.26 0.450.68 0.02
𝜎(Δ𝑅 ⟨R⟩ ) 0.31 0.36 0.18 0.61 0.69 0.020.55 0.08 0.51 0.110.71 0.02
𝜎(Δ𝑅 ⟨t⟩ ) 0.15 0.66 0.18 0.61 0.59 0.06 0.55 0.08 0.55 0.080.71 0.02
𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ (𝐸) ) 0.42 0.26 0.22 0.57 0.68 0.050.64 0.06 0.23 0.55 0.55 0.13
𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ (𝑗) ) 0.52 0.15 0.56 0.12 0.90 0.01 0.79 0.01 0.48 0.190.70 0.04
Note. — Correlation strength,𝜌, and significance (p-value), between median (net)Δ𝑅 orbit, or𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit ), for all stars against: the lookback time to disk onset,
𝑡lb [ (𝑣 𝜙/𝜎 𝑣,3D )form >1]; the radius encompassing 90% of the stellar mass today,𝑅 ★
90; the associated stellar mass today,𝑀 ★
90. Correlation strengths and p-values
that are statistically significant (p-value≤0.05) are bold. We select stars in the Solar annulus (𝑅 now
orbit =7−9 kpc) and stars across the disk (𝑅 now
orbit =2−12 kpc).
The first column lists the metric of orbital radius used. Generally, we find statistically significant correlations (p-value<0.05) with𝑅 ★
90 and𝑀 ★
90.Δ𝑅 orbit
correlates negatively with galaxy size and mass, while𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit )correlates positively with them. The age of disk onset (when a long-lived disk first formed)
only meaningfully correlates withΔ𝑅 orbit for stars in the Solar annulus today. In particular,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit ), the most commonly used metric of radial redistribution,
does not correlate with the age of disk onset.
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Rorbit [kpc]
Rphys
Rcirc(j)
4 6 8 10 12
tlb[(v / tot)form > 1] [Gyr]
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50( Rorbit) [kpc]
8 9 10 11 12 13
R*
90 [kpc]
Fig. 11.—Correlations of radial redistribution with galaxy properties
today, for all stars at𝑅 now
orbit =7−9 kpc. We show correlations only with
𝑅phys and𝑅 circ (𝑗), but Table 2 shows correlations for all metrics of orbital
radius; correlations with𝑅 phys are similar to all other metrics except𝑅circ (𝑗).
Top: Median (net) radial redistribution,Δ𝑅 orbit, versus the lookback time of
disk onset (from McCluskey et al. 2024),𝑡lb [ (𝑣 𝜙/𝜎 𝑣,3D )form >1](left), and
the radius that encompasses 90% of the stellar mass,𝑅 ★
90. For all metrics of
𝑅orbit except𝑅 circ (𝑗), disks that formed later (left) or that are smaller today
(right) experienced more outward radial redistribution.Bottom: Similar, but
for the scatter (half width of the 68th percentile),𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit ). In general,
radial redistribution in terms of𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit )does not correlate significantly
with when the disk started to form. However,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit )does correlate with
𝑅★
90, such that larger galaxies experienced more radial redistribution.
across the disk,𝑅 now
orbit =2−12 kpc. We examine 3 galaxy
properties: (1) the lookback time to disk onset, when each
galaxy transitioned from the pre-disk to the early-disk era, from
McCluskey et al. (2024) based on𝑡lb [(𝑣 𝜙/𝜎𝑣,3D )form >1], (2)
the galaxy size today,𝑅★
90 of all stars, and (3) the galaxy stellar
mass today,𝑀 ★
90, with the latter two from Table 1 of Bellardini
et al. (2021).
Figure 11 shows a visual sample of the correlations against
the time of disk onset (left) and the size of the galaxy (right),
for𝑅 phys and𝑅 circ(𝑗). We do not show the other metrics of
𝑅orbit, because their correlations are generally similar to𝑅phys,
and we do not show the trend versus𝑀 ★
90.
In general, for stars near the Solar neighborhood,Δ𝑅 orbit
correlates significantly (p-value<0.05) and negatively with
the transition time from the pre-disk to early-disk era, for ex-
ample, as Figure 11 (top left panel) shows for𝑅 phys. That
is, galaxies that formed their disk later show stronger net out-
wardΔ𝑅 orbit. The likely reason is the stellar-feedback-induced
breathing modes undergone by these galaxies during their pre-
disk, bursty-star-formation era (El-Badry et al. 2016; Yu et al.
2021), which heat the orbits of stars: the later the disk formed,
the longer this occurred, leading to more outwardΔ𝑅orbit. The
exception to this correlation is𝑅 circ(𝑗), likely because these
breathing modes tend to heat the orbits of stars primarily ra-
dially rather than torque them.
However, none of the above correlations are strong when
including all stars across the disk today, presumably because
stars that end up at small𝑅 now
orbit cancel out any effect. Fur-
thermore, and even more importantly, we find no significant
correlation between𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)and the time of disk onset,
for any metric of𝑅 orbit or for either selection range of𝑅 now
orbit.
Thus,earlier-forming disks do not experience more radial re-
distribution in terms of𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit).This may be surprising,
given that many mechanisms thought to drive𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)are
specific to disk morphology, like scattering off of spiral arms
and bars (for example Sellwood 2014). However, this result is
consistent with Figure 8 (bottom), that𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)depends on
age only over the last few Gyr.
In terms of correlations with galaxy size and mass, Table 2
(middle) and Figure 11 (right) show thatΔ𝑅orbit correlatesneg-
ativelywith galaxy size: smaller galaxies experienced more
radial redistribution. This could be because more compact
galaxies have higher stellar densities, driving more scatter-
ing, though Table 2 (right) shows broadly similar negative
correlations for galaxy stellar mass. Broadly speaking, these
correlations hold both near the Solar neighborhood and across
the disk.
𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)shows a more complicated relation with galaxy
size and mass. For stars in the Solar neighborhood,𝜎(Δ𝑅orbit)
correlates positively with galaxy radius: larger galaxies show

15
more spread in radial redistribution. This remains true, though
to a lesser extent, for stars across the disk. However,𝜎(Δ𝑅orbit)
experienced by stars near the Solar neighborhood does not cor-
relate with galaxy stellar mass, while it does correlate strongly
and positively with stars across the disk, such that more mas-
sive galaxies experienced more𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit).
Furthermore, although we do not show it, we test corre-
lations of the medianΔ𝑅 orbit/𝑅★
90 and𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit/𝑅★
90)against
𝑅★
90. The correlations betweenΔ𝑅 orbit/𝑅★
90 and galaxy size are
essentially the same as between the mean radial change and
𝑅★
90. The correlations between𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit/𝑅★
90)and galaxy size
tend to be weaker than the correlations between𝜎(Δ𝑅orbit)and
galaxy size.
4.SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
4.1.Summary
We characterized radial redistribution, including changes to
specific angular momentum and azimuthal velocity, of stars
from birth to today, using 11 MW/M31-mass galaxies from
the FIRE-2 suite of cosmological zoom-in simulations. We
comprehensively tested 5 metrics of measuring galactocentric
orbital radii:
•𝑅 phys, instantaneous physical radius
•𝑅 ⟨R⟩ , spatially-averaged radius (between apocenter and
pericenter)
•𝑅 ⟨t⟩ , time-averaged radius (between apocenter and peri-
center)
•𝑅 circ(𝑗)radius of a circular orbit with the same angular
momentum
•𝑅 circ(𝐸), radius of a circular orbit with the same energy
We examined changes to both median properties, such as
Δ𝑅orbit, and the scatter about this, such as𝜎(Δ𝑅orbit), the latter
being the most commonly used metric for radial redistribution
(or ‘radial migration’). We also examined their dependence
on current radius, formation radius, and stellar age. Our key
results are as follows.
Comparing metrics of orbital radius,𝑅 orbit:
•The instantaneous physical radius,𝑅 phys, is generally
larger than other metrics of𝑅orbit today(Figure 1).𝑅 phys
is most similar to other metrics for young stars (typical
differences≲0.2 kpc), because they are on nearly cir-
cular orbits.𝑅 phys is as much as 3−7 kpc larger than
the other metrics (on average) for older stars.
•If one uses the same definition of𝑅 orbit to select stars
today and measure radial redistribution, the results are
largely insensitive to the metric of𝑅orbit used(Figures 7
and 8). By contrast, these metrics show stronger differ-
ences if selecting stars today based on𝑅phys (Figure D1).
Therefore, one should use the same radius metric to se-
lect stars today and measure radial redistribution.
•Using different metrics of𝑅 orbit leads to similar radial
gradients in metallicity(differences≲0.005 dex kpc −1,
Figure A1). Thus, the metric of𝑅 orbit used does not
significantly affect the metallicity radial gradient, but it
can modestly shift the normalization of the metallicity
profile at a given𝑅 orbit.
Changes to orbital radius,𝑅 orbit, and specific angular
momentum,𝑗, since birth:
•Changes in specific angular momentum,𝑗, generally
coincide with similar changes, in the same direction, to
both orbital radius,𝑅 orbit, and azimuthal velocity,𝑣 𝜙
(Figures 4, B1). Therefore, we summarize results for
changes to𝑗and𝑅 orbit together.
•Net changes to the median𝑅 orbit and𝑗of a stellar pop-
ulation can be significant(Figures 4, 5, 7, 8). In fact,
the primary mode of radial redistribution for stars born
≳4−8 Gyr ago (depending on radius today) is a net
change in the median𝑅 orbit rather than diffusion about
the birth𝑅 orbit,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit). Thus, one must consider
these net changes in the dynamical evolution of a galaxy.
•If one selects stars based on𝑅 orbit today, those born in
the pre-disk or early-disk eras (ages≳4 Gyr) typically
increased in (net)𝑅 orbit and𝑗since birth, while those
born during the late-disk era (ages≲4 Gyr) typically
decreased in𝑅 orbit (≲0.5 kpc) and𝑗since birth(Fig-
ures 5, 7, 8). The net positiveΔ𝑅 orbit for older stars
is a consequence of a galaxy’s inside-out radial growth
(older stars formed when the galaxy was smaller) com-
bined with feedback-driven breathing modes that in-
creased𝑅 orbit for stars at early cosmic times.
•If instead one selects stars at a given𝑅 orbit (≳4 kpc)
at birth, they typically decreased in𝑅 orbit and𝑗since
birth at almost all most ages(Figures C1, C2). The
difference between selecting stars via𝑅 now
orbit and𝑅 form
orbit
(for sufficiently old stars) arises because the stellar den-
sity profile declines with radius: more stars at a given
𝑅now
orbit redistributed outward from smaller radii than re-
distributed inward from larger radii.
•The scatter in radial change,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit), a common
metric of radial redistribution (or ‘radial migration’),
increases with age, but only up to≈3 Gyr. It saturates
at𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit) ≈2 kpcat ages≳3 Gyr (Figure 8).
•Δ𝑅 orbit increases with𝑅orbit today for all but the youngest
stars, while𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)increases with𝑅 orbit today for all
but the oldest stars(Figure 8).
Correlations of radial redistribution with galaxy prop-
erties:
•Galaxies with larger𝑅 ★
90 or𝑀 ★
90 today experienced more
radial redistribution in terms of𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit). However,
we find no significant correlation between the age of
disk onset, when𝑣 𝜙/𝜎𝑣,3D >1, and the amount of
radial redistribution in terms of𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)(Figure 11,
Table 2). This implies that, in a cosmological setting, the
total𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)that stars experienced does not depend
on how old the (thin) disk is. However, earlier-forming
disks experienced less net outward redistribution (in
terms ofΔ𝑅 orbit) since birth, which may arise because
earlier-forming disks had less time for feedback-driven
breathing modes to drive outward redistribution.

16 Bellardini et al.
4.2.Discussion
4.2.1.Caveats
Several caveats accompany our results, particularly when
extending our findings to the MW.
First, we reemphasize that we examined only the changes
of stellar orbits between birth and today, without regard to the
details of the dynamical evolution over time. Furthermore,
our results for radial redistribution incorporate the combined
effects of both cold torquing and (radial) heating, and we
do not attempt to disentangle the relative contributions of
each. Changes in𝑅 circ(𝑗)track changes in𝑗, but we did not
separately track whether this was ‘cold’ versus ‘hot’ torquing.
In Steel et al. (in prep.), we will quantify cold torquing in
these simulations in detail.
Second, our FIRE-2 simulations of MW/M31-mass galax-
ies represent a fairly random (cosmologically representative)
sampling of such galaxies today, at least within isolated or
LG-like environments, so our results most directly describe
the general behavior of MW/M31-mass galaxies and may not
necessarily reproduce the history of the MW specifically. That
said, we examined all of our results separately for Romeo, our
earliest-forming galaxy/disk, which formed within a LG-like
environment, such that it probably provides the best analog to
the MW among our sample. All trends for radial redistribu-
tion in Romeo are broadly similar to our FIRE-2 sample as a
whole.
Third, the FIRE-2 simulations that we analyze do not model
all of the relevant physical processes that act in galaxies.
Some of this omitted physics, such as magnetohydrodynam-
ics (MHD) and cosmic-ray feedback, most likely does not
dramatically alter our results regarding stellar radial redistri-
bution. FIRE-2 galaxies resimulated with MHD have simi-
lar stellar masses, star-formation histories, morphologies, and
ISM/CGM structure (Su et al. 2017; Hopkins et al. 2020).
Cosmic-ray feedback can have a significant impact on galaxy-
wide properties, reducing the star formation rate at late cosmic
times, resulting in stellar masses that are 2-3 times lower to-
day (Chan et al. 2022; Hopkins et al. 2020). However, as
(McCluskey et al. 2024) showed, this cosmic-ray feedback
does not substantially alter the dynamical state of stellar disks
in terms of metrics like𝑣 𝜙/𝜎𝑣 at fixed stellar mass.
The inclusion of supermassive black holes and active galac-
tic nuclei (AGN) feedback could exert a more significant in-
fluence on stellar radial redistribution. AGN feedback is likely
a key regulator of gas content and star formation, especially
within the inner regions of galaxies (Silk & Rees 1998; Croton
et al. 2006; Fabian 2012; Heckman & Best 2014; Alexander
et al. 2025). By injecting energy and momentum into the sur-
rounding gas, AGN can suppress central star formation and
prevent the growth of overly massive bulges (Hopkins et al.
2008; Dubois et al. 2013; Dav´e et al. 2019). In the absence of
this regulation, these FIRE-2 galaxies often have significant
star formation in their central regions, possibly leading to ele-
vated velocity dispersions and stronger outflows in gas (Chan
et al. 2022; Gandhi et al. 2022; Wellons et al. 2023; Marasco
et al. 2025; Liu et al. 2026). Enhanced star formation and
turbulence in the innermost regions, given the lack of AGN,
might lead to increased radial redistribution, at least in the
form of radial heating. That said, as we discuss below, if the
lack of AGN also leads to weaker bars, this instead could lead
to less radial redistribution, or at least less cold torquing. That
said, the typical𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)in our simulations is≈2 kpc at
𝑅≳8 kpc, so the fraction of stars in these𝑅that originate in
the inner galaxy is small.
Another important caveat is that these FIRE-2 galaxies
rarely host strong long-lived bars. Although bars do form
in about half of these FIRE-2 simulations, they are generally
weaker, more ellipsoidal, and shorter-lived than in the ob-
served galaxies (Ansar et al. 2025). As Ansar et al. (2025)
discussed, the dearth of strong long-lived bars in FIRE-2 may
stem from the lack of AGN feedback. Strong bars are ex-
pected to form in dynamically cold baryon-dominated disks
with relatively low gas fractions, and the Auriga and TNG50
simulations, both of which include AGN, produce stronger
and longer-lived bars (Grand et al. 2017; Frankel et al. 2022;
Khoperskov et al. 2024; Fragkoudi et al. 2020, 2025; Frosst
et al. 2025). That said, those simulations also use significantly
different models for ISM cooling, star formation, and stellar
feedback than FIRE-2, making it difficult to disentangle which
ingredients are decisive for forming and sustaining bars.
Long-lived bars impact stellar dynamics and radial redistri-
bution, because they persistently induce torques that change
stars’ angular momenta and/or radial actions (Lynden-Bell
& Kalnajs 1972; Athanassoula 2003; Sellwood & Wilkinson
1993; Saha et al. 2010; Debattista et al. 2019). In some
respects, bars are just additional non-axisymmetric heating
agents within the disk, acting to increase orbital eccentricities
and thus radial redistribution from blurring/diffusion around
birth radii. Simulations find that bar strength is well correlated
with the degree of heating, particularly for young stars (Grand
et al. 2016). Therefore, our FIRE-2 simulations mayunderes-
timatethe amount of radial redistribution, relative to strongly
barred galaxies. Furthermore, bars can also induce coherent,
disk-wide rearrangements of𝑗via cold torquing. The forma-
tion and subsequent slowdown of a bar can induce substantial
coherent outward redistribution, particularly during its early
evolutionary phase (Khoperskov et al. 2020; Chiba et al. 2021;
Baba 2025). Recent work suggests that this bar-driven redistri-
bution may account for the majority of radial redistribution in
the MW, inside the outer Lindblad resonance (Haywood et al.
2024). In turn, our simulations may underestimate angular
momentum changes compared to strongly barred galaxies.
That said, it is not obvious that simulations with weaker
bars necessarily experience less radial redistribution overall,
because the processes that inhibit bar formation may them-
selves drive an amount of radial redistribution similar to a bar.
Thus, while it is clear that a bar can influence dynamics within
a galaxy, it is less clear exactly how the lack of strong bars in
FIRE-2 impacts our results, without a better understanding of
the origin of the lack of strong bars in FIRE-2.
Okalidis et al. (2022) compared radial redistribution in
strongly-barred and weakly- or non-barred galaxies in the Au-
riga simulations, finding that while both samples showed simi-
lar trends for changes in𝑅phys, strongly-barred galaxies showed
enhanced redistribution in𝑅 circ(𝑗). Specifically, compared
to weakly- and non-barred galaxies, strongly-barred galaxies
have higher values for𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ(𝑗)). However, both samples
exhibit net inward redistribution at all𝑅.
Finally, stars in these FIRE-2 simulations typically have hot-
ter kinematics, in terms of larger𝜎 𝑣 /𝑣 𝜙, than those observed
in the MW (McCluskey et al. 2025), at least for stars older than
a few 100 Myr. McCluskey et al. 2025 also showed that the
MW is dynamically colder than nearly all nearby observed disk
galaxies of similar mass. This suggests that in FIRE-2, stars
may experience more radial redistribution from heating than in
the MW. That said, the dynamical state of stars also regulates
how strongly they couple to perturbations, with much theo-

17
retical work finding that resonance-driven torquing, including
‘cold torquing’ induced by the corotation resonance of spiral
arms, is most effective for dynamically cold populations (Sol-
way et al. 2012; Vera-Ciro et al. 2014; Halle et al. 2015; Daniel
& Wyse 2018; Mikkola et al. 2020). Hotter stars, in contrast,
are less able to ‘keep station’ with the perturbing pattern and
are thus less susceptible to cold torquing (Sellwood & Binney
2002). In turn, stars in FIRE-2 simulations may experience
weaker changes in𝑗and, importantly, less radial redistribution
from cold torquing, compared to stars in the MW, as we will
explore in Steel et al. (in prep.).
4.2.2.Radial redistribution is sub-diffusive and can saturate
One of the most important findings of our work is that the
amount of radial redistribution, as quantified by𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit),
doesnotcontinuously increase with age, but saturates for stars
older than≈4 Gyr, which also agrees with the inference for
the MW from Ratcliffe et al. (2025). This contrasts with a
common expectation that radial redistribution follows a diffu-
sive process, increasing as a population ages as𝜏 0.5, where𝜏
is the stellar age (for example Frankel et al. 2020).
Our results also broadly agree with multiple recent cos-
mological zoom-in simulations, in that radial redistribution
increases more gradually with age. Lu et al. (2022) examined
the strength of radial redistribution in terms of𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys)
as a function of stellar age for≈100 galaxies in the NI-
HAO zoom-in simulations (Buck et al. 2020), finding that
𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys)/𝑅 d ≈0.59×𝜏 0.32, where𝑅 d is a galaxy’s disk
scale radius. Thus, radial redistribution is a sub-diffusive pro-
cess in the NIHAO simulations, increasing more slowly with
age than𝜏 0.5.
Similarly, Okalidis et al. (2022) parameterized radial redis-
tribution in the Auriga zoom-in simulations, fitting diffusion
relations for𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys)and𝜎(Δ𝑅 circ(𝑗))at 3 radial ranges in
each of their simulated galaxies. At solar neighborhood-like
radii, they found that radial redistribution increases with age
typically as𝜏 0.35−0.40 .
Dubay et al. (2024) examined radial redistribution in the
h277 cosmological zoom-in simulation (Christensen et al.
2012), finding that it is well described by𝜎(Δ𝑅 phys)=
𝜎𝑅𝑀8 (𝜏/8 Gyr)0.33 (𝑅 form/8 kpc)0.61, with𝜎 𝑅𝑀8 =2.68 kpc
corresponding to the redistribution strength of an 8 Gyr-old
population at𝑅 form =8 kpc. Their age dependence,𝜏 0.33, is
again sub-diffusive, broadly mirroring the behavior we find.
h277 provides a particularly compelling comparison because
it remains, to our knowledge, the only cosmological zoom-in
simulation that reproduces the cold stellar kinematics of the
MW, given h277’s early-forming disk with a quiescent merger
history (Bird et al. 2021). See McCluskey et al. (2025) for
a broader discussion on stellar kinematics in cosmological
simulations and h277’s unique behavior.
Although modern cosmological zoom-in simulations – in-
cluding FIRE-2, NIHAO, Auriga, and h277 – persistently find
that radial redistribution is sub-diffusive, increasingly with age
more slowly than𝜏 0.5, theoretical models attempting to model
and/or recover radial redistribution in the MW routinely pa-
rameterize radial redistribution via a diffusion process (for
example Sanders & Binney 2016; Frankel et al. 2020; Sharma
et al. 2021a). Indeed, the monotonic increase in𝜎(Δ𝑅)re-
ported by Frankel et al. (2020) (and shown in Figure 10 reflects
their model’s fit to such a form.
Our results, combined with numerous other cosmological
simulations, motivate substantially more flexibility in model-
ing assumptions about radial redistribution of stars in the MW,
and all disk galaxies, in terms of𝜎(Δ𝑅), including weaker de-
pendence on age and a possible saturation (on average) for
stars older than≈4 Gyr at𝜎(Δ𝑅) ≈2−3 kpc.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We performed this work using theGizmoAnalysispackage
(Hopkins 2015), the Astropy package (Astropy Collaboration
et al. 2013; Price-Whelan et al. 2018), as well as libraries
from Numpy (Harris et al. 2020), SciPy (Virtanen et al. 2020),
and Matplotlib (Hunter 2007). We also used the online tool
WebPlotDigitizer (Rohatgi 2022).
MAB and AW received support from: NSF via CA-
REER award AST-2045928 and grant AST-2107772. FM
and CS received support from NASA FINESST award
80NSSC24K1484.
We generated simulations using: XSEDE, supported by
NSF grant ACI-1548562; Blue Waters, supported by the NSF;
Frontera allocations AST21010 and AST20016, supported by
the NSF and TACC; Pleiades, via the NASA HEC program
through the NAS Division at Ames Research Center.
The FIRE-2 simulations are publicly available (Wetzel et al.
2023, 2025) athttp://flathub.flatironinstitute.
org/fire. Additional FIRE simulation data is available at
https://fire.northwestern.edu/data. A public ver-
sion of the GIZMO code is available athttp://www.tapir.
caltech.edu/˜phopkins/Site/GIZMO.html.
REFERENCES
Abadi M. G., Navarro J. F., Steinmetz M., Eke V. R., 2003, ApJ, 597, 21
Alexander D. M., et al., 2025, New A Rev., 101, 101733
Anders F., et al., 2017, A&A, 600, A70
Ansar S., Pearson S., Sanderson R. E., Arora A., Hopkins P. F., Wetzel A.,
Cunningham E. C., Quinn J., 2025, ApJ, 978, 37
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2013, A&A, 558, A33
Athanassoula E., 2003, MNRAS, 341, 1179
Baba J., 2025, PASJ,
Barbanis B., Woltjer L., 1967, ApJ, 150, 461
Bellardini M. A., Wetzel A., Loebman S. R., Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Ma X.,
Feldmann R., 2021, MNRAS, 505, 4586
Bellardini M. A., Wetzel A., Loebman S. R., Bailin J., 2022, MNRAS, 514,
4270
Belokurov V., Kravtsov A., 2022, MNRAS, 514, 689
Benincasa S. M., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 497, 3993
Bhattarai B., Loebman S. R., Ness M. K., Wetzel A., Cunningham E. C.,
Parul H., Wiggins A. I., 2024, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2408.02228
Bird J. C., Kazantzidis S., Weinberg D. H., 2012, MNRAS, 420, 913
Bird J. C., Loebman S. R., Weinberg D. H., Brooks A. M., Quinn T. R.,
Christensen C. R., 2021, MNRAS, 503, 1815
Brunetti M., Chiappini C., Pfenniger D., 2011, A&A, 534, A75
Buck T., Obreja A., Macci`o A. V., Minchev I., Dutton A. A., Ostriker J. P.,
2020, MNRAS, 491, 3461
Buder S., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 478, 4513
Carlberg R. G., Sellwood J. A., 1985, ApJ, 292, 79
Carr C., Johnston K. V., Laporte C. F. P., Ness M. K., 2022, MNRAS, 516,
5067
Carrillo A., Ness M. K., Hawkins K., Sanderson R. E., Wang K., Wetzel A.,
Bellardini M. A., 2023, ApJ, 942, 35
Casagrande L., Sch¨onrich R., Asplund M., Cassisi S., Ram´ırez I., Mel´endez
J., Bensby T., Feltzing S., 2011, A&A, 530, A138
Castro S., Rich R. M., Grenon M., Barbuy B., McCarthy J. K., 1997, AJ,
114, 376
Chan T. K., Kereˇs D., Gurvich A. B., Hopkins P. F., Trapp C., Ji S.,
Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., 2022, MNRAS, 517, 597
Chiba R., Friske J. K. S., Sch¨onrich R., 2021, MNRAS, 500, 4710
Christensen C., Quinn T., Governato F., Stilp A., Shen S., Wadsley J., 2012,
MNRAS, 425, 3058
Conroy C., et al., 2022, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2204.02989
Conselice C. J., 2014, ARA&A, 52, 291
Croton D. J., et al., 2006, MNRAS, 365, 11

18 Bellardini et al.
Cui X.-Q., Zhao Y.-H., Chu Y.-Q., et al., 2012, Research in Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 12, 1197
Danhaive A. L., et al., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2503.21863
Daniel K. J., Wyse R. F. G., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 3576
Daniel K. J., Wyse R. F. G., 2018, MNRAS, 476, 1561
Daniel K. J., Schaffner D. A., McCluskey F., Fiedler Kawaguchi C.,
Loebman S., 2019, ApJ, 882, 111
Dav´e R., Angl´es-Alc´azar D., Narayanan D., Li Q., Rafieferantsoa M. H.,
Appleby S., 2019, MNRAS, 486, 2827
De Silva G. M., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 449, 2604
Deason A. J., Belokurov V., 2024, New A Rev., 99, 101706
Debattista V. P., Gonzalez O. A., Sanderson R. E., El-Badry K.,
Garrison-Kimmel S., Wetzel A., Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Hopkins P. F.,
2019, MNRAS, 485, 5073
Dubay L. O., Johnson J. A., Johnson J. W., 2024, ApJ, 973, 55
Dubois Y., Gavazzi R., Peirani S., Silk J., 2013, MNRAS, 433, 3297
Edvardsson B., Andersen J., Gustafsson B., Lambert D. L., Nissen P. E.,
Tomkin J., 1993, A&A, 275, 101
El-Badry K., Wetzel A., Geha M., Hopkins P. F., Kereˇs D., Chan T. K.,
Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., 2016, ApJ, 820, 131
El-Badry K., Wetzel A. R., Geha M., Quataert E., Hopkins P. F., Kereˇs D.,
Chan T. K., Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., 2017, ApJ, 835, 193
El-Badry K., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 473, 1930
Escala I., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 474, 2194
Fabian A. C., 2012, ARA&A, 50, 455
Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Lidz A., Zaldarriaga M., Hernquist L., 2009, ApJ,
703, 1416
Feuillet D. K., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 2326
F¨orster Schreiber N. M., Wuyts S., 2020, ARA&A, 58, 661
Fragkoudi F., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 494, 5936
Fragkoudi F., Grand R. J. J., Pakmor R., G´omez F., Marinacci F., Springel
V., 2025, MNRAS, 538, 1587
Frankel N., Rix H.-W., Ting Y.-S., Ness M., Hogg D. W., 2018, ApJ, 865, 96
Frankel N., Sanders J., Ting Y.-S., Rix H.-W., 2020, ApJ, 896, 15
Frankel N., et al., 2022, ApJ, 940, 61
Freeman K., Bland-Hawthorn J., 2002, ARA&A, 40, 487
Frosst M., Obreschkow D., Ludlow A., Fraser-McKelvie A., 2025, arXiv
e-prints, p. arXiv:2508.14626
Gaia Collaboration Prusti T., de Bruijne J. H. J., Brown A. G. A., et al.,
2016, A&A, 595, A1
Gandhi P. J., Wetzel A., Hopkins P. F., Shappee B. J., Wheeler C.,
Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., 2022, MNRAS, 516, 1941
Garrison-Kimmel S., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 471, 1709
Garrison-Kimmel S., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 481, 4133
Garrison-Kimmel S., et al., 2019a, MNRAS, 487, 1380
Garrison-Kimmel S., et al., 2019b, MNRAS, 489, 4574
Glazebrook K., 2013, PASA, 30, e056
Graf R. L., Wetzel A., Bellardini M. A., Bailin J., 2025a, ApJ, 981, 47
Graf R. L., Wetzel A., Bailin J., Orr M. E., 2025b, ApJ, 991, 139
Grand R. J. J., Springel V., G´omez F. A., Marinacci F., Pakmor R., Campbell
D. J. R., Jenkins A., 2016, MNRAS, 459, 199
Grand R. J. J., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 467, 179
Grenon M., 1989, Ap&SS, 156, 29
Grudi´c M. Y., Hafen Z., Rodriguez C. L., Guszejnov D., Lamberts A., Wetzel
A., Boylan-Kolchin M., Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., 2023, MNRAS, 519, 1366
Gurvich A. B., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 519, 2598
Guszejnov D., Grudi´c M. Y., Offner S. S. R., Boylan-Kolchin M.,
Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Wetzel A., Benincasa S. M., Loebman S., 2020,
MNRAS, 492, 488
Hahn O., Abel T., 2011, MNRAS, 415, 2101
Halle A., Di Matteo P., Haywood M., Combes F., 2015, A&A, 578, A58
Harris C. R., et al., 2020, Nature, 585, 357
Hayden M. R., et al., 2015, ApJ, 808, 132
Haywood M., 2008, MNRAS, 388, 1175
Haywood M., Snaith O., Lehnert M. D., Di Matteo P., Khoperskov S., 2019,
A&A, 625, A105
Haywood M., Khoperskov S., Cerqui V., Di Matteo P., Katz D., Snaith O.,
2024, A&A, 690, A147
Heckman T. M., Best P. N., 2014, ARA&A, 52, 589
Hopkins P. F., 2015, MNRAS, 450, 53
Hopkins P. F., 2017, MNRAS, 466, 3387
Hopkins P. F., Cox T. J., Kereˇs D., Hernquist L., 2008, ApJS, 175, 390
Hopkins P. F., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 480, 800
Hopkins P. F., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 492, 3465
Hopkins P. F., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 525, 2241
Horta D., et al., 2024, MNRAS, 527, 9810
Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing in Science Engineering, 9, 90
Iwamoto K., Brachwitz F., Nomoto K., Kishimoto N., Umeda H., Hix W. R.,
Thielemann F.-K., 1999, ApJS, 125, 439
Izzard R. G., Tout C. A., Karakas A. I., Pols O. R., 2004, MNRAS, 350, 407
Ju M., et al., 2025, ApJ, 978, L39
Kassin S. A., et al., 2012, ApJ, 758, 106
Kazantzidis S., Bullock J. S., Zentner A. R., Kravtsov A. V., Moustakas
L. A., 2008, ApJ, 688, 254
Khoperskov S., Di Matteo P., Haywood M., G´omez A., Snaith O. N., 2020,
A&A, 638, A144
Khoperskov S., Haywood M., Snaith O., Di Matteo P., Lehnert M., Vasiliev
E., Naroenkov S., Berczik P., 2021, MNRAS, 501, 5176
Khoperskov S., Minchev I., Steinmetz M., Ratcliffe B., Walcher J. C.,
Libeskind N. I., 2024, MNRAS, 533, 3975
Kordopatis G., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 3526
Kroupa P., 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231
Krumholz M. R., Gnedin N. Y., 2011, ApJ, 729, 36
Lacey C. G., 1984, MNRAS, 208, 687
Leitherer C., et al., 1999, ApJS, 123, 3
Lian J., et al., 2022, MNRAS, 511, 5639
Lian J., Bergemann M., Pillepich A., Zasowski G., Lane R. R., 2023, Nature
Astronomy,
Liu V., Balser D. S., Wenger T. V., 2026, ApJ, 999, 268
Loebman S. R., Debattista V. P., Nidever D. L., Hayden M. R., Holtzman
J. A., Clarke A. J., Roˇskar R., Valluri M., 2016, ApJ, 818, L6
Lu Y., Buck T., Minchev I., Ness M. K., 2022, MNRAS, 515, L34
Lynden-Bell D., Kalnajs A. J., 1972, MNRAS, 157, 1
Ma X., Hopkins P. F., Wetzel A. R., Kirby E. N., Angl´es-Alc´azar D.,
Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Kereˇs D., Quataert E., 2017, MNRAS, 467, 2430
Ma X., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 493, 4315
Madau P., Dickinson M., 2014, ARA&A, 52, 415
Majewski S. R., Schiavon R. P., Frinchaboy P. M., et al., 2017, AJ, 154, 94
Mannucci F., Della Valle M., Panagia N., 2006, MNRAS, 370, 773
Marasco A., et al., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2503.03818
Marigo P., 2001, A&A, 370, 194
Martinez-Medina L. A., Pichardo B., Moreno E., Peimbert A., 2016,
MNRAS, 463, 459
McCluskey F., Wetzel A., Loebman S. R., Moreno J., Faucher-Gigu`ere
C.-A., Hopkins P. F., 2024, MNRAS, 527, 6926
McCluskey F., Wetzel A., Loebman S., Moreno J., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2506.11840
Melvin T., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 438, 2882
Mikkola D., McMillan P. J., Hobbs D., 2020, MNRAS, 495, 3295
Minchev I., Famaey B., 2010, ApJ, 722, 112
Minchev I., Quillen A. C., 2006, MNRAS, 368, 623
Minchev I., Famaey B., Quillen A. C., Dehnen W., Martig M., Siebert A.,
2012, A&A, 548, A127
Minchev I., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 481, 1645
Nomoto K., Tominaga N., Umeda H., Kobayashi C., Maeda K., 2006,
Nuclear Physics A, 777, 424
Okalidis P., Grand R. J. J., Yates R. M., Springel V., 2022, MNRAS, 514,
5085
Orr M. E., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 521, 3708
Planck Collaboration et al., 2020, A&A, 641, A6
Price-Whelan A. M., et al., 2018, AJ, 156, 123
Quillen A. C., Minchev I., Bland-Hawthorn J., Haywood M., 2009,
MNRAS, 397, 1599
Quinn J. R., et al., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2507.22793
Ratcliffe B., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 525, 2208
Ratcliffe B., et al., 2025, A&A, 698, A267
Rix H.-W., Bovy J., 2013, A&A Rev., 21, 61
Rohatgi A., 2022, Webplotdigitizer: Version 4.6,
https://automeris.io/WebPlotDigitizer
Roˇskar R., Debattista V. P., Quinn T. R., Stinson G. S., Wadsley J., 2008,
ApJ, 684, L79
SDSS Collaboration Adamane Pallathadka G., Aghakhanloo M., Aird J.,
et al., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2507.07093
Saha K., Tseng Y.-H., Taam R. E., 2010, ApJ, 721, 1878
Sameie O., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 522, 1800
Sanders J. L., Binney J., 2016, MNRAS, 457, 2107
Santistevan I. B., Wetzel A., El-Badry K., Bland-Hawthorn J.,
Boylan-Kolchin M., Bailin J., Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Benincasa S., 2020,
MNRAS, 497, 747
Sch¨onrich R., Binney J., 2009a, MNRAS, 396, 203
Sch¨onrich R., Binney J., 2009b, MNRAS, 399, 1145
Sellwood J. A., 2014, Reviews of Modern Physics, 86, 1
Sellwood J. A., Binney J. J., 2002, MNRAS, 336, 785
Sellwood J. A., Wilkinson A., 1993, Reports on Progress in Physics, 56, 173
Sharma S., et al., 2021a, MNRAS, 506, 1761
Sharma S., Hayden M. R., Bland-Hawthorn J., 2021b, MNRAS, 507, 5882
Silk J., Rees M. J., 1998, A&A, 331, L1
Solway M., Sellwood J. A., Sch¨onrich R., 2012, MNRAS, 422, 1363
Sotillo-Ramos D., Donnari M., Pillepich A., Frankel N., Nelson D., Springel
V., Hernquist L., 2023, MNRAS, 523, 3915
Spitoni E., Romano D., Matteucci F., Ciotti L., 2015, ApJ, 802, 129
Spitzer Lyman J., Schwarzschild M., 1951, ApJ, 114, 385
Su K.-Y., Hopkins P. F., Hayward C. C., Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Kereˇs D.,
Ma X., Robles V. H., 2017, MNRAS, 471, 144
Sun X., et al., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2510.08997
Tacconi L. J., et al., 2013, ApJ, 768, 74
Tacconi L. J., Genzel R., Sternberg A., 2020, ARA&A, 58, 157
¨Ubler H., et al., 2019, ApJ, 880, 48
Vera-Ciro C., D’Onghia E., Navarro J., Abadi M., 2014, ApJ, 794, 173
Villalobos ´A., Helmi A., 2008, MNRAS, 391, 1806
Virtanen P., et al., 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261
Wang X., et al., 2022, ApJ, 938, L16
Wellons S., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 520, 5394

19
Wetzel A. R., Hopkins P. F., Kim J.-h., Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Kereˇs D.,
Quataert E., 2016, ApJ, 827, L23
Wetzel A., et al., 2023, ApJS, 265, 44
Wetzel A., et al., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2508.06608
Wheeler C., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 490, 4447
Wielen R., 1977, A&A, 60, 263
Wiersma R. P. C., Schaye J., Theuns T., Dalla Vecchia C., Tornatore L.,
2009, MNRAS, 399, 574
Wisnioski E., et al., 2019, ApJ, 886, 124
Xiang M., Rix H.-W., 2022, Nature, 603, 599
Yu S., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 505, 889
Yu S., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 523, 6220
Zhang H., et al., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2512.09987
van den Hoek L. B., Groenewegen M. A. T., 1997, A&AS, 123, 305
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
[Fe/H] [dex]
Age = 0-1 Gyr
Rphys
RR
Rt
Rcirc(E)
Rcirc(j)
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
Age = 5-6 Gyr
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
[Fe/H] [dex]
Age = 10-11 Gyr
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.300
0.275
0.250
0.225
0.200
0.175
0.150
0.125
0.100
0.075
Age = 0-14 Gyr
Rnow
orbit [kpc]
Fig. A1.—Stellar [Fe/H] versus current orbital radius,𝑅 now
orbit, in bins of stellar
age, averaged across our galaxies. Lines compare our 5 different metrics of
orbital radius. The bottom right panel shows all stars, regardless of age, today.
The choice of orbital radius metric moderately affects the normalization of
the abundance profile, more so for older stars, with𝑅 circ (𝑗)showing the
lowest normalization and𝑅 phys showing the highest normalization. However,
the radial gradients are all consistent within≲0.005 dex kpc −1 at any age.
The [Fe/H] profile for all stars also agrees across the radius metrics, except
for𝑅 circ (𝑗), which is systematically larger at most𝑅.We conclude that
the choice of orbital radius metric only weakly affects the metallicity radial
gradient.
APPENDIX
A. EFFECT OF ORBITAL RADIUS ON METALLICITY
PROFILES
To explore further the effect of the metric for orbital ra-
dius,𝑅 orbit, on galaxy properties, Figure A1 shows the average
[Fe/H] versus present-day orbital radius,𝑅 now
orbit, for stars in
bins of age, using the 5 metrics of𝑅 orbit. We show results
for mono-age populations sampling the three different eras of
disk formation (pre-disk, early-disk, and late-disk), specified
in Section 2.2.
The primary effect of varying the metric of𝑅orbit is an offset
to the normalization of the abundance profile at a given𝑅orbit.
This is a weak effect for the young stars, which are all on near-
circular orbits. The difference is strongest for the oldest stars,
which tend to be on the most eccentric orbits, so the metrics
of𝑅 orbit are most different (see Figure 1).
However, we find that the choice of radius metric has little
effect on thegradient. We measure the strength of the radial
abundance in [Fe/H] for each definition of orbital radius for
stars in 1 Gyr bins of age (not shown), and we find that the
gradient is always consistent within≲0.005 dex kpc −1 at
any age, at least at sufficiently small𝑅where a single slope
describes the gradient well. This is a small effect relative to
the variations in radial gradients across these galaxies, from
−0.24 to−0.05dex kpc −1 for young stars today (Bellardini
et al. 2022).
This result is generally consistent with the observational
analysis of the MW in Lian et al. (2022) (their Figures 3 and
A2). They measured [Fe/H] of stars as a function of stellar age
in different bins of𝑅(analogous to our𝑅 phys) and ‘guiding
center radius’ (analogous to our𝑅 circ(𝑗)). The radial profiles
of their sample are qualitatively consistent regardless of their
definition of𝑅, but their profiles show a normalization offset.
The notable difference is that their abundance profile measured
via guiding radius is not consistently lower [Fe/H] at a given
𝑅, unlike our abundance profile measured with𝑅 circ(𝑗).
Figure A1 (bottom right) also shows the abundance profile
for all stars today, rather than for mono-age populations. All
metrics of𝑅 orbit are quantitatively consistent (beyond≈1 kpc)
except for𝑅 circ(𝑗). The abundance profile for all stars mea-
sured via𝑅 circ(𝑗)is systematically larger for all radii≳1 kpc.
This is likely driven by the negative radial gradient in age
within these galaxies (for example Ma et al. 2017), a result
of inside-out radial growth (Graf et al. 2025b), in conjunction
with𝑅 circ(𝑗)being a systematically smaller measure of radius
than the other radial metrics. Figure A1 (bottom right) also
shows a ‘break’𝑅, where the galaxies transition from a neg-
ative gradient in [Fe/H] in the inner galaxy to a positive/flat
gradient in the outer galaxy (see also Graf et al. 2025a). Lian
et al. (2023) found a similar break𝑅in the light-weighted
stellar [Fe/H] profile of the MW. Our results suggest that using
𝑅circ(𝑗)leads to a systematically smaller break𝑅.
B. EFFECT OF RADIAL SELECTION ACROSS THE
GALAXY
Figures 2 and 4 showed trends for all stars across the disk,
within a range𝑅 now
phys =2−12 kpc. This upper limit approx-
imately corresponds to the typical𝑅 ★
90 of these galaxies (see
Bellardini et al. 2021, Table 1), though the lower limit is more
ambiguous. We use𝑅 now
phys >2 kpc, based on where stars gen-
erally form on circular orbits in these simulations at𝑧≈0.
Here we test the dependence of our results on that choice, by
also using𝑅 now
phys >0 kpc and>4 kpc.
We do not show the effects on Figure 2 (right), because we
find essentially no change when varying the selection mini-
mum𝑅 now
phys. Selecting all stars in the disk shifts the amount of
redistribution down by an average of≈5% and selecting stars
at 4−12 kpc shifts the trend up by≈3%. The shape is un-
changed. The variation is most noticeable for stars older than
≈8 Gyr, because they have the strongest radial dependence to
their orbital circularity.
Figure B1 recreates Figure 4 using different selection min-
imum𝑅 now
phys. Most trends remain qualitatively similar, es-
peciallyΔ𝑣 𝜙. The biggest differences are for the oldest stars.
Specifically, when selecting all stars across𝑅now
phys =0−12 kpc,
Δ𝑗andΔ𝑅 phys are near 0 or even negative, even at old ages.

20 Bellardini et al.
100
0
100
200
j [kpc km s 1]
4 R 12 kpc
2 R 12 kpc
0 R 12 kpc
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Rphys [kpc]
10
0
10
20
30
40
v  [km s 1]
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0j/|jform|
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Rphys/Rform
phys
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
v /|vform|
Age Gyr
Fig. B1.—Same as Figure 4, but selecting stars across different ranges of𝑅 phys today. Solid lines show our fiducial selection. Because of the declining density
profile of stars, the choice of minimum𝑅 phys significantly can change the population of stars included, so selecting stars just in the ‘disk’ region (𝑅≳2−4 kpc)
versus including stars in the ‘bulge’ region can affect the picture of the galaxy overall. In general, the radial selection has a weak effect for younger stars, but the
increases in angular momentum, radius, and azimuthal velocity for older stars are weaker when including stars at smaller𝑅 phys today.
This is because stars in the inner galaxy today have experienced
little or negativeΔ𝑗andΔ𝑅 phys, and the declining density pro-
file of these galaxies means that a significant fraction of stars
today are at𝑅 now
phys <2 kpc, which shifts the disk-wide average.
This, coupled with systematically older stars near the galactic
center, leads to a significant decrease in outward redistribution
for these effects for older stars. We find the opposite effect in
selecting stars at larger𝑅 now
phys =4−12 kpc.
This test reinforces that the trends in radial redistribution
depend on the radial range one uses to select stars, and ‘galaxy-
wide’ trends can be substantially different depending on the
exact radial range of choice. This is why we examine most
trends in this work for stars at a given𝑅 now or𝑅 form.
C. SELECTING STARS BY BIRTH RADIUS
Previously, we showed trends selecting stars based on their
orbital radius today, motivated by observational analyses of the
MW and nearby galaxies. Here, we instead examine trends
selecting stars by their orbital radius at birth,𝑅 form
orbit.
Similar to Figure 5, Figure C1 shows the fractional change
in angular momentum,𝑗, relative to its value today, as a func-
tion of age, but now for stars selected by𝑅 form
orbit. Now, across
nearly all ages and𝑅, the medianΔ𝑗 <0, unlike in Figure 5.
Again, this difference mainly reflects the declining stellar den-
sity profile of galaxies, such that even if the same number of
stars at a given𝑅 form
orbit increased and decreased in𝑗since birth,
at a given𝑅 now
orbit, a larger population will have redistributed
outward from smaller𝑗than inward from larger𝑗.
Again, the fractional difference inΔ𝑗is smaller for younger
stars, consistent with disk settling and younger stars forming
on more circular orbits. There is little to no dependence on
age for stars born in the inner disk, but the dependence on age
is strong for stars born at larger radii.
Stars selected via𝑅 circ(𝑗)at birth experienced a larger frac-
tional decrease in𝑗. This is because stars at a given𝑅 circ(𝑗)
have the maximum possible𝑗, by definition, so at a given𝑅form
orbit
they had more𝑗to lose. By contrast, for the other metrics of
𝑅orbit, stars on eccentric orbits could have large𝑅 form
orbit even if
they had small𝑗, so on average they had less𝑗to lose.
Figure C1 (bottom) shows that the trends for𝜎(Δ𝑗/|𝑗 now|)
for stars selected by𝑅 form
orbit are broadly consistent across all
metrics. This contrasts with Figure 5 (bottom), where stars
selected via𝑅 circ(𝑗)have systematically lower scatter than the
other metrics. This is because we divide by|𝑗 now|: in Figure 5
|𝑗 now|correlates exactly with𝑅 now
circ (𝑗)(by definition), where
here|𝑗 now|correlates more weakly with𝑅 form
circ (𝑗), so this adds
more scatter.
Figure C2 is the same as Figures 7 and 8 except we select
stars via𝑅 form
orbit. Similar to the trends for𝑗, stars selected by
𝑅now
orbit experiencedΔ𝑅 orbit >0, while here stars selected by
𝑅form
orbit generally experiencedΔ𝑅 orbit <0. Thus, stars typically
redistribute inward from their birth𝑅, so the positive redistri-
bution of stars when selecting them by𝑅now
orbit again stems from
the declining density profile of galaxies.
Figure C2 also shows𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit), which shows similar
trends as for selecting stars via𝑅 now
orbit. In particular, the value
of𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)at a given age or𝑅 orbit is remarkably similar re-
gardless of whether one selects stars based on𝑅 now
orbit or𝑅 form
orbit.
Figure C2 qualitatively agrees with Okalidis et al. (2022)
(their Figure 6). They found that, at a given birth𝑅, the peak
present-day𝑅of stars decreases with age, that is, older stars
redistribute inward more than younger stars.

21
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
j / |jnow|
Rform
orbit = 4±0.25 kpc
Rphys
RR
Rt
Rcirc(E)
Rcirc(j)
Rform
orbit = 8±0.25 kpc Rform
orbit = 12±0.25 kpc
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0
1
2
3
4
( j / |jnow|)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Age [Gyr]
Fig. C1.—Same as Figure 5, but selecting stars based on orbital radiusat birth, instead of today. Now, most stars that formed at a given𝑅 orbit have lost𝑗since
birth. The gain in𝑗in Figure 5 when selecting (sufficiently old) stars by𝑅 now
orbit arises because of the declining density profile of the galaxy: more stars at a given
𝑅now
orbit redistributed outward from smaller𝑗than redistributed inward from larger𝑗. This fractional decrease in𝑗is approximately constant with age for stars that
formed in the inner galaxy, but it grows with age for stars that formed at larger radii. Similar to Figure 5,𝜎(bottom) increases with age.
D. SELECTING STARS BY INSTANTANEOUS
PHYSICAL RADIUS
Throughout, we have shown that the results for radial re-
distribution, in terms of bothΔ𝑅 orbit and𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit), are re-
markably similar, regardless of the metric for𝑅 orbit used, as
long as one self-consistently uses the same𝑅orbit to select stars
and measure redistribution. Here we show that using different
metrics of𝑅 orbit when selecting stars versus measuring redis-
tribution leads to less similar results, and with larger scatter.
Figure D1 is the same as Figure 8, except in all cases we se-
lect stars via𝑅 now
phys (in bins of width 0.5 kpc). While the trends
in Figure D1 (top) are qualitatively consistent with Figure 8
(top), they are quantitatively different. In particular, there is
much less similarity among the metrics, andΔ𝑅 orbit is more
likely to be negative at small𝑅 now
phys.Δ𝑅 orbit tends to be most
positive for𝑅 phys and smallest (or most negative) for𝑅 circ(𝑗).
𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit)is systematically larger selecting stars via𝑅 now
phys
than selecting via𝑅 orbit, espeically for for𝑅 circ(𝑗), as in Fig-
ure 8. That said, the increase is typically≲1 kpc.
This paper was built using the Open Journal of Astrophysics
LATEX template. The OJA is a journal which provides fast and
easy peer review for new papers in theastro-phsection of the
arXiv, making the reviewing process simpler for authors and
referees alike. Learn more athttp://astro.theoj.org.

22 Bellardini et al.
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Rnow
orbit Rform
orbit  [kpc]
Age = 0 - 1 Gyr 
4
3
2
1
0
Age = 5 - 6 Gyr 
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
Age = 10 - 11 Gyr 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0
1
2
3
4
( Rorbit) [kpc]
 Rphys
RR
Rt
Rcirc(E)
Rcirc(j)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Rform
orbit  [kpc]
0
1
2
3
4
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0
1
2
3
4
2
1
0
Rnow
orbit Rform
orbit  [kpc]
Rform
orbit = 4±0.25 kpc
Rphys
RR
Rt
Rcirc(E)
Rcirc(j)
6
4
2
0
Rform
orbit = 8±0.25 kpc
8
6
4
2
0
Rform
orbit = 12±0.25 kpc
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0
1
2
3
4
( Rorbit) [kpc]
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Age [Gyr]
0
1
2
3
4
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0
1
2
3
4
Fig. C2.—Same as Figures 7 and 8, but selecting stars based on orbital radiusat birth, instead of today. Top panels show radial redistribution versus𝑅 form
orbit in
bins of stellar age, while bottom panels show the same trends versus stellar age in bins of𝑅form
orbit. Now, the medianΔ𝑅 orbit is almost always negative, with stronger
inward redistribution for older stars and at larger radii. The outward redistribution in Figures 7 and 8, when selecting (sufficiently old) stars by𝑅 now
orbit, arises
because of the declining density profile of the galaxy: more stars at a given𝑅 now
orbit redistributed outward from smaller𝑅than redistributed inward from larger𝑅.
However,𝜎(Δ𝑅 orbit )here is remarkably similar to that in Figures 7 and 8, regardless of whether one selects stars via𝑅 form
orbit or𝑅 now
orbit.

23
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Rnow
orbit Rform
orbit  [kpc]
Rnow
phys = 4±0.25 kpc
Rphys
RR
Rt
Rcirc(E)
Rcirc(j)
0
2
4
Rnow
phys = 8±0.25 kpc
0
2
4
6
8
Rnow
phys = 12±0.25 kpc
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0
1
2
3
Rorbit [kpc]
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Age [Gyr]
0
1
2
3
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0
1
2
3
Fig. D1.—Same as Figure 8, using different metrics of orbital radius to measure radial redistribution, but here in all cases we select stars via𝑅 phys today.
Selecting stars using a different radius metric than for measuring radial redistribution leads to significantly less agreement between the radius metrics, especially
in terms ofΔ𝑅 orbit.This motivates the importance of being self-consistent in how one selects stars and how one measures radial redistribution.