Title: Choosing the right MCMC sampler: a systematic benchmark of gradient-free methods
Authors: Colin M. Poppelaars, Marcel P. van Daalen
Published: 2026-05-28
Categories: astro-ph.IM, astro-ph.CO, astro-ph.GA

MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026) Preprint 1 June 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.3
Choosing the right MCMC sampler: a systematic benchmark of
gradient-free methods
Colin M. Poppelaars1★ & Marcel P. van Daalen1
1Leiden Observatory, Leiden University, PO Box 9513, NL-2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
We present a set of metrics and methods for testing and comparing a range of modern gradient-free Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) samplers against the commonly used Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm. The goal is to quantify key performance
metrics, including sampler ergodicity, robustness and overall likelihood performance. To provide a controlled and interpretable
testbed, we use the Rosenbrock function and Neal’s funnel as representative unimodal cases, while Gaussian random likelihood
landscapes in three, five, and eight dimensions serve as multimodal test scenarios. The samplers considered include affine-
invariant moves from the literature, such as the stretch and walk moves, the differential evolution move, and the snooker move.
Weadditionallyintroducetwonovelvariations:amodifiedstretchmovethatincorporatesaPrincipalComponentAnalysis(PCA)
transformation, and a hybrid blend move that combines features of both differential evolution and stretch dynamics. Beyond
sampler evaluation, we demonstrate reconstructing likelihood landscapes from sampled points using a quadtree algorithm.
Additionally, we explore the use of optimisation algorithms to refine the best parameter set in terms of its likelihood, and find
consistentimprovementsinlog-likelihoodvalues,withthepost-samplinggainbecomingmoresignificantinhigher-dimensional
problems. Our comparative results of sampler testing show that the differential evolution algorithm, when tuned to a target
acceptance fraction of 25%, consistently outperforms all other samplers in terms of ergodicity, robustness, and likelihood
performance.
Key words:methods: data analysis – methods: numerical – methods: statistical
1 INTRODUCTION
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are a class of algo-
rithmsusedforsamplingcomplexprobabilitydistributions.Theyare
particularlyusefulinBayesianinference,whereoneseekstoexplore
theposteriordistributionovermodelparametersgivenobserveddata.
Thisisoftenrequiredwhentheposteriorisnotanalyticallytractable,
particularly in models with many parameters. Rather than return-
ing a single point estimate, MCMC methods generate a sequence of
correlated samples from the target distribution. These samples col-
lectivelyapproximatetheposteriorandallowforrobustestimationof
notonlythemostprobableparametervaluesbutalsotheirassociated
uncertainties. This sets MCMC apart from standard optimisation
techniques,whichtypicallyaimto optimisealossfunctiontoobtain
a best-fit solution without quantifying uncertainty. MCMC is par-
ticularly powerful in exploring high-dimensional parameter spaces,
wheregrid-search-basedoptimisationiscomputationallyprohibitive,
as the number of possible parameter sets grows infinitely large. The
name “Markov Chain Monte Carlo” reflects its two fundamental
components: a Markov Chain and a Monte Carlo part. The Markov
chain refers to the sequence of samples generated by the algorithm.
Each sample depends only on the previous sample. This property
is known as the Markov property. It implies that the states in the
chain are memoryless. Therefore, future states depend only on the
★ E-mail: colin.poppelaars@gmail.com
current state and are conditionally independent of all earlier states.
We illustrate the idea of a Markov chain in figure 1. It starts from
an initial position, after which it adds new elements, resulting in
a chain. The Monte Carlo part highlights the use of random sam-
plingtechniquestoperformnumericalapproximations.MonteCarlo
simulations involve repeated random draws to probabilistically es-
timate quantities that are often analytically intractable. In MCMC,
thisisusedforstochasticexplorationoftheparameterspacethrough
random proposals and acceptance criteria.
ThecoreideaofMCMCistoconstructaMarkovchainwhoseequi-
librium distribution matches the target posterior distribution. This is
achievedbyevaluatingthelikelihoodfunctionatsuccessivepointsin
parameterspaceandacceptingorrejectingproposedsamplesaccord-
ingtoacriterionthatensuresthatthechainsatisfiesdetailedbalance.
Detailedbalancemeansthatthetransitionprobabilityfromastate ®𝑋
to ®𝑋new is equal to the reverse transition probability. When detailed
balanceholds,theposteriorremainsunchangedunderthechain’sdy-
namics.Bysatisfyingdetailedbalance,theMarkovchainisergodic.
This implies that the long-run frequency with which each state is
visitedbecomesproportionaltoitsposteriorprobability.Inpractice,
however,thechainmustfirstmovefromitsinitialstatetowardregions
of high posterior probability. This is known as the burn-in period.
During this initial phase the samples are strongly influenced by the
starting point and may therefore not yet represent the target distri-
bution. To avoid biasing statistical estimates, the samples generated
during the burn-in are discarded before analysing the chain. After
©2026 The Authors
arXiv:2605.30412v1  [astro-ph.IM]  28 May 2026

2C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
Figure 1.An illustration of a Markov chain. The chain starts from an initial
position,fromwhichproposalsarecreated.Onceaproposalisacceptedbased
on the acceptance criterion, the sample is added to the chain. This process is
repeatedfor𝑁timesuntilthechainlengthisreachedorifanothertermination
cause has been reached. Here𝑁=5.
thisinitialphase,thechainisexpectedtohaveconvergedsufficiently
close to the stationary distribution, such that the remaining samples
can be considered representative draws from the posterior.
MCMC methods have become a central tool in modern as-
trophysics, particularly in exploring high-dimensional parameter
spaces. Semi-analytic galaxy formation models such as L-Galaxies
(Henriques et al. 2020) often contain dozens of coupled parame-
ters describing processes like star formation, feedback processes,
gascoolingandhydrodynamics.Thismakesefficientsamplingtech-
niquesessentialforparametercalibrationanduncertaintyestimation.
Beyond galaxy formation, MCMC techniques are also widely used
in exoplanet science (e.g. Nelson et al. 2013), where they enable the
inference of orbital parameters, planetary masses, and atmospheric
properties from noisy observational data. Many other examples of
usesofMCMCmethodsinotherastrophysicalfields,suchascosmo-
logical analysis, can be found in e.g. Trotta (2017); Sharma (2017).
Improvementsinsamplingstrategies,therefore,havedirectrelevance
forabroadrangeofastrophysicalapplicationswhererobuststatistical
inference is required.
Broadlyspeaking,MCMCsamplersfallintotwocategories:those
that use gradient information and those that do not. Gradient-based
samplers are generally more efficient in high-dimensional spaces
due to their ability to follow the structure of the posterior. However,
theirapplicabilityislimitedtomodelswheregradientinformationis
available. Consequently, gradient-free methods are more widely ap-
plicable,butthesetypicallysufferfromreducedsamplingefficiency.
Afoundationalalgorithmofagradient-basedsamplerisHamiltonian
Monte Carlo (HMC), which uses Hamiltonian dynamics to propose
new samples. By simulating trajectories along the gradient of the
posterior,HMCenablesefficienttraversaloftheparameterspace,re-
ducingrandomwalkbehaviourandimprovingconvergencetothetar-
get posterior. This makes it especially effective in high-dimensional
problems (e.g. Neal 2011). Beyond HMC, recent innovations in this
class include non-reversible samplers based on piecewise determin-
istic Markov processes (PDMPs). These samplers introduce deter-
ministic motions interrupted by stochastic events. The idea is that
between events, the trajectories of sampling are deterministically
understood. This leads to continuous-time dynamics that improve
mixing and eliminate trajectory tuning. Notable methods include
the Zig-Zag sampler (Bierkens et al. 2019), the Boomerang sampler
(Bierkens et al. 2020), and the Bouncy Particle Sampler (Bouchard-
Côté et al. 2018).
In parallel, development in gradient-free MCMC methods has
alsoadvancedconsiderablysincethefoundationalworkofMetropo-
lis et al. (1953). Many efforts have aimed to improve robustness,
sampling efficiency, and scalability in the absence of gradient in-
formation. A promising direction in this context involves the use
of machine learning techniques to overcome classical limitations of
gradient-free MCMC. One example is Posterior Contouring Monte
Carlo (pocoMC, Lange et al. 2022), which combines normalising
flows with traditional MCMC sampling. By learning an invertible
transformation of the posterior into a simpler latent space, pocoMC
enables efficient proposals that adapt to complex distributions, in-
cluding those that are multimodal or highly anisotropic.
Arelatedapproachisflow-basedMCMC,wherenormalisingflows
are trained to flatten the geometry of the posterior. These flows are
often incorporated into a Metropolis–Hastings framework as flexi-
ble proposal distributions, preserving the correctness of the chain
while benefiting from the expressivity of the learned transformation
(Neal et al. 2021). Hybrid strategies such as surrogate-accelerated
MCMC further extend this idea by introducing emulators, such as
neural networks or Gaussian processes, that approximate the likeli-
hood function. This is especially useful when model evaluations are
computationally expensive (e.g. Green et al. 2022).
Therehasalsobeendevelopmentinadaptiveandensemble-based
samplers. Adaptive methods incorporate feedback mechanisms that
adjust proposal scales or directions in response to the evolving be-
haviour of the chain (e.g. Haario et al. 1999, 2001). Ensemble sam-
plers, by contrast, operate with a population of (parallel) chains,
using their collective state to inform new proposals. A widely used
implementation is theEMCEEpackage, based on the affine-invariant
ensemble sampler from Goodman & Weare (2010), and commonly
employed in astrophysical parameter inference (Foreman-Mackey
etal.2013).InadditiontoEMCEE’sstretchmove,thereexistsawhole
collection of ensemble methods. Examples include the differential
evolution algorithm of ter Braak (2006); Nelson et al. (2013), the
snookersamplerofGilksetal.(1994);terBraak&Vrugt(2008),the
walkmove(Goodman&Weare2010),andthet-walkmove(Christen
& Fox 2007).
ThedistinctionbetweenMCMCalgorithmshasprofoundimplica-
tions for algorithmic efficiency and scalability. Gradient-based sam-
plersleveragethegradientofthelogposteriordistributiontoinform
their proposal mechanisms. By exploiting local geometric informa-
tion,theycantraversetheparameterspacemoreefficientlythantheir
gradient-free counterparts. Gradient information allows the sampler
to follow the contours of regions with high posterior density, rather
thantakinguninformedrandomwalkstypicalofgradient-freemeth-
ods (Betancourt 2017). In continuous sample spaces, the gradient
can be interpreted as defining a vector field that is aligned with
the posterior landscape. If this field is well-aligned with the under-
lying geometry of the target distribution, it can guide the sampler
towards high-probability regions, replacing inefficient random walk
behaviourwithdirectionally-biasedmovement.Repeatedapplication
of such informed steps generates trajectories that are more efficient
forexploringtheposterior.Thisoftenresultsinsuchsamplersrequir-
ing fewer samples to capture the target distribution accurately (e.g.
Neal 2011; Betancourt 2017). However, to effectively exploit gradi-
entinformation,thesemethodstypicallyrequireadditionalgeometric
structure to remove dependencies on the specific parametrisation of
the model. This is necessary because the raw gradient alone is often
not sufficient; its sensitivity must be correctly aligned with the local
curvature of the posterior (Betancourt 2017). Additionally, they are
alsomorecomplextoimplement;impropersettingscanleadtoinef-
ficient sampling or instability. They may suffer from drifting, which
is the result of numerical error accumulation. This drift refers to the
growing discrepancy between the true posterior trajectory and the
numerical approximation produced by the sampler. Such drift be-
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler3
comesmoresevereinveryhigh-dimensionalspacesandcandegrade
the sampler’s ability to accurately represent the target distribution.
Contrary to gradient-based samplers, gradient-free methods do
not require derivative information. Instead, they generate proposals
through random-walk behaviour. Gradient-free methods are much
simpler to implement since they require only a black-box evaluation
of the posterior. However, these methods suffer from several chal-
lenges, which are particularly apparent in high-dimensional spaces.
The random-walk proposals of these methods tend to scale poorly
with dimensionality, which leads to high autocorrelation and slow
exploration from the chains (e.g. Roberts et al. 1997). Additionally,
these methods often require careful tuning of the proposal distri-
bution width, which can be non-trivial in multimodal posteriors or
parameter spaces with narrow, high-curvature regions (e.g. Christen
& Fox 2005). Such posteriors don’t have a single value that fits well
for all their space. Adaptive schemes can alleviate some of these
issues, but they often lag behind the efficiency of gradient-based
methods in smooth, high-dimensional settings.
When gradient information is not directly available, one possi-
ble strategy is to approximate the posterior with a surrogate model
that is differentiable. Christen & Fox (2005) propose a two-stage
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm in which an inexpensive surrogate is
used to approximate the posterior and pre-screen proposed samples
before evaluating the full, expensive posterior. While their original
method does not require gradients, this framework naturally allows
theuseofadifferentiablesurrogate.Bychoosingadifferentiablesur-
rogate function, approximate gradient information can be extracted
andusedtoinformproposalmechanismssuchasHamiltonianMonte
Carlo. In this way, gradient-free samplers can be enhanced with
surrogate-derived gradient information without modifying the un-
derlyingexpensivemodel.However,suchmodificationscanbetech-
nicallydemandingandcomputationallyexpensive.Consequently,the
gains of switching to a gradient-based sampler might not outweigh
the costs.
The aim of the current work is to to define key performance met-
rics for gradient-free MCMC samplers, in order to determine which
samplers converge most quickly or reliably for a given likelihood
landscape, and/or can most efficiently explore it. This allows for
a more informed sampler choice in situations where no gradient
is available, and can lead to order-of-magnitude improvements in
runtime in high-dimensional settings, which are not uncommon in
astronomy.
This paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we introduce
the foundational algorithm of MCMC sampling, the Metropolis-
Hastings algorithm Hastings (1970). Following this, we shall
focus on variations of this algorithm as well as the collection of
affine-invariant ensemble samplers. After introducing all samplers
included in this paper, we turn to our toy models in section 3.
These are used to compare and rank the samplers. We explore
two kinds of toy models: unimodal and multimodal models. Our
unimodal models consist of the Rosenbrock Rosenbrock (1960)
and Neal’s funnel Neal (2003) functions. For our multimodal
test cases, we introduce the concept of𝑁-dimensional Gaussian
landscapes. Also in section 3, we demonstrate the reconstruction of
our multimodal likelihood landscapes through an application of a
quadtree algorithm. Next, in section 4, we put our samplers to the
test using various metrics regarding the ergodicity, convergence,
performance and robustness. We introduce an ergodicity metric that
aims to compare cell occupation from sampling our multimodal
landscapes to the expectation values of these cells. Additionally,
we also introduce performance and robustness metrics concerning
the likelihood estimations from the samplers. The performance
metric maps the median performance over many random seed runs,
whereas the robustness metric maps the discrepancy between the
best and worst performing chain populations of samplers over these
runs. Finally, we summarise and discuss our findings in section 5,
where we also outline future directions of the research field.
2 MCMC ALGORITHMS
2.1 Classic MCMC
2.1.1 The Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm
ThebasicalgorithmofMCMCsamplingistheMetropolis-Hastings
(MH) algorithm, which followed from the development of the foun-
dational Metropolis et al. (1953) algorithm. The MH algorithm pro-
poses samples from a target distribution using random proposals
based on the current state of the Markov chain. Steps are either
accepted or rejected based on their consistency with the detailed
balance condition. The Metropolis algorithm assumes symmetric
proposal distributions, allowing for a simple acceptance ratio that
only depends on the posterior:
𝛼=min
 
1, 𝑃(𝑌| ®𝑋𝑖
new
)𝑃( ®𝑋𝑖
new
)
𝑃(𝑌| ®𝑋𝑖)𝑃( ®𝑋𝑖)
!
=min
 
1, 𝜋( ®𝑋new
𝑖 )
𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖)
!
,(1)
where ®𝑋𝑖 represents the model parameters and𝑌the data against
which the model is tested.𝑃( ®𝑋𝑖)represents our prior information
about the model parameters, whereas𝜋represents the posterior dis-
tribution.𝑃(𝑌| ®𝑋𝑖)is the likelihood of observing data𝑥given the
current model ®𝑋𝑖.
A uniform random number between 0 and 1 can then be drawn
and compared to𝛼, in order to either accept or reject the proposed
sample.Hastings(1970)latergeneralisedthistoallowforasymmetric
proposal distributions, leading to the MH algorithm. This includes a
correction for the asymmetry via the ratio of proposal probabilities,
as shown in equation (2).
𝛼=min
 
1, 𝜋( ®𝑋new
𝑖 )
𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖)
𝑞( ®𝑋𝑖 | ®𝑋𝑖
new
)
𝑞( ®𝑋𝑖
new
| ®𝑋𝑖)
!
.(2)
The loop inside the MH algorithm defines the core of all MCMC
methods. The algorithm starts with initialisation, followed by pro-
posalgeneration,acceptancetesting,andrepetitionofthegeneration
and acceptance testing. The chain is typically terminated after a
predefined number of steps, a fixed computation time, or when a
convergence diagnostic is satisfied.
Typically, a Gaussian proposal distribution is used for proposals
in the MH algorithm. This is centred at the current position®𝑋𝑖, with
standard deviation𝜎. This symmetric choice simplifies the accep-
tanceratioby removingtheproposalterms, reducingtheacceptance
probability to the original Metropolis form. We illustrate this move
in figure 2. The choice of𝜎significantly affects the efficiency of the
sampling process. If𝜎is too small, proposed moves deviate slightly
from the current position, leading to slow exploration and thus in-
efficient sampling. If𝜎is too large, most proposed moves land in
low-probability regions and are rejected, again reducing efficiency.
Both extremes are undesired. Ultimately, we aim to find a proposal
distributionthatmaximisesthealgorithm’sefficiency.Unfortunately,
this fine-tuning is problem-specific, and it isn’t easy to find the best
proposal width or distribution. A rich body of literature addresses
thetuningofthisparameteranddistribution,seeforinstanceGelman
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

4C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
Figure 2.A Gaussian Metropolis-Hastings move for current chain®𝑋𝑖. The
move is based on centring a Gaussian around the current position®𝑋𝑖 with a
standard deviation of𝜎. From this, a new point is sampled,®𝑋𝑖
new
.
et al. (1996); Roberts et al. (1997); Haario et al. (1999); Roberts &
Rosenthal(2001);Haarioetal.(2001);Atchadé&Rosenthal(2005);
Brooks et al. (2011a).
Despite the simplicity of the MH algorithm, it struggles in high-
dimensional spaces, where it is difficult to identify a proposal dis-
tribution that effectively balances acceptance and exploration. This
challenge is often referred to as thecurse of dimensionality. Ad-
ditionally, MH may perform poorly in scenarios involving strong
correlations among parameters, as its proposal width is uniform
across all parameters. These limitations have motivated the devel-
opment of more specialised sampling strategies, including adaptive
and ensemble-based methods.
2.1.2 Metropolis-Hastings with standardised scaling (MH SS)
Inhigh-dimensionalproblems,isotropicGaussianproposals(orother
symmetric forms) assume similar scaling across dimensions. As
such, parameters with small ranges might dominate the proposed
moves, while large-range parameters receive poor exploration. To
reducethesensitivitytothedifferentscalesonwhichparametersare
sampled, it is beneficial to scale every parameter prior to the same
range before applying an MCMC algorithm. Often, the unit interval
[0,1]ischosen.Thisapproachisknownasstandardisedscalingand
improves the efficiency of the sampling procedure. By rescaling, we
ensure uniform proposal behaviour across all dimensions, making it
easiertoselectasinglescalarproposalwidth.Italsomitigatesissues
with tuning, as proposals in the [0,1] space tend to behave more
consistently. Although the proposal width still needs to be tuned,
typical values in the range of0.05to0.2tend to work well for most
applications.
To apply standardised scaling, we transform each parameter in®𝑋𝑖
using its prior bounds:
𝑋𝑖,standardised = 𝑋𝑖 −𝑃(𝑋 𝑖)lower
𝑃(𝑋 𝑖)upper −𝑃(𝑋 𝑖)lower
,(3)
where𝑋 𝑖isthecurrentpositionintheparameterspace,and𝑃(𝑋 𝑖)lower
and𝑃(𝑋 𝑖)upper arethepriorlowerandupperlimitsforparameter𝑋 𝑖.
2.1.3 The Adaptive-Metropolis (AM) algorithm
AnadaptiveversionoftheMetropolisalgorithmistheAMalgorithm
fromHaarioetal.(2001).ItextendstheclassicMetropolisalgorithm
by adapting the proposal distribution during sampling. By using a
normal distribution with a covariance for the proposal distribution,
the covariance can be continuously updated based on the history of
the Markov chain. Through adaptation, it improves sampling. The
keyideaoftheAMalgorithmistoalleviatethedifficultyofchoosing
awell-tunedproposaldistributionbyadaptingtoit.Theadaptivityis
bothspatialandorientational,meaningthattheproposaldistribution
gradually aligns itself with the geometry of the posterior.
Importantly, this adaptation makes the algorithm non-Markovian,
as each proposal now depends not only on the current state but also
on all previous states. This makes it difficult to use parallelisation
strategies.Whilemultipleadaptivechainscanberuninparallel,their
trajectories cannot be directly combined into a single long Markov
chain. Consequently, one must run a single long chain to match the
performanceofmethodsthatcanuseparallelisation.Wewilldescribe
how parallelisation works for our ensemble methods in section 2.2.
Despite this, it is shown that under certain regularity conditions,
the algorithm maintains the ergodicity required for correct sampling
from the target posterior distribution.
The AM move is written as:
®𝑋new
𝑖 = ®𝑋𝑖 + N (0, 𝐶𝑡 ),(4)
where ®𝑋𝑖 denotes the current position of chain𝑖andN (0, 𝐶 𝑡 )the
Gaussianproposaldistributionfromwhicharandomsampleisdrawn
with a covariance matrix𝐶𝑡. We illustrate the AM move in figure 3.
To ensure stable behaviour, the AM chain collects sufficient sam-
ples initially for a reliable covariance estimate. During this initial
phase, the proposal covariance remains fixed at a user-specified ma-
trix𝐶 0, typically the identity matrix. The updates on the covariance
matrixareappliedduringeachstep,butswitchingtothiscovariance
matrix only occurs after a fixed period of length𝑡0. After𝑡 0, the
covariance matrix continues to be updated.
Therecursiveupdateformulausedtoupdatetheempiricalcovari-
ance of the chain is shown in equation (5):
𝐶𝑡+1 = 𝑡−1
𝑡 𝐶𝑡 + 𝑆𝑑
𝑡 (𝑡 ¯𝑋𝑡−1 ¯𝑋𝑇
𝑡−1 − (𝑡+1) ¯𝑋𝑡 ¯𝑋𝑇
𝑡 +𝑋 𝑡 𝑋𝑇
𝑡 +𝜀𝐼 𝑑),(5)
where𝑆 𝑑 =2.4 2/𝑑is a dimension-dependent scaling factor, as rec-
ommended by Gelman et al. (1996) to optimize the efficiency of
Gaussian proposals. Additionally,¯𝑋𝑡 represents the empirical mean
ofthechainuptolength𝑡,and𝜀 >0isasmallregularisationconstant
that ensures the covariance matrix remains positive definite. This is
especiallyimportantinthepresenceofmultimodalorill-conditioned
posteriors. Lastly,𝐼 𝑑 represents the𝑑-dimensional identity matrix.
This ensures that the regularisation constant is uniformly applied to
all dimensions. After𝑡 0, the covariance matrix is continued to be
updated using the recursive formula from equation (6).
𝐶𝑡 =
(
𝐶0, 𝑡≤𝑡 0
𝑠𝑑 cov(𝑋 0, . . . , 𝑋𝑡−1 ) +𝑠 𝑑𝜀𝐼 𝑑, 𝑡 > 𝑡 0
(6)
2.2 Parallel affine-invariant ensemble samplers
2.2.1 Ensembles
Ensemble MCMC methods are an alternative to traditional single-
chain algorithms. Instead of evolving a single chain, these methods
employ a collection of chains that together form anensemble. For-
mally, the ensemble is the set𝑆={ ®𝑋𝑖 : 1≤𝑖≤𝑀}, where chain
𝑖is denoted as ®𝑋𝑖. Unlike standard MCMC, proposals in ensemble
methodsarenotgeneratedindependently;theproposalforanychain
𝑖depends not only on its state but also on the states of the other
walkers.
This coupling allows ensemble methods to explore the posterior
distribution more effectively. Since proposals are defined relative to
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler5
Figure 3.An adaptive Metropolis move for chain®𝑋𝑖. Initially, before𝑡=𝑡 0,
we sample the ®𝑋𝑖
new
from the initial Gaussian distribution with covariance
𝐶0. Starting from𝑡 0, we use the empirical covariance𝐶𝑡. This adaptive
covariance can increase or decrease the width of the Gaussian distribution.
For this figure, we present an increased width.
other walkers, the algorithm inherently adapts to the local geometry
of the posterior, reducing the need for manual tuning of global pro-
posal scales. This makes ensemble MCMC particularly effective in
poorly preconditioned or anisotropic parameter spaces. The simul-
taneous evolution of multiple walkers enables broad exploration of
the parameter space, thereby improving sampling efficiency. Addi-
tionally,theinteractionbetweenwalkershelpsreducetheprobability
of them getting trapped in local modes, making ensemble methods
suitable for sampling from complex, multimodal posteriors.
The ensemble is constructed such that the walkers are marginally
independent samples from the same target posterior distribution𝜋.
The joint target distribution for the ensemble is the product of the
individual marginal densities:
Π(𝑆)= Π( ®𝑋1, ®𝑋2, . . . , ®𝑋𝑀 )=𝜋( ®𝑋1)𝜋( ®𝑋2). . . 𝜋( ®𝑋𝑀 ).(7)
This structure allows the ensemble sampler to update each walker
byconditioningontheotherswhilepreservingtheoverallstationary
distributionΠ. That is, as long as the update rule for walker ®𝑋𝑖
leaves its marginal distribution𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖)invariant, the full ensemble
distribution remains invariant. This condition mirrors the transition
kernel condition,
𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖)=
∫
𝐾( ®𝑋𝑖
new
| ®𝑋𝑖)𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖)𝑑 ®𝑋𝑖 (8)
for each chain®𝑋𝑖. This condition is achieved using detailed balance
(Goodman & Weare 2010).
2.2.2 Parallelisation of ensembles
Parallelisation can greatly reduce the required computation time for
algorithms. For classic MCMC, it can effectively cut down the pro-
cess of serial running into simultaneous execution since a chain has
no references to other chains. This, unfortunately, does not apply to
ensemble methods since the updates of chains refer to one another.
Thisbreaksthepossibilityofrunningallchainsinparallel.However,
Foreman-Mackeyetal.(2013)giveasolutiontothisproblem.Instead
ofevolvingallchainswithintheentireensemble(𝑆)simultaneously,
it is better to divide the collection into two ensembles of equal size.
These ensembles are defined as𝑆0 ={ ®𝑋𝑖,∀𝑖=1, . . . , 𝑆/2}and
𝑆1 ={ ®𝑋𝑖,∀𝑖=𝑆/2+1, . . . , 𝑆}. From these, we can simultaneously
update all walkers of one ensemble, using proposals based on the
other complementary ensemble. This allows us to parallelise half of
the complete ensemble, giving a large boost in performance com-
pared to a sequential calculation. To update all chains, we switch
betweeneachensemble,i.e.firstensemble𝑆 0 isupdatedbasedon𝑆 1
and then ensemble𝑆1 is updated based on𝑆0. This continues until
termination.
To further improve this method, reshuffling is used for the two
ensembles after each global iteration. This reallocates the chains to
theensemblesafterbothhavebeenupdatedonce.Reshufflingallows
walkers to interact with a broader and more varied subset of the
ensemble. As a result, the algorithm benefits from improved mixing
andreducedriskoflocaloptima.Thisstrategyisimplementedinthe
EMCEE1 package(Foreman-Mackeyetal.2013),whichservedasthe
inspiration for incorporating this additional performance enhance-
ment to our ensemble-based MCMC algorithms.
2.2.3 Affine invariance
Anaffinetransformationisdefinedasaninvertibletransformationof
the form𝑦=𝐴𝑥+𝑏, where𝐴∈R 𝑛×𝑛 is an invertible matrix and
𝑏∈R 𝑛isavector.Theypreservethelinearstructureoftheparameter
space.Anaffine-invariantMCMCsamplerisonewhoseperformance
remains unchanged under an affine transformation of the parameter
space. It implies that the sampler performs equally well on a target
𝜋as well as the transformed targetˆ𝜋=𝜋(𝐴−1 (𝑦−𝑏))without the
needofmanuallytuningtheproposaldistributiontothetransformed
geometry of𝜋(Huijser et al. 2017).
The samplers we consider in this work all contain the affine-
invariance property. As highlighted by Goodman & Weare (2010);
Foreman-Mackey et al. (2013), having this property is beneficial
since the performance does not degrade when the target distribution
isstretched,rotated,orhighlycorrelated.Thisimpliesthatsuchsam-
plers adapt automatically to the geometry of the target distribution.
2.2.4 The PAIES algorithm
To generalise affine-invariant ensemble methods, we present our de-
scriptionofsuchsamplersinalgorithm1.Thisisbasedontheparal-
lelisedformulationintroducedbyForeman-Mackeyetal.(2013),and
calledtheparallelisedaffine-invariantensemblesamplingalgorithm,
or PAIES in short. The algorithm begins with an initial ensemble𝑆
consisting of𝑁walker positions. At each iteration, the ensemble is
randomlyshuffledanddividedintotwoequallysizedsubsets,𝑆 1 and
𝑆2, respectively. During the updating of a set, one of these subsets
is designated as the active set𝑆𝑖, while the other, denoted as𝑆′,
is fixed and is used to inform the proposals for the active half. For
each walker ®𝑋𝑖 in the active ensemble𝑆𝑖, a new position ®𝑋𝑖
new
is
proposed using an affine-invariant update rule𝑅that depends on®𝑋𝑖
and the complementary ensemble𝑆′. The proposal is accepted with
probability𝛼, calculated using the posterior distribution (𝜋) and the
proposaldistribution(𝑞(·|·)).Acceptedproposalsreplacethecurrent
walkerpositionsintheactivehalf.Rejectedproposalsarediscarded,
and the corresponding walkers retain their current positions in the
active set. After updating the current active half, roles are switched,
and the originally fixed half is now updated. Once both halves have
been updated, the full ensemble is stored in the chain collection𝐶.
The chain collection contains all individual chains; the chains are
not combined into a single chain; they are each stored individually.
Onlythecurrentensembleismodifiedduringeachiteration,while𝐶
containstheentireMarkovchainhistoryforeachwalker.Theprocess
repeats until the target chain length𝑇is reached.
1 https://emcee.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

6C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
Algorithm 1The Affine-Invariant Ensemble Algorithm
1:Input:Initial ensemble𝑆of𝑁walkers, target chain length𝑇,
affine-invariant update rule𝑅
2:Initialise chain collection𝐶←𝑆
3:for𝑡=1, . . . , 𝑇do
4:Randomly shuffle and split𝑆into two halves:𝑆 1 and𝑆 2
5:for𝑆 𝑖 ∈ {𝑆 1, 𝑆2}do
6:Let𝑆 ′ ←𝑆\𝑆 𝑖 ⊲Complementary ensemble
7:foreach walker ®𝑋𝑖 ∈𝑆 𝑖 do
8:Propose ®𝑋new
𝑖 using𝑅:
9: ®𝑋new
𝑖 ←𝑅( ®𝑋𝑖, 𝑆
′
)
10:
11:Compute the acceptance probability:
12:
13:𝛼=min

1,
𝜋( ®𝑋new
𝑖 )𝑞( ®𝑋𝑖 | ®𝑋new
𝑖 )
𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖 )𝑞( ®𝑋new
𝑖 | ®𝑋𝑖 )

14:
15:Sample𝑢∼ U (0,1)
16:if𝑢 < 𝛼then
17:Accept the proposal: set ®𝑋𝑖 = ®𝑋new
𝑖
18:else
19:Reject the proposal: retain ®𝑋𝑖
20:end if
21:end for
22:end for
23:Append updated ensemble𝑆to𝐶.
24:end for
25:return𝐶
2.2.5 The stretch move
Given that we have now discussed how ensemble samplers work
and what affine invariance implies, we will start by introducing the
manyaffine-invariantmovesthatcanbeusedasanupdaterule𝑅for
proposinganewsetofparameters.Webeginwiththeintroductionof
thestretchmovefromthewell-knownEMCEEpackagefromForeman-
Mackey et al. (2013).
The stretch move was introduced by Goodman & Weare (2010),
followingthewalkmovefromChristen&Fox(2007),withamodifi-
cationtomakeitaffine-invariant.Thestretchmoveproposalisgiven
by:
®𝑋𝑖
new
= ®𝑋 𝑗 +𝑍( ®𝑋𝑖 − ®𝑋 𝑗 ),(9)
in which ®𝑋 𝑗 is a walker that is randomly sampled from the com-
plementary ensemble, and𝑍is the stretch factor. We illustrate the
stretch move in figure 4. The stretch movestretchesthe difference
vector from chains𝑖and𝑗with a factor of𝑍to put chain ®𝑋𝑖 in a
different location within the parameter space.
Tousethestretchmove,onemustsamplethestretchfactor𝑍.This
sampling is done through:
𝑍=𝑢 2

𝑎+ 1
𝑎 −2

+2𝑢

1− 1
𝑎

+ 1
𝑎 ,(10)
where𝑢∼ U (0,1)and𝑎=2. We use a value of𝑎=2as recom-
mended by Goodman & Weare (2010). This results, for𝑢=0, in
𝑍=1/2,andfor𝑢=1in𝑍=2,therefore,weseethat1/2≤𝑍≤2,
asdescribedbyGoodman&Weare(2010).Wepresentthederivation
of this formula in appendix A2. Additionally, we present the proof
of affine invariance for the stretch move in appendix A1. To satisfy
detailedbalanceforthestretchmove,werequireamodificationofthe
Metropolis-Hastingsacceptancecriterion.FromGoodman&Weare
(2010), a𝑍 𝑁−1 factor is introduced to ensure this condition is met.
Figure 4.A stretch move for current chain ®𝑋𝑖. The black dot represents
the reference walker ®𝑋 𝑗 that is taken from the complementary ensemble of
walkers.Thestretchmovestretchesthedifferencebetweenwalkers ®𝑋𝑖 and ®𝑋 𝑗
byafactorof𝑍,asseeninequation(9),where𝑍isobtainedbyequation(10).
From this move, we arrive at the new position,®𝑋𝑖
new
.
Figure5.Awalkmoveforcurrentchain ®𝑋𝑖.Theblackandgreydotsrepresent
the complementary ensemble. The black dots mark the chains used from the
complementforthiswalkmove,i.e.|𝑆|=4.Thesamplemeanofthesepoints
is given by ¯𝑋𝑠. From this, we construct the covariance matrix𝐶, which is
used to propose the new point®𝑋𝑖
new
by centring a normal distribution about
®𝑋𝑖 with covariance𝐶.
This results in:
𝛼=min
 
1, 𝑍 𝑁−1 𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖
new
)
𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖)
!
,(11)
where𝑁is the dimensionality of the parameter space. We present
the proof of this equation in appendix A3.
2.2.6 The walk move
In addition to the stretch move, Goodman & Weare (2010) also
introduced the walk move. This move is illustrated in figure 5. The
walk move proposes the next set of parameters for a walker𝑖, using
itscurrentposition ®𝑋𝑖 andthecovariancebetweenasubsetofwalkers
from the complementary ensemble. The proposal is given by:
®𝑋new
𝑖 = ®𝑋𝑖 + N (0, 𝐶),(12)
where𝐶represents the covariance matrix of the complementary
ensemble, and is given by:
𝐶= 1
|𝑆|
∑︁
®𝑋 𝑗 ∈𝑆
( ®𝑋 𝑗 − ¯𝑋𝑠) ( ®𝑋 𝑗 − ¯𝑋𝑠)𝑇 ,(13)
in which|𝑆|represents the size of the complementary ensemble,
required to be at least size 2. The ensemble mean position is given
by:
¯𝑋𝑠 = 1
|𝑆|
∑︁
®𝑋 𝑗 ∈𝑆
®𝑋 𝑗 .(14)
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler7
2.2.7 The differential evolution (DE) move
The differential evolution (DE) move (Nelson et al. 2013) is a sam-
plingstrategythatresemblesthestretchmoveinstructure,butdiffers
in how the proposal is constructed and adapted. The move orig-
inates from the differential evolution approach introduced by ter
Braak (2006), with the modification of making it affine-invariant.
The move is written as:
®𝑋𝑖
new
= ®𝑋𝑖 +𝛾( ®𝑋𝑘 − ®𝑋 𝑗 ),(15)
where ®𝑋𝑖 is the current state of walker𝑖, and ®𝑋 𝑗 and ®𝑋𝑘 are two
walkers drawn at random from the complementary ensemble. We
illustratethedifferentialevolutionmoveinfigure6.Comparedtothe
stretch move,𝛾acts as the stretching factor𝑍, however, unlike the
stretch factor,𝛾is partially sampled, i.e. although it uses a sampled
𝑧,𝛾is constructed by multiplying this𝑧with𝛾 0:
𝛾=𝛾 0 (1+𝑧),(16)
with
𝑧∼ N (0, 𝜎 𝛾),and𝛾 0 = 2.38√2𝑛dim
,(17)
where𝑛 dim denotes the dimensionality of the parameter space, and
𝜎𝛾 is a control parameter for the amount of noise added to the
scalingfactor.Nelsonetal.(2013)recommendchoosing𝜎 𝛾 between
10−4 and10 −1. In our implementation, however, we use𝜎𝛾 =0.5
to encourage more diverse proposals. Based on the optimal scaling
analysis of Metropolis algorithms by Roberts & Rosenthal (2001),
the factor2.38/√2𝑛dim is used to set the initial scaling factor of the
differential evolution method.
A strength of the DE move is its built-in mechanism to adapt the
proposal scale based on the chain’s performance. DE adjusts𝛾0 in
response to the current acceptance fraction of all chains. After each
global step, the algorithm computes the average acceptance fraction
across all walkers, as seen in equation (18), and uses this to rescale
𝛾0, as per equation (19).
Acceptance fraction= 1
|𝑆|
𝑆∑︁
𝑖=1

1− # Rejections chain𝑖
Chain length𝑖

(18)
𝛾0 ←𝛾 0
√︄
Acceptance fraction
Target acceptance fraction.(19)
The size of the typical stretch step is thus based on how much the
current mean acceptance fraction deviates from the target. If the
acceptance rate is too high, the proposals are too conservative, and
the algorithm increases𝛾0 to encourage exploration. In contrast, if
theacceptancerateistoolow,theproposalsarelikelytooaggressive,
and the algorithm reduces𝛾0 to make smaller moves.
By constantly steering the sampler towards a target acceptance
fraction, the algorithm automatically balances exploration and ex-
ploitation. This dynamic adaptation aids the sampler to remain ef-
ficient. This is beneficial when the optimal scale is unknown be-
forehand or when it varies across the parameter space[, and allows
thealgorithmtobeadaptivetolocalgeometries.Nelsonetal.(2013)
suggestatargetacceptancefractionof0.25.Thisisinagreementwith
the recommended acceptance fraction range of 0.2–0.5 from Good-
man & Weare (2010) and Foreman-Mackey et al. (2013). Choosing
a target near the lower end favours broader proposals, which can be
advantageous in complex or multimodal posterior landscapes. The
higher end favours smaller proposals, resulting in more exploitative
behaviour. The DE move accepts proposals based on the Metropolis
Figure 6.A Differential Evolution (DE) move for current walker®𝑋𝑖. The
blue and grey dots represent the walkers from the complementary ensemble.
The blue dots are the reference walkers that are sampled at random from
the ensemble, from which we determine the displacement that is scaled and
added to ®𝑋𝑖 to arrive at the proposal®𝑋𝑖
new
.
acceptance criterion, equation (1), ensuring that it satisfies detailed
balance.Thisdiffersfromtheacceptancecriterionusedforthestretch
move. The reason for this is that there is no dependence on the cur-
rentpoint ®𝑋𝑖 inthestretchingterm.Additionally,as𝛾isdrawnfrom
a symmetric distribution, the two result in the proposal densities
(𝑞(·|·)) being symmetric; therefore, no adjustment is required in the
acceptancecriterion.Wepresenttheproofofaffineinvarianceofthe
DE move in appendix B1.
2.2.8 The snooker move
The snooker move is a type of differential evolution move as intro-
duced by ter Braak & Vrugt (2008). It is based on the DE algorithm
ofterBraak(2006),butfindsitsorigininGilksetal.(1994),Roberts
&Gilks(1994)andLiang&Wong(2001).Weillustratethesnooker
move in figure 7.
Thesnookermoveupdatesacurrentwalker ®𝑋𝑖 basedonitselfand
the addition of two other walkers (®𝑍1 and ®𝑍2) that are orthogonally
projected on the line through®𝑋𝑖 and another walker®𝑍0. These other
walkers are sampled from the complementary ensemble at random.
The snooker move’s proposal is given by:
®𝑋𝑖
new
= ®𝑋𝑖 +𝛾 𝑠 ( ®𝑍𝑃1 − ®𝑍𝑃2),(20)
where𝛾 𝑠 represents the scaling factor, similar to the stretch factor𝑍
inthestretchmove.The𝛾 𝑠 factoristakentobeequalto1.7,basedon
𝛾=2.38/
√
2𝑑with𝑑=1taken from Roberts & Rosenthal (2001).
terBraak&Vrugt(2008)arguethattheprojectionstepofthesnooker
movereducesthevarianceofthedifferenceenough,andthatittakes
careofthedimensionality,allowingustopick𝑑=1for𝛾.Inaddition,
theyalsoarguethatitcanbebeneficialtotake𝛾 𝑠 ∼ U (1.2,2.2)such
that it is centred on 1.7, but with the possibility of having different
sizes, which can improve exploration.
ContrarytoterBraak&Vrugt(2008),werunthealgorithmwith-
out mixing it with another sampler, i.e. notblendingthe move. The
authors use this move for10%of their updates, in addition to the
90%of their differential evolution move. This is done to diversify
the differential moves, but they do not argue why the snooker move
alone would presumably underperform.
Giventhesimilarityintheproposalmovetothestretchmovefrom
section2.2.5,wewillnotpresenttheproofofaffineinvarianceforthe
snookermove.Toensuredetailedbalance,thesnookermoverequires
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

8C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
Figure 7.Asnooker move for current chain®𝑋𝑖. The reddots mark the initial
and proposed position of walker𝑖. The black dot marks the reference walker
®𝑍0, which is used to define a line between itself and®𝑋𝑖. The dark blue dots
markthepositionsofthewalkers, ®𝑍1 and ®𝑍2,thatareorthogonallyprojected
onto this line. The light blue dots mark the positions of the orthogonal posi-
tions, ®𝑍𝑃1 and ®𝑍𝑃2.Thenewpoint, ®𝑋new
𝑖 isthesumoftheinitialposition𝑋 𝑖
and the scaled vector between®𝑍𝑃1 and ®𝑍𝑃2.
anadjustmenttotheMetropolisacceptancecriteria,inasimilarsense
asforthestretchmove,sinceitsproposalsarenotsymmetric.Forthe
snooker move, we use:
𝑞( ®𝑋𝑖 | ®𝑋𝑖
new
)
𝑞( ®𝑋𝑖
new
| ®𝑋𝑖)
= || ®𝑋𝑖
new
− ®𝑍0|| 𝑛−1
|| ®𝑋𝑖 − ®𝑍0|| 𝑛−1
,(21)
implying that instead of𝑍𝑁−1 for the stretch move, we multiply the
ratioofposteriorvaluesbytheratioofthenormsbetweentheoldand
new point and the reference walker®𝑍0. This results in the following
acceptance criterion:
𝛼=min
 
1, || ®𝑋𝑖
new
− ®𝑍0|| 𝑛−1
|| ®𝑋𝑖 − ®𝑍0|| 𝑛−1
𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖
new
)
𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖)
!
.(22)
2.2.9 The blend move
Taking inspiration from ter Braak & Vrugt (2008), we introduce the
blendmove, which combines the differential evolution algorithm of
Nelson et al. (2013) and the stretch move of Goodman & Weare
(2010). We take these two moves based on their empirical success
in the area of astrophysics, e.g. Sanders & Fabian (2013); Reis &
Miller (2013); Akeret et al. (2013); Angus et al. (2017); Dhawan
et al. (2018); Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. (2019).
Theideaisthatthroughutilisingtwokindsofmoves,wearereturned
with a potentially better proposal that can explore parameter spaces
efficiently. Contrary to ter Braak & Vrugt (2008), we do not pick
separate moves with a fixed probability, but we combine the two
moves with some fraction of𝛽∈ [0,1], which controls how much
we favour the stretch move over the differential evolution move. The
blend move is formulated as:
®𝑋𝑖
new
=𝛽 ®𝑋𝑖
Stretch
+ (1−𝛽) ®𝑋𝑖
DE
(23)
=𝛽( ®𝑋 𝑗 +𝑍( ®𝑋𝑖 − ®𝑋 𝑗 )) + (1−𝛽) ( ®𝑋𝑖 +𝛾( ®𝑋𝑙 − ®𝑋𝑘)),
whereweusethreerandomlysampledwalkersofthecomplementary
ensemble,𝑗, 𝑘and𝑙. We illustrate the blend move in figure 8.
Just like DE, we utilise a target acceptance fraction; therefore, the
algorithm adjusts its stepping size of𝛾. To ensure detailed balance,
Figure 8.A blend move for current chain ®𝑋𝑖. The blend move combines
the proposal moves of the stretch, equation (9), and the differential evolution
(DE) move, equation (15). The grey, blue, and black dots correspond to the
complementary ensemble from which we sample the random walkers𝑗, 𝑘,
and𝑙. From walker𝑗, we obtain the stretch proposal; from𝑘and𝑙we obtain
the DE proposal. These proposals are then blended, using a𝛽=0.5, into a
new position ®𝑋𝑖
new
.
we must adjust the𝑍𝑁−1 factor by the amount of stretching that we
use, i.e.𝛽. This gives us the following acceptance criteria:
𝛼=min
 
1, 𝛽𝑍 𝑁−1 𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖
new
)
𝜋( ®𝑋𝑖)
!
.(24)
2.2.10 The PCA stretch move
Inadditiontotheblendmove,wealsointroduceaPrincipalCompo-
nent Analysis (PCA) stretch move. This is a variation of the stretch
move from Goodman & Weare (2010). This move is designed to
enhance exploration in directions of the highest variance within the
complementaryensemble.Theideaistoperformthestretchmovein
a rotated coordinate system defined by the principal components of
thecomplementaryensemble.Thiscoordinatesystemtherebyaligns
the sampling directions with the dominant axes of variation. In this
context, PCA acts as a rotation because it finds a new coordinate
system, i.e. a new basis in which the axes align with the directions
of maximum variance in the data.
While PCA is typically used for dimensionality reduction, here it
is applied with the full number of dimensions. This ensures that the
PCAtransformationisafull-rankaffinerotationandscaling,thereby
preserving affine invariance. The move transforms the complemen-
tary ensemble of walkers into PCA space, after which it transforms
thecurrentwalkerofinterest𝑖tothisspace,andpicksarandomcom-
plementaryensemblewalker𝑗.Then,followingthestretchmove,we
obtain the proposed position in PCA space,®𝑋new
𝑖,PCA . To obtain the
proposedpositionintheparameterspace,wetransformthisposition
backthroughtheinversetransformation.Weusethescikit-learn 2
implementation of PCA for this transformation. The PCA stretch
move is given by:
®𝑋𝑖
new
=𝑇 −1 ( ®𝑋new
𝑖,PCA )=𝑇 −1 ( ®𝑋 𝑗,PCA +𝑍( ®𝑋𝑖,PCA − ®𝑋 𝑗,PCA ))(25)
where𝑇 −1 represents the inverse PCA transformation. We illus-
trate the PCA stretch move in figure 9. Since PCA is a linear and
invertible transformation when using all dimensions, the Jacobian
2 https://scikit-learn.org/stable/
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler9
Figure 9.A Principal Component Analysis (PCA) stretch move for current
chain ®𝑋𝑖. The PCA stretch move transforms the complementary ensemble
to the PCA space and picks a random walker𝑗to propose the new position
®𝑋new
𝑖,PCA ,usingthetransformed ®𝑋𝑖.Thisnewpositionisthentransformedback
into the parameter space by the inverse PCA transform, such that we obtain
®𝑋new
𝑖 .
determinant of the change of variables is constant and cancels out
in the Metropolis-Hastings ratio. Therefore, the standard acceptance
probability from the original stretch move still applies.
3 LIKELIHOOD LANDSCAPES
3.1 The need for toy models
To compare the performance of the samplers introduced in section
2, we require a controlled test environment. For this purpose, we
utilisetoy models: mathematical constructions that define artificial
likelihoodlandscapes.Amajoradvantageistheirindependencefrom
datasets,allowingforacontrolledandsystematicevaluationofsam-
pler performance. The landscapes remain fixed across experiments,
resulting in stability, which makes it possible to discover differences
in convergence speed, sampling efficiency, or accuracy solely to the
algorithms themselves, without interference from data variability,
model assumptions, or noise.
Typical MCMC applications rely on empirical data and a forward
model to define the likelihood function (e.g. Brooks et al. (2011b)).
While this is essential for real-world inference, such setups compli-
cate fair comparisons between samplers because performance be-
comes entangled with factors like data quality, noise characteristics,
model adequacy, and domain-specific choices. Toy models avoid
these issues and thereby shift the focus of testing from “Can we fit
thisdata?”tothemorefundamentalquestion:“Howeffectivelydoes
the sampler explore the underlying landscape of the posterior?”
To build intuition, the likelihood function can be seen as the de-
scription of a multi-dimensional “landscape” in which each set of
points in the parameter space is associated with a likelihood value.
Thiscanbeviewedasatopographicmapwithelevationvaluesforge-
ographic coordinates. The task of the sampler is to explore the land-
scape efficiently, while spending more time in the high-likelihood
regions than in low-likelihood regions.
Webeginwithunimodallandscapes,whichfeatureasingleglobal
optimumandnolocaloptima.Theseprovideastraightforwardsetting
fortestinghowrapidlyandaccuratelysamplersconvergetothetarget
distribution. We then consider more complexmultimodallikelihood
landscapes,whichbetterresemblerealisticinferenceproblemswhere
posteriors contain multiple distinct high-probability regions. Such
local optima pose significant challenges for MCMC samplers since
they cannot jump easily from one to another. Effective sampling
requiresnotonlyidentifyingthemodesbutalsotransitioningbetween
them in proportion to their posterior weight.
OurgoalinusingtoymodelsistoidentifyMCMCalgorithmsthat
are both efficient and robust. To test this, we systematically apply
thealgorithmsonlandscapesofincreasingcomplexity,startingfrom
simple, unimodal cases and progressing to complex, multimodal
scenarios.
3.2 Unimodal landscapes
3.2.1 Rosenbrock
As the first instance of our unimodal likelihood toy models, we in-
cludethewell-knownRosenbrockfunction.Originallyintroducedby
Rosenbrock(1960)asaperformancetestforoptimisationalgorithms,
this function has become a classic benchmark in both optimisation
and sampling literature.
The Rosenbrock function is non-convex and presents an interest-
ingchallengeforbothoptimisationandMCMCalgorithmssincethe
location of the global minimum is numerically difficult to find. The
function’s landscape consists of a long, narrow, and curved valley;
finding this valley is relatively straightforward, but navigating it to
converge on the global minimum is where the difficulty arises. Al-
gorithms must contend with the strong curvature and the significant
difference in scale between the valley’s width and length, making
the Rosenbrock function an ideal test case for evaluating how well a
sampler can handle anisotropic and curved posterior geometries.
The Rosenbrock function is defined as:
𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦)=(𝑎−𝑥) 2 +𝑏(𝑦−𝑥 2)2,(26)
where the global minimum is located at(𝑥, 𝑦)=(𝑎, 𝑎 2), for which
𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦)=0. Standard parameter choices are𝑎=1and𝑏=100,
which we also adopt. These parameters result in a characteristic
banana-shaped valley.
In the context of our MCMC models, we use the logarithmic ver-
sionofthisfunction,resultinginlog-likelihoodvalues.Additionally,
wetakethenegativesignvalueofthislogarithmicfunctiontodefine
the probability density. By using the negative version of the Rosen-
brockfunction,wechangethevalleyintoamountain.Wedothisfor
consistencyacrossourtestcases.Alltoymodelsthatwewillpresent
have regions of interest associated with regions of high likelihood.
Furthermore, to prevent the logarithmic calculation of 0, we define
this in equation (27). For numerical stability, we add an addition of
-10tothisequation.WepresenttheRosenbrocklikelihoodlandscape
in figure 10.
L (𝑥, 𝑦)=−ln

(𝑎−𝑥) 2 +𝑏(𝑦−𝑥 2)2

(27)
3.2.2 Neal’s funnel
As our second toy model, we use theNeal’s funneldistribution,
introduced by Neal (2003). This synthetic distribution is known for
its challenging geometry, which can cause significant difficulties for
MCMC algorithms. In particular, its funnel-shaped geometry of the
probability contours leads to extreme anisotropy and sharp scale
changes.
The distribution of Neal’s funnel consists of two variables: an
upper-level variable𝑣and a lower-level variable𝑦. The variable𝑣is
sampled from a normal distribution with zero mean and variance 3.
Conditionalon𝑣,thevariable𝑦issampledfromanormaldistribution
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

10C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
−2.0 −1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
X
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Y
−9
−6
−3
0
3
6
9
12
Figure 10.The Rosenbrock likelihood landscape. The landscape exhibits
a banana-like shaped region of interest where the log-likelihood is highest.
Outsidethisregion,thelog-likelihoodislower.Theglobaloptimumislocated
at (1,1).
with zero mean and a variance that grows or shrinks exponentially
with𝑣. The sampling process is given by:
𝑣∼ N (0|3), 𝑦∼ N

0|exp
 𝑣
2

.(28)
Asaresult,thestandarddeviationof𝑦changesexponentiallywith𝑣:
forlargepositivevaluesof𝑣,thevarianceof𝑦becomeslarge,creating
a wide region of support; for negative values of𝑣, the variance
collapses, forming a narrow neck in the probability landscape.
The corresponding likelihood function of Neal’s funnel is given
by:
L (𝑣, 𝑦)=exp

− 1
2

𝑣 2 + 𝑦2
exp(𝑣) +𝑣

.(29)
We present this likelihood landscape in figure 11.
3.2.3 Experimental samplers setup
For all samplers applied to the unimodal landscapes, we define a set
ofgeneralparameters,summarisedintable1.Eachsampleroperates
withanensembleof10walkersandachainlengthof2500steps.To
ensure a fair comparison between samplers, the initial positions of
thewalkersarefixedforeachrun.Thisisimportantbecausethesecan
significantlyinfluencesamplerperformance.Theinitialpositionsare
generated by drawing at random from the prior ranges. This choice
ensures that differences in performance arise from the sampling al-
gorithms themselves rather than disparities in basic configuration.
Forourunimodallandscapes,weperform1000independentruns
with different random seeds. By averaging performance over many
different seeds, we aim to reduce the variability introduced and
obtain a more reliable assessment of each sampler.
In addition to these general choices, each sampler requires specific
algorithmicsettings.Wesummarisetheseintable2.Wherepossible,
recommendations from the literature are followed to ensure compa-
rability and to align with best practices. For some algorithms, such
as the snooker move, differential evolution, and blend move, mul-
tiple versions are tested to assess the sensitivity of performance to
−10.0 −7.5 −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0
y
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
v
−8.0
−6.4
−4.8
−3.2
−1.6
0.0
Figure 11.The log-likelihood landscape of Neal’s funnel for the upper-
level variable𝑣and the lower-level variable𝑦. The geometry exhibits the
characteristic funnel shape, with a narrow neck at low𝑣and an increasingly
wide spread for larger values of𝑣. We limit the space occupied in the figure
tohighlighttheshapeofthelandscape.Inreality,thelandscapeisdefinedfor
any pair of(𝑣, 𝑦) ∈R 2.
Table 1.General sampler settings used across all unimodal landscapes.
Setting Value
Walkers 10
Chain length 2500 steps
Random seeds 1000
keyhyperparameters.Additionally,fortheadaptiveMetropolisalgo-
rithm, we set the initial covariance to the identity matrix, reflecting
anabsenceofpriorinformationonparametercorrelations.Weutilise
the initial covariance matrix until we have updated the running co-
variance matrix for10%of the entire chain length, after which we
usetheupdatedcovariance.TheMetropolis-Hastingsalgorithmsuse
a Gaussian proposal with a modest standard deviation to balance
exploration and acceptance rates.
In addition to the algorithms introduced in section 2, we also
include theEMCEEimplementation of the stretch move in our exper-
iments. Incorporating this established version serves two purposes:
firstofall,itallowsustovalidatethecorrectnessofourimplementa-
tion by direct comparison; second of all, it provides a well-regarded
baselineagainstwhichtheperformanceoftheothersamplerscanbe
evaluated.
3.3 Multimodal landscapes
3.3.1 Creation of Gaussian landscapes
Inadditiontotheunimodallandscapes,wepresenthereamethodol-
ogyforgeneratingmultimodal𝑁-dimensionallikelihoodlandscapes.
To generate such landscapes, we require a fundamental building
block that can be naturally extended to any dimensionality of in-
terest. An obvious choice for this building block is the Gaussian
function, since it scales seamlessly to any dimensionality. We define
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler11
Table 2.Sampler-specific settings used in the single and multimodal likelihood landscapes.
Sampler Setting Value/details
Metropolis-Hastings (Regular, SS) Proposal distribution Normal distribution with standard deviation 0.2
Adaptive Metropolis Initial covariance (𝐶 0) Identity matrix
Covariance update start After 10% of chain length
Covariance update frequency Every step
Stretch (Regular, PCA) Stretch factor (𝑎) 2
Snooker𝛾value (1) Fixed at 1.7
(2) Sampled fromU (1.2,2.2)
Differential Evolution Target acceptance fraction (1) Value of 0.25
(2) Value of 0.40
Walk Complementary ensemble Full ensemble used for mean calculation
Blend Move composition (1) 80% Stretch / 20% DE, acceptance fraction 0.40
(2) 80% Stretch / 20% DE, acceptance fraction 0.25
(3) 20% Stretch / 80% DE, acceptance fraction 0.25
an𝑁-dimensional Gaussian by:
𝐴·exp

− (®𝑟− ®𝜇)2
2®𝜎2

=𝐴·
𝑁Ö
𝑖=1
exp
 
− (𝑟𝑖 −𝜇 𝑖)2
2𝜎2
𝑖
!
,(30)
whereweusevectornotationforthecomponents:®𝑟representsthepo-
sitionalcoordinates,®𝜇thecoordinatesofthemeanand®𝜎thestandard
deviation. The dimensionality is given through𝑁. The amplitude of
the Gaussian is given by𝐴.
To construct landscapes, we define the likelihood function as the
sum of the values from multiple Gaussians, i.e. for any given𝑁-
dimensional input vector, this function returns the likelihood value
at that point in space. For a landscape composed of𝑀Gaussians,
the likelihood function is defined as:
L (®𝑟)=
𝑀∑︁
𝑚=1
𝐴𝑚
 𝑁Ö
𝑖=1
exp
 
− (𝑟𝑖 −𝜇 𝑚,𝑖 )2
2𝜎2
𝑚,𝑖
!!
.(31)
Each Gaussian in the landscape is characterised by its centre®𝜇,
width®𝜎, and amplitude𝐴. We define these parameters by randomly
drawing them from uniform distributions constrained by the direc-
tional sizes of a landscape. To avoid placing Gaussians directly on
the edges of these prior ranges, we apply a small buffer equal to the
standard deviations (𝜎) of our Gaussians. The choices made for the
parameters of each landscape will be detailed later.
To ensure sufficient coverage of the multi-dimensional space, we
define the number of Gaussians as a function of the dimensionality
𝑁using equation (32). This allows the complexity of the landscape
to grow, but capped at15 625to keep the computational cost man-
ageable.
𝑀=min

5𝑁 ,5 6

.(32)
3.3.2 Creating projections of Gaussian landscapes
To provide interpretability and insight into the structure of the like-
lihood surfaces described, we turn to visualisation. We visualise an
𝑁-dimensionalGaussianlandscape,bycreatingprojectionsalongall
axes. By reducing the dimensionality through these projections, we
gain intuitive insights into the structure of high-dimensional land-
scapes before applying MCMC.
Togeneratetheseprojections,wesamplepointsfromthelikelihood
landscape.Wedothisbycreatingameshgridofequallyspacedpoints
across the predefined parameter ranges. This meshgrid provides a
structured sampling of the landscape, enabling us to approximate
thelikelihoodacrossthefulldomain.Givenan𝑁-dimensionalspace
with coordinates(𝑥 1, 𝑥2, . . . , 𝑥𝑁 ), we generate a projection for any
pair of axes by summing over all other dimensions. The projection
values are determined using the likelihood values.
Themeshgridapproach,however,hasatrade-off:small-scalefea-
tures of the landscape may be smeared out due to the fixed grid
resolution. This limitation arises because the number of meshgrid
points increases exponentially with the number of dimensions, a
manifestation of the curse of dimensionality. To balance computa-
tional cost with visual detail, we limit the number of grid points per
axis. Specifically, for𝑁≤5, we set the number of points equal to:
max(150−3 𝑁 ,8). For higher dimensions, we fix the number of
points per axis to 5.
3.3.3 Multimodal toy models
Inwhatfollows,weshallintroduceourmultimodallandscapesusing
the plotting projection method from section 3.3.2. For our work, we
define three multimodal toy models of increasing dimensionality: a
3D, 5D and 8D case.
Thefirsttestcasewedefineservesasanintuitivelow-dimensional
exampleofthemultimodalGaussianlandscapesstudiedinthiswork.
We present the setup of this landscape in table 3. The projections of
the landscape are presented in figure 12. It can be seen that the sum
ofmanyGaussiansresultsinamultimodallandscapeofmanypeaks
andvalleys,makingtheidentificationofanoptimalsetofparameters
a non-trivial problem.
In addition, by introducing two more dimensions, resulting in a test-
case of 5 dimensions, the parameter space is enlarged, which pro-
vides samplers a more challenging setting. The projections of this
landscapearepresentedinfigure13andthesetupisshownintable4.
Contrary to figure 12, the 5D projections show less detail, and more
islands appear in the sea of the parameter spaces.
Lastly,wehavethe8Dtestcase,whichpresentsasubstantiallymore
complex landscape compared to the previous two cases. For the 8D
toymodel,wearefacedwithfurtherreductioninvisualinterpretation
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

12C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Axis 2
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Axis 3
−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 2
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Axis 3
−18
−16
−14
−12
−10
−8
−6
−4
−18.4
−16.8
−15.2
−13.6
−12.0
−10.4
−8.8
−7.2
−5.6
−18
−16
−14
−12
−10
−8
−6
−4
Figure12.Theprojectionsofthelog-likelihoodlandscapeofthe3Dtestcase.Thecontourshighlightelevationchangesinthelog-likelihoodvalues.Highvalues
are associated with a white colour, whereas low values are represented in dark blue, as indicated by the globally scaled colour bar. In this figure, a total of 123
points per axis were used for the sampling of the landscape.
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Axis 2
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Axis 3
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
Axis 4
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
0
5
10
15
20
25Axis 5
−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 2
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Axis 3
−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 2
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
Axis 4
−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 2
0
5
10
15
20
25Axis 5
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 3
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
Axis 4
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 3
0
5
10
15
20
25Axis 5
−35 −30 −25 −20 −15 −10 −5
Axis 4
0
5
10
15
20
25Axis 5
−18.48
−18.32
−18.16
−18.00
−17.84
−17.68
−17.52
−17.36
−18.36
−18.24
−18.12
−18.00
−17.88
−17.76
−17.64
−17.52
−18.4
−18.3
−18.2
−18.1
−18.0
−17.9
−17.8
−17.7
−17.6
−18.42
−18.30
−18.18
−18.06
−17.94
−17.82
−17.70
−17.58
−18.48
−18.32
−18.16
−18.00
−17.84
−17.68
−17.52
−17.36
−18.48
−18.32
−18.16
−18.00
−17.84
−17.68
−17.52
−17.36
−18.42
−18.30
−18.18
−18.06
−17.94
−17.82
−17.70
−17.58
−17.46
−18.48
−18.32
−18.16
−18.00
−17.84
−17.68
−17.52
−17.36
−17.20
−18.45
−18.35
−18.25
−18.15
−18.05
−17.95
−17.85
−17.75
−17.65
−18.48
−18.32
−18.16
−18.00
−17.84
−17.68
−17.52
−17.36
Figure 13.As figure 12, but for the 5D test case, using 8 points per axis and showing pairwise combinations of dimensions.
Table 3.Setup parameters for our 3D Gaussian landscape.
Parameter Value
Dimensionality (𝑁) 3
Number of Gaussians (𝑀) 125
Ranges(−10,15),(−20,15),(−15,15)
Gaussian widths (®𝜎) Uniformlysampledbetween0and1.5in
each direction
Amplitude Uniformly sampled between 0 and 2
as seen in figure 14. From it, we see that the peaks and valleys
are smeared out, as there are fewer peaks and valleys in general to
be found in the figure compared to figures 12 and 13. To support
the generation of this higher-dimensional space, the amplitude of
Table 4.Setup parameters for our 5D Gaussian landscape.
Parameter Value
Dimensionality (𝑁) 5
Number of Gaussians (𝑀) 3125
Ranges(−10,15),(−20,15),(−15,15),
(−35,−5),(0,25)
Gaussian widths (®𝜎) Uniformlysampledbetween0and1.5in
each direction
Amplitude Uniformly sampled between 0 and 2
the Gaussians is increased compared to the previous cases. This
adjustment makes it slightly easier to distinguish local maxima in
projection views, allowing us to validate if a potential 8D test case
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler13
Table 5.Setup parameters for the 8D Gaussian landscape.
Parameter Value
Dimensionality (𝑁) 8
Number of Gaussians (𝑀) 15625
Ranges(−10,15),(−20,15),(−15,15),
(−35,−5),(0,25),(−25,25),
(−40,10)and(−10,40)
Gaussian widths (®𝜎) Uniformlysampledbetween0and3.5in
each direction
Amplitude Uniformly sampled between 10 and 500
Table 6.General sampler settings used across the multimodal landscapes.
The landscapes and initial positions remain fixed under the seeds.
Setting 3D 5D 8D
Walkers 20 40 40
Chain length 10000 10000 15000
Random seeds 150 100 100
is sufficient for sampler testing. We present the setup of our 8D test
case in table 5.
3.3.4 Experimental samplers setup
Forallsamplers,wedefineaconsistentsetofgeneralparametersfor
each multimodal landscape. We summarise these in table 6. We can
see that there are some differences between the landscapes, notably
the number of chains used is increased compared to the unimodal
landscapes as described in table 1. For our multimodal landscapes,
we run with at least double the number of chains. This choice was
made as starting in multiple positions allows us to capture more of
the landscape and to better test the dependence of each algorithm’s
convergenceontheinitialpositions.Fromtable6,wecanalsoseethat
betweenour3Dand5Dtestcasesisthenumberofchains;insteadof
20, the 5D model has 40 chains. The chain length remains the same.
However, our 8D test case has an increased chain length due to the
complexityofthelandscape.Byincreasingthechainlength,wegive
the samplers more time to explore, as exploration is expected to be
more difficult.
In table 6, we also provide the number of runs executed for each
test case. To ensure a fair comparison between samplers, the initial
positions of the walkers are fixed for each run. The initial positions
are generated by randomly drawing them from the prior ranges once
again. The sampler-specific settings from table 2 also apply to our
multimodal landscapes.
Importantly,our5Dand8Dtestcasesdonotincludetheadaptive-
Metropolisalgorithm,duetoitsnon-Markoviannature,whichlimits
us in combining chains when we aim to do inference; thereby, its
applicability for higher dimensionality is limited, as it is beneficial
tohavemultiplechainswithvaryingstartingpositionssinceasingle
chain is more likely to get trapped in a local optima. Additionally,
for the 5D and 8D runs, we only pick a single blend move, the80%
stretch20%DE move with an acceptance fraction target of 0.40.
3.4 Landscape reconstruction from MCMC samples
An interesting application of MCMC samples is the possibility to
(re)construct a likelihood landscape. Since each sample in a chain
represents a set of parameters with an associated likelihood value
that lies somewhere within the landscape, we can use these to map
out the projections of the underlying landscape. From sampling in
proportiontotheposterior,wehavehighresolutionintheregionsof
high likelihood and lower resolution in the low likelihood regions,
whichallowsustoadaptivelyzoominoninterestingregions.Tocre-
ate such adaptive resolution images, we apply aquadtreealgorithm.
Thismethodalsoallowsustomapoutlikelihoodlandscapesthatare
not known analytically. From these projections, it is therefore possi-
ble to validate the correctness of the individual model components,
as well as finding possible degeneracies in underlying likelihood
models.
Toapplyaquadtreeinourcases,weselectapairofparameters,as
intheprojectionplots,todefineatwo-dimensionalprojectionplane.
From the full set of MCMC samples, we consider only this pair of
dimensions.Foreachresultingquad,wecomputethemeanlikelihood
value of the points inside it. The quadrants are then coloured based
on this mean. This visually distinguishes regions of high and low
likelihood. In this way, the quadtree provides plots similar in style
to those in section 3.3.2, but with the added benefit of adaptive
resolution that reflects the density of the posterior.
3.4.1 Application to Gaussian landscapes
To demonstrate how the quadtree method can reconstruct likelihood
landscapes,weapplyittoour3Dand5Dmultimodaltoymodelsfor
a single seed run (thereby including 200000 and 400000 samples
respectively). To obtain the reconstructed landscapes, we run the
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm with standardised scaling using the
settings from table 6 for each test case. For the sampler, we employ
a Gaussian proposal distribution with a width of 0.2.
The reconstruction of the 3D landscape is shown in figure 15.
From this figure, we see that the overall shape of the reconstructed
landscape closely matches the original projections from figure 12.
We see that the key features of the original landscape are preserved,
withwell-definedregionsemergingfromthesampling.Additionally,
thecolourbarscalinghasshiftedfrom[≃ −19,−4]intheoriginalto
[≃ −18,∼0.25] in the reconstruction. This expanded scaling arises
from having more estimates of the landscape, which enhances the
resolution. Although the scale extends to values above zero, these
highestregionsarenotprominentlyvisibleinthefigurebecausethey
correspond to small, isolated areas within the landscape.
The reconstruction of the 5D toy model is presented in figure 16.
Here, the colour bar has been adjusted to improve the visibility of
landscape features. While the original colour range was determined
by the likelihood values from the samples, the highest-likelihood
regions in this case are particularly small and would otherwise be
difficulttodistinguish.Additionally,itwouldmaketheoverallstruc-
ture less visible through the colour scaling. The general structure of
the original projections from figure 13 is preserved, with increased
resolution revealing additional details. In particular, features that
initially appeared as well-connected regions are now seen as more
isolatedislands,highlightingthemultimodalnatureofthelandscape.
Theoriginalfigure’scolourscalespannedapproximately1.22orders
of magnitude, while the reconstructed landscape spans a broader
range of 6. This discrepancy arises from the MCMC chains explor-
ingthelandscapemoreefficientlycomparedtothemeshgridmethod,
aswellasthenumberofavailablepointsbeingsignificantlylargerin
the quad tree application.
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

14C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Axis 2
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Axis 3
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
Axis 4
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
0
5
10
15
20
25Axis 5
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−20
−10
0
10
20
Axis 6
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
Axis 7
−10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 1
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Axis 8
−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 2
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Axis 3
−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 2
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
Axis 4
−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 2
0
5
10
15
20
25Axis 5
−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 2
−20
−10
0
10
20
Axis 6
−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 2
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
Axis 7
−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 2
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Axis 8
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 3
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
Axis 4
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 3
0
5
10
15
20
25Axis 5
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 3
−20
−10
0
10
20
Axis 6
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 3
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
Axis 7
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15
Axis 3
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Axis 8
−35 −30 −25 −20 −15 −10 −5
Axis 4
0
5
10
15
20
25Axis 5
−35 −30 −25 −20 −15 −10 −5
Axis 4
−20
−10
0
10
20
Axis 6
−35 −30 −25 −20 −15 −10 −5
Axis 4
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
Axis 7
−35 −30 −25 −20 −15 −10 −5
Axis 4
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Axis 8
0 5 10 15 20 25
Axis 5
−20
−10
0
10
20
Axis 6
0 5 10 15 20 25
Axis 5
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
Axis 7
0 5 10 15 20 25
Axis 5
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Axis 8
−20 −10 0 10 20
Axis 6
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
Axis 7
−20 −10 0 10 20
Axis 6
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Axis 8
−40 −30 −20 −10 0 10
Axis 7
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Axis 8
−18.382
−18.370
−18.358
−18.346
−18.334
−18.322
−18.310
−18.298
−18.286
−18.376
−18.360
−18.344
−18.328
−18.312
−18.296
−18.280
−18.264
−18.384
−18.368
−18.352
−18.336
−18.320
−18.304
−18.288
−18.272
−18.400
−18.384
−18.368
−18.352
−18.336
−18.320
−18.304
−18.288
−18.272
−18.405
−18.375
−18.345
−18.315
−18.285
−18.255
−18.225
−18.195
−18.405
−18.375
−18.345
−18.315
−18.285
−18.255
−18.225
−18.195
−18.165
−18.415
−18.385
−18.355
−18.325
−18.295
−18.265
−18.235
−18.40
−18.37
−18.34
−18.31
−18.28
−18.25
−18.22
−18.39
−18.37
−18.35
−18.33
−18.31
−18.29
−18.27
−18.25
−18.375
−18.365
−18.355
−18.345
−18.335
−18.325
−18.315
−18.305
−18.295
−18.39
−18.36
−18.33
−18.30
−18.27
−18.24
−18.21
−18.18
−18.42
−18.39
−18.36
−18.33
−18.30
−18.27
−18.24
−18.21
−18.40
−18.37
−18.34
−18.31
−18.28
−18.25
−18.22
−18.39
−18.37
−18.35
−18.33
−18.31
−18.29
−18.27
−18.25
−18.39
−18.36
−18.33
−18.30
−18.27
−18.24
−18.21
−18.40
−18.36
−18.32
−18.28
−18.24
−18.20
−18.16
−18.12
−18.42
−18.39
−18.36
−18.33
−18.30
−18.27
−18.24
−18.21
−18.405
−18.375
−18.345
−18.315
−18.285
−18.255
−18.225
−18.195
−18.165
−18.384
−18.368
−18.352
−18.336
−18.320
−18.304
−18.288
−18.272
−18.42
−18.39
−18.36
−18.33
−18.30
−18.27
−18.24
−18.21
−18.18
−18.40
−18.36
−18.32
−18.28
−18.24
−18.20
−18.16
−18.39
−18.36
−18.33
−18.30
−18.27
−18.24
−18.21
−18.39
−18.36
−18.33
−18.30
−18.27
−18.24
−18.21
−18.405
−18.375
−18.345
−18.315
−18.285
−18.255
−18.225
−18.40
−18.38
−18.36
−18.34
−18.32
−18.30
−18.28
−18.26
−18.24
−18.425
−18.375
−18.325
−18.275
−18.225
−18.175
−18.125
−18.075
−18.40
−18.36
−18.32
−18.28
−18.24
−18.20
−18.16
−18.12
−18.44
−18.40
−18.36
−18.32
−18.28
−18.24
−18.20
−18.16
−18.12
Figure 14.As figure 12, but for the 8D test case, using 5 points per axis and showing all pairwise axis combinations.
−5 0 5 10
Axis 1
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
Axis 2
−5 0 5 10
Axis 1
−10
−5
0
5
10
Axis 3
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10
Axis 2
−10
−5
0
5
10
Axis 3
−17.5
−15.0
−12.5
−10.0
−7.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
−17.5
−15.0
−12.5
−10.0
−7.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
−17.5
−15.0
−12.5
−10.0
−7.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
Figure15.Reconstructedlog-likelihoodlandscapeofthe3DmultipleGaussiantestcaseasshowninfigure12,usingaquadtree.Thecolourscalingreflectsthe
minimum and maximum log-likelihood values from the samples. The maximal depth of the quadtree used here is set at 7.
4 SAMPLER PERFORMANCE
4.1 Measuring the performance of a sampler
Having introduced the various samplers in section 2 and the toy
models in section 3, we now shift our focus to assessing and com-
paring the performance of the samplers. The goal is to understand
howeffectivelyandreliablyasamplercanexplorethetargetposterior
distribution. This involves not only evaluating how well it identifies
regionsofhighprobabilitybutalsoassessingwhetherthedistribution
ofsamplesisrepresentativeoftheunderlyinglandscape.Byevaluat-
ing the performance of samplers for toy models, we can understand
the strengths and limitations of the moves in a controlled setting.
To this end, we propose a set of performance metrics that are
broadly applicable across MCMC samplers and likelihood land-
scapes.First,weintroduceanergodicitymetricinsection4.2,which
quantifies how proportionally a sampler explores the posterior dis-
tribution. This metric is constructed by comparing the empirical
distributionoflikelihoodvaluesfromthesamplestotheexpectation
valuesofthetruelandscape.Itallowsustoassesswhetherasampler
samples the posterior in an ergodic manner. A sampler that fails to
exhibitergodicityisoflimitedpracticaluse,asitmaysystematically
missimportantregionsoftheposterior.Followingthis,wemovetoa
performancemetricthattrackstheevolutionoflog-likelihoodvalues
over chain length, presented in section 4.3. By evaluating the chains
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler15
−5 0 5 10
Axis 1
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
Axis 2
−5 0 5 10
Axis 1
−10
−5
0
5
10
Axis 3
−5 0 5 10
Axis 1
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10Axis 4
−5 0 5 10
Axis 1
5
10
15
20Axis 5
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10
Axis 2
−10
−5
0
5
10
Axis 3
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10
Axis 2
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10Axis 4
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10
Axis 2
5
10
15
20Axis 5
−10 −5 0 5 10
Axis 3
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10Axis 4
−10 −5 0 5 10
Axis 3
5
10
15
20Axis 5
−30 −25 −20 −15 −10
Axis 4
5
10
15
20Axis 5
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
−13
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
−13
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
−13
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
−13
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
−13
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
−13
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
−13
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
−13
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
−13
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
−13
Figure16.Asfigure15,butforthe5Dtestcasewithprojectionsshowninfigure13.Amaximalquadtreedepthof6isused.Thecolourscalehasbeenmanually
adjusted to span values from−19to−13for improved visibility. Isolated islands reflect the multimodal nature of the landscape.
ofmultiplerunsandvisualisingtheprogressionoftheirbestmedian
log-likelihood values, we gain insight into how quickly and reliably
each sampler finds high-probability regions. This metric highlights
differences in convergence speed, exploration strategies, and overall
effectiveness. Furthermore, we also consider sampler robustness, as
defined in section 4.4. This metric captures the variability between
chainsofasamplerbycomparingthebestandworstoutcomesacross
multiple runs with different random seeds. A robust sampler should
produceconsistentlygoodresults,whilelargediscrepanciesindicate
sensitivitytoinitialconditionsandinstability.Finally,insection4.5,
we explorethe potentialbenefit ofapplying a non-stochasticoptimi-
sation algorithm to the best parameter estimates produced by each
MCMCsampler.ThishybridapproachofcombiningMCMCexplo-
rationwithlocaloptimisationcanleadtoimprovedlikelihoodvalues
and more accurate estimates. For models where the best-fit parame-
ters are critical, this step can offer a significant practical advantage.
4.2 The ergodicity metric
Being able to determine how ergodic a sampler is helps to under-
stand how effectively the sampler can reproduce the target posterior
distribution.Wheneverasamplerisergodic,itsamplespointsinpro-
portion to the posterior, which implies that the number density of
points is proportional to the posterior values:
𝑛(𝜃) ∝𝑃(𝜃|𝑥).(33)
Using Bayes’ theorem, this can be rewritten as a product of the
likelihood and the prior functions:
𝑛(𝜃) ∝𝑃(𝑥|𝜃)𝑃(𝜃),(34)
or as a function of only the likelihood whenever a prior is used that
is flat within its bounds:
𝑛(𝜃) ∝ L (𝑥|𝜃).(35)
This equation implies that when the sampler is ergodic, the number
density of points should be proportional to the respective likelihood
values of these samples.
Tocreatetheergodicitymetric,wedivideanylikelihoodlandscape
into hypercube segments. We present this method in appendix C2.
This hypercube division allows us to compare the expectation value
ofindividualcellstothenumberofsamplesinthesecellsfromsam-
pling. This detailed approach increases the accuracy of the metric
as there is less smearing-out compared to the calculation of the en-
tirelandscape.GiventhemultimodalityofourGaussiantoymodels,
segmenting these landscapes is beneficial as cells can differ dramat-
ically. The obtained likelihood values are calculated following the
method described in appendix C1. These are used to determine the
expectation value per cell, which represents the expected number of
samplesinacellbasedonthelikelihoodvalue.Theexpectationvalue
of a hypercube cell is given by:
Cell expectation value= Lcell
Ltotal
𝑁samples,(36)
wherethelikelihoodofacellisgivenbyL cell,thetotallikelihoodby
Ltotal and the total number of samples drawn from the landscape by
𝑁samples. Both are determined through numerical integration, where
theboundsaredefinedbythecell’sboundsandthelandscapebounds,
respectively.Ifthesamplerisergodic,thenumberofsamplesineach
cell should approximately match this expectation value.
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

16C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
To visualise the expectation values and the number of samples
of the cells, we plot the values using overlaying histograms. These
allow us to identify whether a sampler over- or underestimates the
expectationvaluesofthecellswithinalandscape.Iftheheightsofthe
barsinthefigurematch,thenthesamplerissaidtobeergodicforthat
regime.Theresultsofourergodicitymetric,appliedtoourGaussian
testcases,arepresentedinsection4.2.1.Toobtainasufficientnumber
ofbins,weapplytheRiceruletothenumberofcellsthat,onaverage,
have a cell occupation above 1, i.e.𝑁bins =2𝑛 1/3.
4.2.1 Application to our multimodal toy models
Having run according to the general settings in table 2 and the
landscape-specific settings in table 6, we have collected the results
of the random-seed runs for the collection of samplers. From these
runs,wedeterminetheaveragecelloccupationoverallruns,without
removing any burn-in, and use it to obtain a more robust estimate
of the ergodicity, as it smooths out any potential outlier runs. We
present the result of our ergodicity metric applied to the samplers
for the 3D Gaussian landscape in figure 17. From this, we can see
that all samplers follow the expectation values more closely than the
Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm. The MH algorithm has some
outlying bins, indicating that it oversamples compared to the expec-
tation values for some cells on average. Additionally, we see that
our stretch move implementation has a comparable ergodicity out-
cometotheoriginalstretchmovefromEMCEE.Thesemovesvisually
follow the expectation values the closest among all samplers. More-
over, we also note that the newly introduced methods of the blend
moveandthePCAstretchmovefollowsimilarbehaviourtothewell-
establishedmovesofsnooker,differentialevolution,stretchandwalk
moves. Notably, however, the differential evolution (DE) algorithm
withanacceptancefractionof0.25oversamplessomecells,whereas
the 0.40 target acceptance fraction variant does less oversampling.
The snooker move gives similar results to the version where𝛾is
sampled. However, it can be seen that the oversampled region of the
snooker with a fixed𝛾disappears when using the sampled version.
Amongst the blend moves, the (20/80) version with an acceptance
fractiontargetof25%visuallyfollowstheexpectationvaluebinsthe
best.
Wepresentthe5Dresultoftheergodicitymetricforoursamplers
infigure18.Fromthisfigure,weseethattheMHsamplerundersam-
ples certain regions of the parameter space compared to the ergodic
expectations, as seen from the isolated blue bins. The other sam-
plers do not present undersampling. Most samplers oversample the
high-expectation valued cells. The DE (AF25%) and walk sampler
oversample the expectation value bin around a value of 15000 the
most,goingupto30000-35000.Additionally,weseethatmorebins
are not completely overlayed, as opposed to the results of the 3D
testcase in figure 17.
Lastly, we present the results of the ergodicity metric for our
highest-dimensional landscape, the 8D model, in figure 19. From
this,weseethatmostsamplersundersamplehigh-likelihoodregions:
a lot of blue is observed. The snooker moves, the DE 25%, and the
walk move cover the most among all the samplers; these samplers
seemmostergodic.Interestingly,theDEmovewithanacceptanceof
25% is the only sampler that overestimates the expectation value of
somecellsbyalargemargin,withthelargestoverestimationofabove
60000 compared to the expectation value of just below 30000.
TheMHalgorithmhasthelowestergodiccoverage,withthefewest
overlaps and histogram bars. The stretch moves also have less cov-
erage of the expectation values compared to the snooker and DE
moves.
4.3 The performance of samplers
To have a consistent and robust comparison of sampler performance
across multiple runs, we introduce alog-likelihood ratio evolution
metric.Thismetricquantifieshowfareachsamplerdeviatesfromthe
best observed sampler over chain length, averaged across chains and
runs.Aftereachrun,foranysampler,wecomputethebestlikelihood
attained by every chain. From this collection of best likelihoods,
we select the median chain per run. This provides a representative
estimate of the sampler’s typical performance within that run. This
medianchainislesssensitivetooutliersthanusingtheabsolutebest
or worst-performing chain and thus provides a representative reflec-
tion of average convergence behaviour. From the selected median
chain, we construct a monotonic likelihood trajectory by replacing
each point with the best likelihood reached up to that stage in the
chain.Thisensuresthattheconvergenceprofilesonlyimprovewhen
a better parameter set is found, making comparisons between sam-
plers more interpretable. Having obtained the median chains across
many independent runs, we then average the likelihood trajectories
foreachsampleroverallruns.Thisyieldsasmoothedprofileofhow
thesamplertendstoevolveovermanyruns,accountingforvariations
due to randomness. To compare samplers, we express their perfor-
mance relative to the overall best sampler by computing likelihood
ratios. We define the best sampler as the one that achieves the best
median likelihood over chain length. Since our likelihoods are in
log-space, these ratios reduce to simple differences:
log
 Lbest
L

=log(L best) −log(L),
whereLdenotestheaveragelikelihoodtraceofagivensamplerand
Lbest that of the best one.
Plotting these differences over time gives a set oflog-likelihood
ratiocurves,wheretheverticalaxisindicatesdeviationfromthebest-
performing sampler. A steep decline suggests rapid convergence,
whereasaflattertrajectoryindicatesslowerprogress.Thefinaloffset
on the𝑦-axis reflects the residual performance gap compared to the
best sampler over the full chain length. This visualisation highlights
both convergence speed and final performance. It offers a compact
summary of how each sampler performs on average for arbitrary
seeds. We apply this method across all unimodal and multimodal
toy models, with their results presented in sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2,
respectively.
4.3.1 Application to unimodal landscapes
Wepresenttheresultsofthelog-likelihoodevolutionfortheunimodal
landscapes in figures 20 and 21. From these figures, we see that the
walk move outperforms the other samplers. The MH-based moves
perform the worst as seen from their lowest ranking of 12, 13 and
14 in the Rosenbrock case. However, in Neal’s funnel case, the MH
algorithmitselfranksinthetopthreesamplers.Thisisalsoseenfrom
itscurve,whichissignificantlydifferentfromallsamplercurves.The
adaptive Metropolis (AM) and the MH with standardised scaling
version remain the worst among the pool of samplers for Neal’s
funnel.
Betweenthetwounimodaltestcases,weseenotabledifferencesin
theshapeofthecurves.IntheRosenbrockcase,ittakesthesamplers
longer to decrease the distance to the best likelihood of the best
sampler,whereasinNeal’sfunnel,theinitialsamplingphasehasthe
largest decrease in distance. Additionally, in figure 20, all samplers
from the top six and upward have a log-likelihood ratio value above
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler17
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
MH
Expectation values
MH (SS)
Expectation values
AM
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
Stretch (EMCEE)
Expectation values
Stretch (own)
Expectation values
Stretch (PCA)
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
Snooker
Expectation values
Snooker (RG)
Expectation values
DE (AF 25%)
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
DE (AF 40%)
Expectation values
Walk
0 2500 5000 7500 10000
Value
Expectation values
Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
0 2500 5000 7500 10000
Value
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
Blend (80/20) (AF 25%)
0 2500 5000 7500 10000
Value
Expectation values
Blend (20/80) (AF 25%)
Figure 17.Ergodicity comparison between the expectation values of cells and the number of samples per cell for our 3D toy model. The data have been binned
according to the Rice rule. The expectation values are plotted in blue, and the number of samples of each sampler is plotted in red. Each sampler has its unique
subfigure, as highlighted by the label of the red colour bins. By overlaying the two, we identify the regimes where the sampler is considered ergodic, resulting
in a darker red colour. In this figure, we apply a shared x-axis to compare the samplers effectively. The effective number of non-zero cells was 1194. The total
number of cells of the landscape was 2197.
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

18C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
MH
Expectation values
MH (SS)
Expectation values
Stretch (EMCEE)
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
Stretch (own)
Expectation values
Stretch (PCA)
Expectation values
Snooker
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
Snooker (RG)
Expectation values
DE (AF 25%)
0 10000 20000 30000
Value
Expectation values
DE (AF 40%)
0 10000 20000 30000
Value
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
Walk
0 10000 20000 30000
Value
Expectation values
Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
Figure 18.As figure 17, but for our 5D Gaussian toy model. The effective number of non-zero cells was 3896, and the total number of cells was 59049.
1comparedtothebestsampler.WedonotseethisforNeal’sfunnel;
all samplers are within a log-likelihood ratio value of10−2.
Notably, the snooker moves are ranked in both test cases near the
lower end of the performance chart. The stretch moves cluster near
each other in the ranking; however, the stretch move fromEMCEE
does have some distance to our implementation of the stretch move
andthePCAstretchmove.Itisunclearwherethedifferencedirectly
originates from; we suspect that it arises from subtle differences in
our implementation of the random number generation, meaning that
the samplers traverse the landscape differently, but converge to the
same target distribution.
Between the blend moves, we see that the performance in the
Rosenbrock case is much more spread than in Neal’s funnel. The
blend move with more differential evolution performs better in the
Rosenbrock case, whereas in Neal’s funnel, the performance of the
blend moves is comparable. From the differential evolution moves,
we see that they perform well in the Rosenbrock toy model, but not
so well in Neal’s funnel.
4.3.2 Application to multimodal landscapes
We present the results of the evolution of log-likelihoods for the
multimodal toy models in figures 22, 23 and 24. From these, we
see that the differential evolution move with a target acceptance
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler19
10−9
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
MH
Expectation values
MH (SS)
Expectation values
Stretch (EMCEE)
10−9
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
Stretch (own)
Expectation values
Stretch (PCA)
Expectation values
Snooker
10−9
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
Snooker (RG)
Expectation values
DE (AF 25%)
0 20000 40000
Value
Expectation values
DE (AF 40%)
0 20000 40000
Value
10−9
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Density
Expectation values
Walk
0 20000 40000
Value
Expectation values
Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
Figure 19.As figure 17, but for our 8D Gaussian toy model. The effective number of non-zero cells was 21437, and the total number of cells was 1679616.
fraction of 25% outperforms all samplers in each test case. Notably,
the magnitude by which it outperforms the other moves increases
with dimensionality. For 3D, the closest sampler is within a log-
likelihood difference of∼2·10 −2, whereas for 5D this is∼6·10−2
and∼0.5·10 −1 for 8D.
Interestingly,forincreasingdimensionality,weseethatthesnooker
moves gain ground compared to the other moves. For the 5D test
case,itrankssecondandthird;inthe8Dmodelalsoranksthird.The
snooker move obtains curves below the stretch-based moves in the
5D and 8D test cases. Given the stretch moves, we see, in addition
to the unimodal results, that the stretch move fromEMCEEis the
best-performing. It has the lowest curves among the stretch moves
we tested, although the results are close.
Additionally, considering the Metropolis-Hastings-based algo-
rithms, we see that standardised scaling has a head start compared
to the regular MH algorithm. In the 3D and 8D cases, it maintains
this advantage, resulting in a curve below the MH curve. In the 5D
case, this does not occur. Notably, the MH-based variants are iso-
lated and at the top of the results for the 5D and 8D cases, followed
by the walk move, until a jump is made to the ensemble methods
that utilise two or three walkers in their proposals. The figures in-
dicate that ensemble-based sampling outperforms classic MCMC in
multimodal settings.
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

20C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Step in Markov chain
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
1
M ∑ln() − 1
N ∑ln(best)
Samplers
1. Walk (Best)
2. DE (AF 40%)
3. DE (AF 25%)
4. Blend (20/80) (AF 25%)
5. Blend (80/20) (AF 25%)
6. Stretch (EMCEE)
7. Stretch (own)
8. Stretch (PCA)
9. Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
10. Snooker (RG)
11. Snooker
12. MH
13. AM
14. MH (SS)
best = -2.3024e+01
Figure 20.Sampler log-likelihood evolution over chain length compared to the best sampler of the Rosenbrock test case. Each curve is the difference of the
average of median log-likelihoods over many runs between a sampler and the best sampler. The samplers are ranked based on their final positions relative to the
best-performing sampler. In addition, the final likelihoods are indicated with a star marker. The best sampler’s best likelihood is indicated with a dashed line to
highlight the position in the chain where this was reached on average, as well as the average median log-likelihood value.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Step in Markov chain
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
1
N ∑ln(best) − 1
M ∑ln()
Samplers
1. Walk (Best)
2. Stretch (EMCEE)
3. MH
4. Stretch (own)
5. Stretch (PCA)
6. DE (AF 40%)
7. Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
8. Blend (20/80) (AF 25%)
9. Blend (80/20) (AF 25%)
10. DE (AF 25%)
11. Snooker (RG)
12. Snooker
13. AM
14. MH (SS)
best = 1.2469e-01
Figure 21.As figure 20, but for Neal’s funnel test case.
4.4 The robustness of samplers
In addition to evaluating the average convergence behaviour of sam-
plers,wealsoassesstheirrobustness.Thismetriccapturestheconsis-
tency and reliability of a sampler across multiple independent runs,
providinginsightintoitsstability.Contrarytothepreviousmetric,we
store the chains with the highest and lowest achieved likelihoods of
a sampler run. These are then used to construct populations of best-
and worst-performing chains through the number of runs. We then
computetheaverageofthebestandworstchainpopulations,anden-
forcelikelihoodmonotonicityagainforcomparabilityoftheprofiles.
Thedifferencebetweenthesetwoaveragedpopulationchainsreflects
theextenttowhichasampler’sperformancecanvary.Asmalldiffer-
enceindicatesthattheworstchainsbehavesimilarlytothebestones,
signifying high robustness. Conversely, a large gap between the two
suggests that the sampler’s performance is sensitive to initialisation
or stochastic effects and thus leads to low stability. This measure is
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler21
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Step in Markov chain
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
1
N ∑ln(best) − 1
M ∑ln()
Samplers
1. DE (AF 25%) (Best)
2. Stretch (EMCEE)
3. Stretch (own)
4. Blend (80/20) (AF 25%)
5. Stretch (PCA)
6. Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
7. Snooker (RG)
8. DE (AF 40%)
9. Snooker
10. Blend (20/80) (AF 25%)
11. MH (SS)
12. AM
13. Walk
14. MH
best = 6.9756e-01
Figure 22.Sampler log-likelihood evolution compared to the best sampler of the 3D Gaussian toy model. The curves are generated by the difference between
the average median log-likelihoods of samplers compared to the best sampler. The best sampler’s best likelihood is indicated with a dashed line to highlight the
position in the chain where this was reached on average.
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Step in Markov chain
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
1
N ∑ln(best) − 1
M ∑ln()
Samplers
1. DE (AF 25%) (Best)
2. Snooker (RG)
3. Snooker
4. Stretch (EMCEE)
5. Stretch (PCA)
6. Stretch (own)
7. Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
8. DE (AF 40%)
9. Walk
10. MH
11. MH (SS)
best = 3.6803e-01
Figure 23.As figure 22, but for the 5D Gaussian toy model.
particularly relevant when computational resources are limited and
only a small number of chains can be run. In such settings, a robust
sampler increases the possibility of achieving satisfactory conver-
gence in a single run. When interpreted in conjunction with the
log-likelihood ratio evolution curves, this robustness metric helps to
identify samplers that are not only performant but also reliably so.
Theidealsamplerexcelsinbothmetrics,havingqualityconvergence
across runs, while also converging quickly and efficiently.
4.4.1 Application to unimodal landscapes
We present the results of the robustness metric of the Rosenbrock
and Neal’s funnel toy models in figures 25 and 26, respectively.
From these, we see that the walk move has the largest robustness. It
achievesadeviationof∼3·10 −2 inlog-likelihoodfortheRosenbrock
test case and∼10 −3 in Neal’s funnel. In the Rosenbrock case, the
stretch-based moves take the lowest rankings. Notably, their curves
increaseovertime,asopposedtotheflattenedlevelsachievedbythe
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

22C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000
Step in Markov chain
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
1
N ∑ln(best) − 1
M ∑ln()
Samplers
1. DE (AF 25%) (Best)
2. DE (AF 40%)
3. Snooker (RG)
4. Stretch (EMCEE)
5. Stretch (own)
6. Stretch (PCA)
7. Snooker
8. Blend (80/20) (AF 40%) 
9. Walk
10. MH (SS)
11. MH
best = 5.5556e+00
Figure 24.As figure 22, but for the 8D Gaussian toy model.
walk,adaptiveMetropolis,andDEmoves.Importantly,havingalevel
curve is only a measure of good robustness whenever it is located at
a low value. The worst-performing moves have a discrepancy above
a log-likelihood of 1 in the Rosenbrock test case. In Neal’s funnel,
this is at most10−2.
Given both figures, we see that there exists an initial phase in which
the differences fluctuate frequently, after which the curves stabilise.
The position of this varies per sampler, as seen in both figures. In
the Rosenbrock figure, after roughly 700 steps, the samplers have
relatively converged. In Neal’s funnel, this occurs for around 250
steps in the Markov chain.
4.4.2 Application to multimodal landscapes
The robustness results of our three-, five-, and eight-dimensional
test cases are presented in figures 27, 28, and 29, respectively. From
these, we see similar behaviour to the unimodal robustness results.
Most samplers achieve a flattened regime after an initial phase of
fluctuations. The worst-performing sampler in all our multimodal
testcases,intermsofrobustness,istheMetropolis-Hastingssampler.
Notably, for increasing dimensionality, the discrepancy between the
worst and best chains grows for all samplers. In the 3D test case, the
highest discrepancy is found for the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm
at a log-likelihood difference value of∼1, whereas for the 5D and
8D cases, this is for∼10and∼20. The differential evolution move
withatargetacceptancefractionof25%performswellacrossalltest
cases; it never drops out of the top 5. For the 3D and 8D cases, it
is the best-performing sampler. However, this does not apply to the
40% version. This version is located near the lower-performing end
of the robustness.
Interestingly, the snooker moves perform well in the 5D and 8D
test cases. In the 5D case, it comes on top of the robustness ranking.
In the 8D case, it performs as the third and fifth best. For the 3D
model, it is outperformed by all stretch moves and the DE 25%
algorithm; nevertheless, it is frequently located in or around the top
5.Moreover,fromthefigures,weseethatstandardisationresultsinan
improvement of robustness compared to the default MH algorithm.
In each multimodal test case, the standardised scaling approach has
a curve located lower than the regular MH sampler. The robustness
ofthewalkmoveintheunimodaltestcasesdoesnottransferdirectly
to the multimodal cases, as it is no longer outperforming the other
algorithms with some margin. Nevertheless, it still appears to be
more stable than the Adaptive Metropolis and Metropolis-Hastings
algorithms.
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler23
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Step in Markov chain
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
|1
N ∑ln(best, c) − 1
M ∑ln(worst, c)|
Samplers
1. Walk
2. AM
3. DE (AF 40%)
4. DE (AF 25%)
5. Blend (20/80) (AF 25%)
6. Blend (80/20) (AF 25%)
7. MH (SS)
8. MH
9. Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
10. Snooker (RG)
11. Snooker
12. Stretch (EMCEE)
13. Stretch (own)
14. Stretch (PCA)
Figure 25.Robustness curves for the samplers applied to the Rosenbrock test case. Each curve is constructed by using the worst and best populations of chains
across all runs. These are based on the overall best log-likelihood found in each run. The samplers are ranked according to their final robustness score and are
presented in the legend.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Step in Markov chain
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
|1
N ∑ln(best, c) − 1
M ∑ln(worst, c)|
Samplers
1. Walk
2. Stretch (EMCEE)
3. DE (AF 40%)
4. Stretch (own)
5. Stretch (PCA)
6. Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
7. DE (AF 25%)
8. Blend (20/80) (AF 25%)
9. MH
10. Snooker (RG)
11. Snooker
12. Blend (80/20) (AF 25%)
13. AM
14. MH (SS)
Figure 26.As figure 25, but for Neal’s funnel test case.
4.5 Improving on the best set of parameters
Once MCMC sampling has been performed for a given likelihood
landscape, a natural follow-up question arises: “Can we further im-
proveuponthebestparametersetidentifiedduringsampling?”.This
question is particularly relevant for complex models, where even
marginal improvements in the parameter set can yield noticeably
better model fits. While MCMC methods are primarily designed to
approximate the posterior distribution rather than to optimise the
likelihood explicitly, they often produce samples that lie close to
the global optimum. However, due to their stochastic nature and fi-
nite sampling resolution, these methods may not land exactly on
the optimal likelihood point. This observation motivates the use of
optimisation techniques as a post-processing step to refine the best
sampleobtained.Topursuethisrefinement,weapplyadeterministic
optimisationalgorithmstartingfromthebest-likelihoodsampleiden-
tifiedacross allsamplers.Specifically, weusethe DownhillSimplex
(DHS)method,alsoknownastheNelder–Meadalgorithm(Nelder&
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

24C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Step in Markov chain
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
|1
N ∑ln(best, c) − 1
M ∑ln(worst, c)|
Samplers
1. DE (AF 25%)
2. Stretch (EMCEE)
3. Stretch (PCA)
4. Stretch (own)
5. Snooker (RG)
6. Snooker
7. Blend (80/20) (AF 25%)
8. MH (SS)
9. Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
10. Walk
11. AM
12. DE (AF 40%)
13. Blend (20/80) (AF 25%)
14. MH
Figure 27.Robustness curves for the samplers applied to the 3D Gaussian toy model. The curves are constructed using the worst and best populations of chains
across all runs. These are based on the overall best log-likelihood found in each run. The samplers are ranked according to their final robustness score and are
presented in the legend.
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Step in Markov chain
10−2
10−1
100
101
|1
N ∑ln(best, c) − 1
M ∑ln(worst, c)|
Samplers
1. Snooker (RG)
2. Snooker
3. Walk
4. DE (AF 25%)
5. MH (SS)
6. Stretch (own)
7. Stretch (EMCEE)
8. Stretch (PCA)
9. DE (AF 40%)
10. Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
11. MH
Figure 28.As figure 27, but for the 5D toy model.
Mead1965).Thisisaderivative-freeoptimiserthatiswell-suitedfor
noisy,non-smooth,ornon-differentiableobjectivefunctions.Itaims
to climb the final stretch of the likelihood surface from a promising
initial point, potentially uncovering a better-fitting parameter con-
figuration. In our experiments, we apply the DHS algorithm to our
multimodaltoylandscapes.Weexcludetheunimodalcasesfromthis
step, assuming that their relatively simple structure allows MCMC
to sample already close enough to the optimum.
Table 7.Configuration parameters for the Downhill Simplex algorithm.
Parameter Value
Initial step size 0.005
Convergence tolerance10 −10
Maximumnumberofiterations 10000
Objective functionLas equa-
tion (31)
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler25
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000
Step in Markov chain
10−2
10−1
100
101
|1
N ∑ln(best, c) − 1
M ∑ln(worst, c)|
Samplers
1. DE (AF 25%)
2. Walk
3. Snooker
4. MH (SS)
5. Snooker (RG)
6. DE (AF 40%)
7. Stretch (own)
8. Blend (80/20) (AF 40%)
9. Stretch (EMCEE)
10. Stretch (PCA)
11. MH
Figure 29.As figure 27, but for the 8D toy model.
Table8.ResultsofDHSrefinementacrossGaussianlandscapesofincreasing
dimensionality.
Dimensionality Initial log( L )Refined log( L )Improvement Iterations
3D 0.748156 0.773032 0.0248766 75
5D 0.666361 0.677412 0.0110508 175
8D 5.82135 6.19364 0.372287 1270
4.5.1 Application to toy models
ForourDownhillSimplexalgorithm,weusethesettingsasdescribed
in table 7. It is applied to the best set of parameters from the sam-
ples of the differential evolution algorithm with a target acceptance
fraction of25%. This sampler was chosen based on the results from
sections4.3and4.4.Theresultsarepresentedintable8.Fromthese,
weseethatthebest-foundlikelihoodisalwaysanimprovementofthe
optimum found from MCMC. The largest log-likelihood improve-
ment is found for the 8D toy model, improving the log-likelihood
from∼5.82to∼6.19. The smallest improvement is found for the
5Dtestcase,improvingfromalog-likelihoodof∼0.666to∼0.677.
Additionally,wecanseethatforincreasingdimensionality,thenum-
berofrequirediterationsforconvergenceincreases.Thisisexpected
as the complexity increases for higher dimensionality. Importantly,
this can halt the value of applying an optimisation algorithm since
higher-dimensional likelihood functions are more costly to evaluate.
Nevertheless, these results indicate that there is a potential room for
improvement on the best found set of parameters.
5 DISCUSSION
5.1 Toy models
Fortheconstructionofourmultimodallandscapes,weusetheGaus-
sian function as described in equation (30). It is worth noting that
alternative functions to the Gaussian exist and could potentially im-
prove computational efficiency in higher dimensions. An interesting
alternativecouldinvolveconstructinglandscapesbasedonfunctions
that avoid the exponential calculation inherent to Gaussians. How-
ever, the bottleneck of our likelihood function is in the logarithm
of the sum of individual Gaussians; therefore, improvements should
primarily focus on this operation.
Additionally,itwouldbeworthwhiletoextendthedimensionality
of our test cases to higher cases since these would be particularly
beneficial for understanding the behaviour of each sampler in more
complex problems. This, in turn, could help users select the most
suitable sampler based on the dimensionality of their application.
Given our current highest dimensionality of eight, our results might
belimited;ahigherdimensionalitytestcasewouldgivemoreweight
to our outcomes. However, given the exponential increase in com-
putational cost with dimensionality, our test would need to be done
with a significantly smaller number of chains and/or re-runs.
5.2 Ergodicity metric
The ergodicity metric provides a diagnostic for evaluating how well
different MCMC samplers can recover the expected distribution of
samples across a discretised likelihood landscape. When comparing
the results across the three toy models of increasing dimensionality,
several consistent trends and notable deviations emerge. In the 3D
case, nearly all ensemble-based samplers demonstrate close agree-
ment with the expected occupation values, indicating highly ergodic
behaviour.Additionally,boththeoriginalandourimplementationof
the stretch move closely follow the theoretical expectations, validat-
ing the correctness of our implementation and suggesting that the
stretch move is highly ergodic in low dimensions. Moreover, newly
introduced moves, such as the PCA stretch and blend moves, dis-
playbehaviourcomparabletothemoreestablishedensemblemoves,
reinforcing the correctness of their implementation and potential
usefulness. Among the blend moves, the (20/80) blend with a 25%
target acceptance fraction stands out as the most ergodic, effectively
balancing the exploratory strength of the DE with the regularising
influenceofthestretchmove.Theseobservationshighlightthevalue
of combining move types to modulate the exploratory-exploitative
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

26C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
trade-off. The Metropolis-Hastings (MH) sampler, however, shows
cleardeviations,withseveralcellsbeingoversampledrelativetotheir
expectation values. This suggests that the MH sampler can become
trapped in local optima more easily, leading to prolonged sampling
in specific regions and an inflated local density.
Movingtofivedimensions,thesamplingchallengeincreases,and
the differences between samplers become more pronounced. The
MHalgorithmnowunderestimatestheoccupationofnearlyallcells,
markedly worse than in 3D. This confirms that the MH struggles
to maintain coverage as dimensionality increases, or at least that
the length of its burn-in phase increases more strongly with dimen-
sionality than for ensemble methods. Interestingly, most ensemble
samplers begin to exhibit some degree of overestimation in high-
expectationcells.Forinstance,theDEwitha25%targetacceptance
fraction, as well as the walk move, significantly oversample certain
high-likelihoodregions,withcountsthatexceedtheexpectationval-
ues by a factor of two or more. These high-likelihood modes act
asstrongattractors,particularlyincomplex,multimodallandscapes,
where exploration becomes more difficult, and the chain can remain
stuck. The stretch and snooker moves retain reasonable ergodicity
but also begin to show small deviations compared to their strong
performance in 3D.
In eight dimensions, ergodic behaviour is compromised across all
samplers.TheMHsampler,inparticular,failstocapturetheexpected
distribution almost entirely, with the sparsest histogram coverage
and minimal overlap with the expectation values. This underlines its
ineffectiveness for high-dimensional, multimodal landscapes. Most
samplers exhibit widespread underestimation of cell occupation of
regions with significant likelihood, visible through a predominance
of blue bins. This is particularly evident in samplers like stretch and
PCA stretch, which lack coverage of the ergodic domain. The DE
move with a 25% acceptance target remains the only sampler to still
overestimate certain high-likelihood regions, reinforcing the earlier
observation that exploration-heavy configurations can lead to local
overconcentration. Nevertheless, the snooker and DE (25%) moves
achieve the highest coverage of the expectation values in this set-
ting,indicatingthat,despitesomelocaloverestimation,theyprovide
the most ergodic behaviour under fixed settings. The reduced per-
formance of stretch-based methods at high dimensionality suggests
thattheyarelesssuitedforstronglymultimodalorhigh-dimensional
exploration, where broader proposals or differential information are
more beneficial.
Across all test cases, the observed ergodicity trends affirm that no
samplerisuniversallyoptimal,butsomeareconsistentlymorerobust,
in terms of ergodicity, than others. Importantly, in our analysis, we
did not remove any burn-in phase. This choice was made since the
size of the burn-in depends per testcase and the optimal size is
not known exactly. However, by removing a burn-in period from the
chains,theretainedsamplesareexpectedtobetterrepresentthetarget
distribution and therefore obtain a better ergodicity measure, since
these early samples are strongly influenced by the initial conditions
of the chains.
5.3 Performance metric
5.3.1 Unimodal landscapes
We observe from figures 20 and 21 that the walk move is the most
effective across both unimodal landscapes. This result can be at-
tributedtoitsensemble-basedproposalstrategy,whichleveragesthe
full state of the population. This allows it not only to rapidly ap-
proach the global optimum but also to iteratively refine its estimate
as all walkers concentrate around the high-likelihood region. The
continuedimprovementinitscurvereflectsthisadaptiverefinement.
In contrast to this, the Metropolis-Hastings (MH) based samplers
generally underperform. In the Rosenbrock case, they occupy the
lowest rankings, likely due to the local, uninformed nature of their
proposals, which struggle with the sharp curvature and narrow opti-
mum region. Interestingly, in Neal’s funnel, the plain MH algorithm
ranksamongthetopthreesamplers.Thisdivergenceinperformance
suggests that while MH may initially struggle to explore complex
regions, once it locates the optimum, its consistent local exploration
enables further refinement, resulting in a noticeable late-stage im-
provement in its log-likelihood curve.
Thedifferenceinconvergencebehaviouracrossthetwotestcasesis
interesting. In Neal’s funnel, most of the reduction in log-likelihood
ratio occurs early in the sampling process. This suggests that the
globaloptimumiseasiertolocateinthiscase,likelyduetoitsbroader
andmoreaccessiblegeometry.Incontrast,theRosenbrockfunction’s
narrow valley and strong curvature delay convergence, making it
more challenging for samplers to approach the optimum early on.
This difficulty is also reflected in the absolute log-likelihood ratios.
In figure 20, all samplers outside the top five exhibit log-likelihood
ratios greater than one, implying their maximum likelihoods are at
least a factor of𝑒lower. Neal’s funnel shows no such discrepancy;
all samplers converge within a range of10−2.
Lookingattheperformanceacrossmovetypes,thesnookermoves
consistentlyranknearthebottominbothlandscapes,suggestinglim-
ited performance across these relatively easy test cases. The stretch
moves, while similarly clustered, reveal subtle implementation dif-
ferences. TheEMCEEversion achieves slightly better performance,
possibly due to small deviations in tuning or algorithmic detail
compared to our versions. Blend moves demonstrate more varied
behaviour. In the Rosenbrock landscape, the variant incorporating
more differential evolution performs notably better. In Neal’s fun-
nel, however, performance across blend variations is more uniform.
We note that differential evolution-based samplers are particularly
effective on the Rosenbrock landscape but less so on Neal’s funnel.
This contrast highlights the dependency of sampler performance on
landscapestructure;strategiesthatexcelatexploringnarrow,curved
optimamaynotofferthesameadvantagesinbroader,flatterregions,
as in Neal’s funnel.
5.3.2 Multimodal landscapes
The log-likelihood evolution results for the 3D, 5D, and 8D multi-
modal toy models, shown in figures 22, 23, and 24, indicate how
sampler performance changes with dimensionality. Across all three
test cases, the differential evolution (DE) sampler with a 25% target
acceptancefractionconsistentlyachievesthehighestlikelihoods,and
itsrelativeadvantagebecomesincreasinglypronouncedwithdimen-
sionality. This scaling behaviour strongly suggests that DE-based
samplers are particularly well suited to high-dimensional inference
problems.Furtherinvestigationintotheirperformanceatevenhigher
dimensions may yield valuable insight to understand the extent to
which the DE sampler performs well.
Interestingly,snookermovesimprovewithdimensionalityaswell.
While they lag in 3D, they consistently rank among the top per-
formers in both the 5D and 8D cases. These results indicate that
the snooker move may offer satisfactory exploration capabilities in
higher dimensions. This and the results of the DE sampler are espe-
cially relevant given the continued popularity of the stretch move as
implemented inEMCEE, which performs reasonably well but is out-
paced by both these samplers in the higher-dimensional scenarios.
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler27
Utilising these methods over the stretch move can result in better
results. Adding onto the performance ofEMCEE’s stretch move, their
stretch move has a performance edge over our implementations; it
is evident but minor. This suggests that while it remains a robust
default,thereremainsroomforimprovementinourimplementations
of this move.
The Metropolis-Hastings variants generally perform poorly, par-
ticularly in higher dimensions, where their curves in figures 22, 23,
and24areisolatedabovethoseoftheensemble-basedmethods.The
MH algorithm with standardised scaling fares especially poorly in
the 5D and 8D test cases. In 3D, the MH SS variant maintains an
advantage over the standard MH approach, but in 5D, this reverses.
This is likely due to the increased multimodality and the oversized
proposal width in the standardised version.
5.4 Robustness metric
5.4.1 Unimodal landscapes
The robustness metric offers a clear view into the consistency of
sampler performance across runs. An ideal sampler would exhibit
a small and stable difference between its best and worst-performing
chains.Suchascenariowouldindicatethatimprovementsareshared
throughout the ensemble. In our unimodal results of figures 25 and
26, samplers such as the walk move and differential evolution show
this desirable behaviour, as evidenced by their relatively flat robust-
ness curves over chain length. Robustness curves that plateau over
time indicate that both best and worst chains improve at a similar
pace, maintaining a constant deviation. This balance is a hallmark
ofmorereliablesamplersandcontrastssharplywithmethodswhere
the deviation continues to grow.
In contrast to this, the increasing curves seen for stretch-based
moves, particularly in the Rosenbrock test case, suggest that while
some chains continue to improve their log-likelihood, others stag-
nate. This widening gap between the best and worst chains points to
walkersbecominglocallytrapped,failingtobenefitfromtheensem-
ble’s collective progress. Such divergence undermines robustness,
as it reflects uneven performance within the same sampler. Inter-
estingly, differential evolution avoids this pattern. Its update mech-
anism, relying on three walkers, may reduce the risk of decoupling
between ensemble members, effectively maintaining performance
across chains. Similarly, the walk move leverages the full ensemble
during proposals, which likely contributes to its strong robustness
profile, especially in unimodal cases.
In practical terms, log-likelihood discrepancies exceeding one
highlight significant instability across chains and should be treated
withcaution.ComparingtheRosenbrockandNeal’sfunneltestcases
reveals a marked difference in difficulty. Rosenbrock poses a greater
challenge,asindicatedbyitslongertransientphasebeforerobustness
stabilises and the larger chain-to-chain discrepancies. Neal’s funnel,
in contrast, reaches stability faster and exhibits minimal growth in
robustnessdeviation,suggestingitisaneasierlandscapeformethods
to navigate.
5.4.2 Multimodal landscapes
The robustness results for the multimodal landscapes, in figures 27,
28 and 29 reveal several differences compared to the unimodal
settings.Notably,therobustnesscurvesinhigher-dimensionalGaus-
sian models display less fluctuation in the early stages of the chain,
suggesting that samplers exhibit more stable behaviour throughout
their chain lengths. However, this apparent stability is offset by a
pronounced increase in the discrepancy between the best and worst-
performing chains as dimensionality increases. This widening gap
indicates that individual chains are more prone to becoming trapped
inlocaloptima,withtheoverallsamplingqualitybecomingincreas-
ingly uneven in higher dimensions. The Metropolis-Hastings algo-
rithmisparticularlysensitivetothiseffect;ineachofthemultimodal
testcases,itshowsthelargestrobustnessdeviation,farexceedingall
other samplers.
Among the ensemble methods, the differential evolution move
with a 25% target acceptance fraction consistently performs well. It
remains within the top five samplers in all test cases and reaches the
top rank in both the 3D and 8D settings. This consistency highlights
the importance of controlled exploration in achieving robustness:
withaloweracceptancefraction,the25%variantmaintainsabroader
proposaldistribution,encouragingmoreglobalmovementacrossthe
landscape. In contrast, the 40% variant, favouring more localised,
exploitativemoves,suffersadegradationinrobustnessperformance.
This underlines the key role of target acceptance fraction tuning in
balancingexplorationandexploitation.Furtherinvestigationintothe
optimal choice of this parameter could enhance the performance of
the algorithm further.
The snooker update moves emerge as particularly effective in
higher-dimensional settings. While their performance is less com-
petitive in the 3D case, they achieve top-tier rankings in the 5D and
8D models, suggesting that their mechanics may be better suited to
navigating high-dimensional multimodal spaces. This trend mirrors
their improved behaviour in the log-likelihood evolution, support-
ing the idea that the snooker strategy benefits from the increased
complexity and volume of higher-dimensional parameter spaces.
Another interesting finding is the impact of standardised scal-
ing in the Metropolis-Hastings sampler. While still outperformed by
more modern methods, the standardised variant consistently shows
improvedrobustnesscomparedtothedefaultMHversion.Thisindi-
cates that even relatively minor adjustments to scaling strategies can
enhance traditional samplers.
Finally,thewalkmove,whichdominatedtheunimodalrobustness
results,doesnotcarrythesameadvantageinmultimodallandscapes.
Although it still outperforms several methods, including Adaptive
MetropolisandMetropolis-Hastings,itsrelativeperformancedrops.
This is likely due to the walk move’s global proposal mechanism,
whichbecomeslesseffectiveincomplexlandscapes.Whenthetarget
distribution has many modes or sharp local structures, proposals
based on the full ensemble can lead to inefficient exploration, as
individual walkers may be misled by globally averaged directions.
The degradation in robustness is consistent with observations from
the log-likelihood evolution, where the walk move also struggled to
maintain its advantage in higher-dimensional settings.
5.5 Improving on the best set of parameters
The improvement in log-likelihood achieved by applying the Down-
hill Simplex algorithm illustrates that it is indeed possible to refine
MCMC results through post hoc optimisation. This outcome aligns
with expectations, as MCMC methods are primarily designed for
sampling from the posterior rather than for locating its global opti-
mum.
Themagnitudeofimprovementvariesnotablyacrossdimensions.
The smallest gain occurs in the 5D case, likely due to its config-
uration: although it shares the same chain length as the 3D case,
it employs twice the number of chains. This increased diversity in
parameter space exploration may have already allowed the MCMC
sampler to identify a solution close to the global optimum. In con-
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

28C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
trast,the8Dcaseshowsasubstantialimprovementinlog-likelihood,
suggesting that the chain length may have been insufficient for ad-
equately exploring the vastly larger parameter space of higher di-
mensions, leaving more room for post hoc optimisation to improve
the result. Our results of the ergodicity metric for this test case also
support this thought since all samplers were less ergodic than the
lower-dimensional landscapes.
Additionally, the number of iterations required for convergence
of the Downhill Simplex algorithm increases with dimensionality,
and particularly so between 5D and 8D. It may indicate that the
MCMC chain settings were insufficient to ensure convergence in
high-dimensional spaces, making the optimiser’s contribution more
impactfulin8Dthanin3Dor5D.Despitethis,applyinganoptimiser
to suboptimal MCMC settings can account for these and return us
withbetterestimatesforparametersthroughthelikelihoodfunction.
6 CONCLUSIONS
Our results show that, in terms of robustness, convergence speed,
raw performance, and ergodicity, several modern samplers outper-
form the traditional MH algorithm. Among the tested methods, the
differential evolution sampler with a 25% target acceptance fraction
emergedasthemosteffective,particularlyonmultimodaltoymodels.
Thewalkmoveperformedbestinourunimodalcases,bothintermsof
performanceandrobustness.Tocomparesamplersmeaningfully,we
introduced several metrics that quantify different aspects of sampler
performance.Thesemetrics,designedtobeapplicableacrossabroad
rangeoflikelihoodlandscapes,enablesystematicbenchmarkingand
could serve as a general-purpose framework for evaluating MCMC
methods. We also explored the benefits of applying an optimisation
algorithm to the final states of a Markov chain. This post-processing
step proves fruitful for uncovering higher-likelihood parameter sets,
thereby improving the predictive capabilities of models that rely on
maximum-likelihood estimates. Beyond sampling, we demonstrated
that collected MCMC samples can be repurposed to reconstruct the
likelihood landscape using a quadtree-based approach. This recon-
struction provides structural insight into the landscape and enables
the identification of parameters within models.
While this work focused primarily on ensemble MCMC meth-
ods, future studies could explore non-ensemble alternatives within a
gradient-free context. Comparing these approaches may reveal new
advantages or highlight limitations not captured in this study. Fur-
ther research should also investigate higher-dimensional test cases
since our current toy models go up to 8 dimensions, while higher-
dimensional cases could solidify our findings.
DATA AVAILABILITY
All data used in this work was generated randomly. Instructions for
repeating the generation can be found in section 3.3.
REFERENCES
AkeretJ.,SeeharsS.,AmaraA.,RefregierA.,CsillaghyA.,2013,Astronomy
and Computing, 2, 27–39
Angus R., Morton T., Aigrain S., Foreman-Mackey D., Rajpaul V., 2017,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 474, 2094
Atchadé Y. F., Rosenthal J. S., 2005, Bernoulli, 11, 815
Betancourt M., 2017, arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02230v2
Bierkens J., Roberts G. O., Zitt P., 2019, Annals of Statistics, 47, 1288
Bierkens J., van Leeuwen J., Roberts G. O., 2020, Annals of Statistics, 48,
3235
Bouchard-CôtéA..,VollmerS.J.,DoucetA.,2018,JournaloftheAmerican
Statistical Association, 113, 855
Brooks S., Gelman A., Jones G. L., Meng X.-L., eds, 2011a, Handbook of
Markov Chain Monte Carlo. CRC Press
Brooks S., Gelman A., Jones G., Meng X. L., 2011b, Handbook of Markov
Chain Monte Carlo. Chapman & Hall/CRC Handbooks of Modern Sta-
tisticalMethods,CRCPress,https://books.google.nl/books?id=
qfRsAIKZ4rIC
Christen J. A., Fox C., 2005, Journal of Computational and Graphical Statis-
tics, 14, 795
ChristenJ.A.,FoxC.,2007,Technicalreportno.i-07-16/12-12-2007,AGen-
eral Purpose Scale-Independent MCMC Algorithm,https://cimat.
repositorioinstitucional.mx/jspui/handle/1008/645. Cen-
tro de Investigación en Matemáticas (CIMAT), Guanajuato,
Mexico,https://cimat.repositorioinstitucional.mx/jspui/
handle/1008/645
Dhawan S., Jha S. W., Leibundgut B., 2018, A&A, 609, A72
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al., 2019, The Astrophysical Jour-
nal Letters, 875, L6
Foreman-Mackey D., Hogg D. W., Lang D., Goodman J., 2013, Publications
of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 125, 306
Gelman A., Roberts G. O., Gilks W. R., 1996, in Bernardo J. M., Smith A.
F. M., et al., eds, , Bayesian Statistics V. Oxford University Press, pp
599–608
GilksW.R.,RobertsG.O.,GeorgeE.I.,1994,JournaloftheRoyalStatistical
Society. Series D (The Statistician), 43, 179
Goodman J., Weare J., 2010, Communications in Applied Mathematics and
Computational Science, 5, 65
Green P. J., Oates C. J., Wilkinson D. J., 2022, Statistical Science, 37, 238
HaarioH.,SaksmanE.,TamminenJ.,1999,ComputationalStatistics,14,375
Haario H., Saksman E., Tamminen J., 2001, Bernoulli, 7, 223
Hastings W. K., 1970, Biometrika, 57, 97
Henriques B. M. B., Yates R. M., Fu J., Guo Q., Kauffmann G., Srisawat
C., Thomas P. A., White S. D. M., 2020, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 491, 5795
HuijserD.,GoodmanJ.,BrewerB.J.,2017,PropertiesoftheAffineInvariant
Ensemble Sampler in High Dimensions, arXiv:1509.02230v2 [stat.CO],
https://arxiv.org/abs/1509.02230
Lange O., Krone-Martins A., Mieske S., Lovis C., Saha P., Triaud A. H.,
2022, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 662, A94
LiangF.,WongW.H.,2001,JournaloftheAmericanStatisticalAssociation,
96, 653
Metropolis N., Rosenbluth A. W., Rosenbluth M. N., Teller A. H., Teller E.,
1953, The Journal of Chemical Physics, 21, 1087
Neal R. M., 2003, Annals of statistics, pp 705–741
NealR.M.,2011,inBrooksS.,GelmanA.,JonesG.,MengX.-L.,eds,,Hand-
bookofMarkovChainMonteCarlo.Chapman&Hall/CRC,Chapt.5,p.
113–162,http://arxiv.org/abs/1206.1901
Neal T., Paige B., Wood F., 2021, Proceedings of the 38th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)
Nelder J. A., Mead R., 1965, The Computer Journal, 7, 308
NelsonB.,FordE.B.,PayneM.J.,2013,TheAstrophysicalJournalSupple-
ment Series, 210, 11
Reis R. C., Miller J. M., 2013, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 769, L7
Roberts G. O., Gilks W. R., 1994, Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 49, 287
Roberts G. O., Rosenthal J. S., 2001, Statistical Science, 16, 351
RobertsG.O.,GelmanA.,GilksW.R.,1997,AnnalsofAppliedProbability,
7, 110
Rosenbrock H. H., 1960, The Computer Journal, 3, 175
SandersJ.S.,FabianA.C.,2013,MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomical
Society, 429, 2727–2738
Sharma S., 2017, ARA&A, 55, 213
Trotta R., 2017, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1701.01467
ter Braak C. J. F., 2006, Statistics and Computing, 16, 239
ter Braak C. J. F., Vrugt J. A., 2008, Statistics and Computing, 18, 435
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

Choosing the right MCMC sampler29
APPENDIX A: STRETCH MOVE
A1 Affine invariance proof
The proof of the affine invariance of the stretch move is as follows.
Given the stretch move, equation (9), a proposal is called affine-
invariant if it follows the form of𝑌=𝐴𝑥+𝑏. If we substitute the
stretch move for𝑥, we arrive at:
𝑌𝑖 =𝐴(𝑋 𝑗 +𝑍(𝑋 𝑖 −𝑋 𝑗 )) +𝑏.(A1)
We can write out this expression, and add in factors of𝑏:
𝑌𝑖 =𝐴𝑋 𝑗 +𝐴𝑍(𝑋 𝑖 −𝑋 𝑗 ) +𝑏=(𝐴𝑋 𝑗 +𝑏) +𝑍(𝐴𝑋 𝑖 −𝐴𝑋 𝑗 )(A2)
=(𝐴𝑋 𝑗 +𝑏) +𝑍(𝐴𝑋 𝑖 −𝐴𝑋 𝑗 +𝑏−𝑏).
This can then be reshuffled to get:
𝑌𝑖 =(𝐴𝑋 𝑗 +𝑏) +𝑍(𝐴𝑋 𝑖 +𝑏− (𝐴𝑋 𝑗 +𝑏)).(A3)
Fromthispoint,wenotethatwecanexpressallquantitiesintheform
of𝑌=𝐴𝑥+𝑏, e.g.𝑌 𝑗 =𝐴𝑋 𝑗 +𝑏; this gives us:
𝑌𝑖 =𝑌 𝑗 +𝑍(𝑌 𝑖 −𝑌 𝑗 ),(A4)
whichisexactlythestretchmove,butintheaffinetransformedspace.
Hence, the stretch move is affine-invariant.
A2 The stretch factorZ
In equation (9),𝑍is the stretch factor, which is sampled from a
density𝑔of the form:
𝑔(𝑧) ∝
 

1√𝑧 ,for𝑧∈
 1
𝑎 , 𝑎

0,otherwise.
(A5)
Goodman&Weare(2010)discussthat𝑎shouldbelargerthan1,but
recommend to use𝑎=2for good MCMC performance. To sample
𝑍fromthe𝑔(𝑧)distribution,wecanuseinversetransformsampling.
We start by normalizing equation (A5),𝑔(𝑧)=𝐶/√𝑧for a constant
𝐶. We solve𝐶by integrating𝑔(𝑧).𝑔(𝑧)is the probability density
function (PDF) of𝑍since the integral over the domain converges to
1:
𝐶
∫ 𝑎
1/𝑎
1√𝑧 𝑑𝑧=1(A6)
=𝐶
∫ 𝑎
1/𝑎
𝑧−1/2 𝑑𝑧=𝐶

2𝑧1/2 𝑎
1/𝑎 =1
=𝐶

2√𝑎− 2√𝑎

=1
𝐶= 1
2  √𝑎−1/ √𝑎 .
To obtain the cumulative distribution function of𝑔(𝑧), we integrate
thePDFupto𝑧,for1/𝑎≤𝑧≤𝑎insteadofupto𝑎asinequation(A6).
This results in:
𝐺(𝑧)=2𝐶  √𝑧−1/ √𝑎 ,(A7)
which, using the expression of𝐶, turns into:
𝐺(𝑧)=
√𝑧−1/ √𝑎√𝑎−1/ √𝑎 .
To sample z, we use inverse transform sampling, based on the ex-
pression of𝐺(𝑧). Since0≤𝐺(𝑧) ≤1, we define𝑢∼ U (0,1), such
that:
𝑢=𝐺(𝑧)=
√𝑧− 1√𝑎
√𝑎− 1√𝑎
(A8)
which we solve for𝑧:
𝑧=𝑢 2

𝑎+ 1
𝑎 −2

+2𝑢

1− 1
𝑎

+ 1
𝑎 (A9)
We can validate the values of𝑧by filling in the upper and lower
limitsof𝑢;theseshouldgiveusthelimitsofthedensity𝑔asseenin
equation(10).Weuseavalueof𝑎=2asrecommendedbyGoodman
& Weare (2010). This results, for𝑢=0, in𝑧=1/2. For𝑢=1we
obtain𝑧=2, therefore, we see that1/2≤𝑧≤2, as expected.
A3 Detailed balance
Tosatisfydetailedbalanceforthestretchmove,werequireamodifi-
cationoftheMetropolis-Hastingsacceptancecriterion.FromGood-
man & Weare (2010), a𝑍𝑁−1 factor is introduced to ensure this
condition is met. This results in equation (11):
𝛼=min

1, 𝑍 𝑁−1 𝜋(𝑋 new
𝑖 )
𝜋(𝑋 𝑖)

,(A10)
where𝑁is the dimensionality of the parameter space, and𝜋(𝑋)
denotes the target density.
Wecanderivethiscriterion,startingfromtheMetropolis-Hastings
acceptancecriterion,equation(1).Forthestretchmove,theproposal
distribution is asymmetric, which implies that:
𝑞(𝑋 𝑖 |𝑋new
𝑖 )
𝑞(𝑋 new
𝑖 |𝑋 𝑖) ≠1.(A11)
The ratio of proposal densities evaluates to:
𝑞(𝑋 𝑖 |𝑋new
𝑖 )
𝑞(𝑋 new
𝑖 |𝑋 𝑖) = |𝑋new
𝑖 −𝑋 𝑗 | 𝑁−1
|𝑋 𝑖 −𝑋 𝑗 | 𝑁−1 =𝑍 𝑁−1 ,(A12)
where𝑋 𝑗 is the complementary walker and𝑋new
𝑖 is defined via the
stretch move, equation (9). Substituting this into the proposal ratio
yields the𝑍 𝑁−1 factor, and thus we obtain equation (11).
An intuitive geometric explanation supports this adjustment. The
stretch move proposes a point along the line connecting the cur-
rent walker𝑋 𝑖 and the complementary walker𝑋 𝑗. This can be
parametrised as
𝑋new
𝑖 (𝜆)=𝑋 𝑗 +𝜆(𝑋 𝑖 −𝑋 𝑗 ).(A13)
The conditional density of points along this line segment is propor-
tional to
||𝑋 new
𝑖 −𝑋 𝑗 || 𝑁−1 𝜋(𝑋 new
𝑖 ),(A14)
which accounts for the volume element in𝑁-dimensional space
(Goodman & Weare 2010). For the reverse move from𝑋new
𝑖 to𝑋 𝑖,
the corresponding density is
||𝑋 𝑖 −𝑋 𝑗 || 𝑁−1 𝜋(𝑋 𝑖),(A15)
leading to the proposal ratio in equation (A12) and justifying the
𝑍 𝑁−1 correction to maintain detailed balance.
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)

30C. M. Poppelaars & M. P. van Daalen
APPENDIX B: DIFFERENTIAL EVOLUTION MOVE
B1 Affine invariance proof
GiventheslightlydifferentmathematicalformoftheDEmovecom-
pared to the stretch move, we present here the proof of affine invari-
ance for the DE move. We start from the DE move as described by
equation (15),
𝑋new
𝑖 =𝑋 𝑖 +𝛾(𝑋 𝑘 −𝑋 𝑗 ).(B1)
Which we will substitute into𝑌=𝐴𝑥+𝑏,
𝑌𝑖 =𝐴(𝑋 𝑖 +𝛾(𝑋 𝑗 −𝑋 𝑘)) +𝑏=𝐴𝑋 𝑖 +𝑏+𝐴𝛾(𝑋 𝑗 −𝑋 𝑘)(B2)
=𝑌 𝑖 +𝛾(𝐴𝑋 𝑗 −𝐴𝑋 𝑘),
where we can use the trick of adding in𝑏’s inside the brackets:
𝑌𝑖 =𝑌 𝑖 +𝛾(𝐴𝑋 𝑗 −𝐴𝑋 𝑘)=𝑌 𝑖 +𝛾(𝐴𝑋 𝑗 +𝑏−𝐴𝑋 𝑘 −𝑏)=𝑌 𝑖 +𝛾(𝑌 𝑗 −𝑌𝑘).
(B3)
Hence, the differential evolution move is affine-invariant.
APPENDIX C: ERGODICITY METRIC
C1 Integration of N-dimensional Gaussian landscapes
Toevaluatethelikelihoodcontributiontothetotalofindividualcells
withinourGaussianlandscapes,weneedanintegrationmethodcapa-
ble of operating in𝑁-dimensions. Fortunately, since our likelihood
landscapes are constructed as sums of multivariate Gaussians, we
can use an analytical form of integration based on the error function
(erf).Thisprovidesahighlyefficientandaccuratealternative.Inone
dimension, the integral of a Gaussian over a finite interval[𝑎, 𝑏]is
given by:
∫ 𝑏
𝑎
𝑒− (𝑥−𝜇) 2/2𝜎 2
𝑑𝑥= 𝜎√𝜋√
2

erf
 𝑏−𝜇
𝜎
√
2

−erf
 𝑎−𝜇
𝜎
√
2

.(C1)
This result extends naturally to the multivariate case due to the sep-
arabilityofGaussians.Thelikelihoodvalue,withinsomehypercube
with bounds®𝑎and ®𝑏, for our landscapes is defined as the sum over
its𝑀Gaussian components in𝑁-dimensions:
∫ ®𝑏
®𝑎
L𝑑𝑥 1𝑑𝑥2 . . . 𝑑𝑥 𝑁 =
∫ ®𝑏
®𝑎
𝑀∑︁
𝑖=1
𝐴𝑖
 𝑁Ö
𝑑=1
𝑒− (𝑥𝑖,𝑑 −𝜇 𝑖,𝑑 )2/2𝜎 2
𝑖,𝑑
!
𝑑®𝑥
=
𝑀∑︁
𝑖=1
𝐴𝑖
 𝑁Ö
𝑑=1
∫ 𝑏𝑑
𝑎𝑑
𝑒− (𝑥𝑖,𝑑 −𝜇 𝑖,𝑑 )2/2𝜎 2
𝑖,𝑑 𝑑𝑥𝑑
!
=
𝑀∑︁
𝑖=1
𝐴𝑖
" 𝑁Ö
𝑑=1
𝜎𝑖,𝑑
√𝜋√
2
×

erf
 𝑏𝑑 −𝜇 𝑖,𝑑
𝜎𝑖,𝑑
√
2

−erf
 𝑎𝑑 −𝜇 𝑖,𝑑
𝜎𝑖,𝑑
√
2
 #
.
(C2)
To integrate using the error function, we use the
scipy.special.erffunction from theSciPylibrary 3.
3 https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.special.erf.html
C2 Hypercube division
EachGaussianlandscapecanbedefinedoveraboundeddomainrep-
resented by a hypercube, where the bounds on each axis correspond
totheparameterrangeslistedintables3,4,and5forthe3D,5D,and
8D models, respectively. To obtain cells of a hypercube, we divide
eachaxisintoequallyspacedsegments,whichdefinetheboundaries
of each cell. This ensures that the entire hypercube is divided into
cells of equal volume. The number of divisions per axis is defined
dynamically:
divisions per axis=min (5+8·exp(−0.4(𝑁−3)),5 ) ,(C3)
where𝑁is the dimensionality of the landscape. This choice was
made to ensure a smooth transition across dimensionalities while
capping the maximum number of divisions per axis at 5 for higher-
dimensionalcases(𝑁 >13)topreservenumericalperformance.For
reference,theresultingnumbersofdivisionsperaxisare13,8,and6
for the 3D, 5D, and 8D landscapes, respectively. We define the total
number of cells that compose the hypercube by:
number of cells=(divisions per axis)𝑁 .(C4)
To then compute the likelihood integral for any cell, we must also
determine its boundaries. For this, we use an𝑁-dimensional index-
ing scheme that maps a linear index𝑖, ranging from 0 to the total
number of cells minus one, to its corresponding coordinates in the
𝑁-dimensional grid. To ensure uniform treatment of all dimensions,
theaxesarerescaledtotheintervalof[0,1],whicheffectivelytrans-
formseachcellintoamini-hypercubeinnormalisedspace.Themap-
pingfromaflatindex𝑖tomultidimensionalindices(𝑥 1, 𝑥2, . . . , 𝑥𝑁 )
follows a generalised form of low-dimensional modular arithmetic,
generalised to any dimensionality𝑁as:
𝑥𝑘 =

𝑖mod𝐷 𝑘

//𝐷 𝑘−1 ,for𝑘=1,2, . . . , 𝑁,(C5)
where𝐷denotes the number of divisions per axis. This indexing
ensuresthatwecancorrectlyidentifythelocationandextentofeach
cell in parameter space based on its flat index𝑖.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
MNRAS000, 1–30 (2026)