Title: Disformal Kerr Imprints on BHL Accretion: Shock Morphology, PSD Signatures, and Observational QPO Counterparts
Authors: Orhan Donmez, M. Yousaf, Imtiaz Khan, G. Mustafa
Published: 2026-05-15
Categories: astro-ph.HE, gr-qc

arXiv:2605.15686v2  [astro-ph.HE]  2 Jun 2026
Disformal Kerr Imprints on BHL Accretion: Shock Morphology , PSD Signatures, and Observational QPO
Counterparts
Orhan Donmez, 1, ∗M. Y ousaf,2, †Imtiaz Khan, 3, ‡and G. Mustafa 4, §
1College of Engineering and Technology, American Universit y of the Middle East, Egaila 54200, Kuwait
2Department of Mathematics, Virtual University of Pakistan , 54-Lawrence Road, Lahore 54000, Pakistan.
3Department of Physics, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua , Zhejiang 321004, China
4Department of Physics, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China
In this work, we reveal the e ﬀect of the spacetime parameters on the accretion morphology formed
through the Bondi-Hoyle-Lyttleton (BHL) mechanism around a slowly rotating disformal Kerr black hole.
Thus, we investigate the measurable signatures of these par ameters on the hydrodynamical morphology and
the timing behavior of the accreting ﬂow. By numerically sol ving the general relativistic hydrodynamical
(GRH) equations, we reveal the behavior of the accreting mat ter around a black hole with rotation parameter
a = 0. 3M. It is shown that even weak disformal deviations from the Ker r solution modify the shock-cone
structure, enhance the density in the post-shock region, an d produce coherent oscillations in the accretion rate.
Strong deviations produce qualitatively di ﬀerent physical mechanisms. These are classic shock cone, mi xed
shock-cone/spiral structures, burst-like accretion, and warped post- shock ﬂow. Power spectral density analysis
with Lorentzian decomposition reveals model-dependent Qu asi periodic oscillations (QPOs) like frequencies,
allowing the simulated variability to be compared directly with observed black-hole timing signals. The most
important key result of this work is that the obtained QPO-li ke frequencies can be compared with the observed
QPOs from black-hole sources with di ﬀerent masses. The Kerr model produces coherent peaks at 42 . 99 Hz
and 68 . 13 Hz, and these frequencies are consistent with the high-fr equency QPOs observed from the source
GRS 1915+105. In the models where the deviations from the Kerr solutio n are weak, low-frequency QPOs are
produced and found to be coherent. These frequencies also fa ll within the frequency range observed in Galactic
black-hole binaries. On the other hand, the models with larg e deviations from Kerr can be used to explain
observational results that are more irregular, broad-band , and contain multiple peaks. In addition, by using
inverse-mass scaling in this work, the numerically calcula ted frequencies are also compared with observations
of intermediate-mass and supermassive black holes. In part icular, the disformal black-hole models are found
to be consistent with the observational results obtained fr om the sources M82 X-1, NGC 5408 X-1, and RE
J1034+396. This comparison also allows the possible black-hole ma ss range of observed sources to be inferred
from the relation between simulated and observed frequenci es. As a result, the numerical results obtained in
this work show that variations in the disformal spacetime pa rameters do not only shift the QPO frequencies,
but also lead to the formation of di ﬀerent physical mechanisms that can explain di ﬀerent sources. This makes
BHL accretion in disformal Kerr geometry a powerful framewo rk for connecting modiﬁed-gravity black-hole
spacetimes with observable QPO phenomenology.
Keywords: Disformal Kerr black holes; Bondi–Hoyle–Lyttleton accre tion; general relativistic hydrody-
namics; power spectral density;black-hole timing
I. INTRODUCTION
Black holes (BHs) are singular entities deﬁned by intense gr av-
itational ﬁelds in the cosmic realm. Classically, nothing c an es-
cape from the event horizon of a BH due to the powerful gravita -
tional forces; instead, it absorbs everything entangled in its vicin-
ity. The rapid progress achieved in gravitational wave dete ctions
and BH imaging has provided a powerful observational platfo rm
for examining theoretical descriptions of compact astrophysical ob-
jects [
1, 2], while ﬁrst M87 event horizon telescope results VI, the
shadow and mass of the central BH studied in [ 3]. So far, the avail-
able observations remain broadly consistent with the predi ctions
of general theory of relativity (GTR), supporting the view t hat as-
trophysical BHs are accurately described, to a high degree, by the
Kerr spacetime. Nevertheless, in order to fully use the cons training
capability of present and next generation observations for studying
possible departures from GTR, it is essential to develop a de tailed
phenomenological understanding of rotating BHs in theorie s be-
yond the Einstein gravity scenario. In this direction, one o f the
key issues is to assess whether current and future observati onal
data can eﬀectively discriminate the Kerr geometry from alternative
Kerr like compact entities that may generate closely simila r obser-
vational features. The photon rings around Kerr and Kerr-li ke BHs
investigated in [ 4], while Carson and his collaborators [ 5] studied
asymptotically ﬂat and parametrized BH metric that preserv es Kerr
∗orhan.donmez@aum.edu.kw
†myousaf.math@gmail.com
‡ikhanphys1993@gmail.com
§gmustafa3828@gmail.com
symmetries.
A commonly adopted method for investigating such deviation s
is to introduce phenomenological modiﬁcations into the spa cetime
metric through arbitrary functions or parameters, which ar e then
constrained by observational data, and another possibilit y is to ex-
plore geometrical extensions involving torsion in the unde rlying
spacetime structure [ 6– 9], while parameterized non-circular devi-
ation from the Kerr paradigm and its observational signatur es, ex-
treme mass ratio inspirals and Lense Thirring e ﬀect studied in [10].
Although these approaches are useful as preliminary model i nde-
pendent studies, they also have important drawbacks, where as in
particular, the inserted deviations often do not possess a t ranspar-
ent geometrical or theoretical origin. Moreover, such para meteri-
zations test only the selected class of geometries, rather t han pro-
viding a direct examination of a fundamental modiﬁed theory of
gravity. Therefore, a more physically motivated, though te chni-
cally demanding, route is to obtain exact analytical rotati ng BH
solutions within extended theories of gravity and then inve stigate
their physical, geometrical and observational consequenc es.
The diﬃculty of this program becomes clearer when one recalls
the special role played by the Kerr solution and the challeng es in-
volved in extending it beyond GTR. The Kerr BH is regarded as
the unique stationary ﬁnal conﬁguration produced by the col lapse
of a su ﬃciently massive rotating star, while gravitational ﬁeld of a
spinning mass as an example of algebraically special metric s stud-
ied in [
11], provided that the spacetime is asymptotically ﬂat and
the event horizon is regular and non degenerate, i.e., axisy mmet-
ric BH has only two degrees of freedom [ 12]. This remarkable
result is summarized by the well known no hair theorem, while
within the scenario of GTR, however, some rotating vacuum ge -
ometries distinct from Kerr have also been constructed. Two impor-

2
tant examples are the Tomimatsu-Sato solutions, presented in [13]
where a new exact solution for the gravitational ﬁeld of a spi n-
ning mass was studied and the Kerr-Levi-Civita family [ 14], both
of which admit meaningful static limits. The Tomimatsu-Sat o class
is asymptotically ﬂat, but it avoids the standard uniquenes s the-
orem by introducing higher multipolar deformations of the K err
geometry. These deformations generally give rise to naked s in-
gularities in the region where an event horizon would otherw ise
be expected, while the Kerr-Levi-Civita family describes a regular
rotating conﬁguration embedded in an asymptotically Levi- Civita
background [ 15]. Obtaining rotating solutions in closed analyti-
cal form is a highly non-trivial task. The original derivati on of the
Kerr metric was deeply connected with the Goldberg-Sachs th eo-
rem [14], which algebraically relates special spacetimes to the exis-
tence of a non-shear-free geodesic principal congruence. It was also
inﬂuenced by the Robinson-Trautman class of expanding spac e-
times that are shear-free and twist-free [ 16], while recent studies
on compact entities in modiﬁed gravity and nonlinear electr ody-
namics provided important insights into BH physics beyond G TR.
As, horizon free conﬁgurations alternative to BH highlight stabil-
ity and electromagnetic features at high energies studied i n [ 17],
while accretion processes extensively explored, demonstr ating sig-
niﬁcant modiﬁcations in BH environments due to nonlinear el ec-
trodynamics and alternative gravity theories [ 18, 19]. Moreover,
observational constraints based on epicyclic frequencies and oscil-
latory dynamics provided further support for studying BH pr oper-
ties and testing theoretical models [ 20]. These compact conﬁgura-
tions play a crucial role in testing established gravitatio nal scenar-
ios and in distinguishing between competing gravitational theories,
and they remain a central topic of interest in physics. Resea rch on
BH shadows, along with numerous related studies, has broade ned
this line of inquiry across a range of gravitational models [ 21– 24]
and further research on various compact objects across di ﬀerent
gravitational theories also enriched the ﬁeld [ 25– 27].
The QPOs [ 28, 29] detected in X-ray emission spectrum from
tiny quasars provide valuable information into these binar y sys-
tems, in which BHs are surrounded by accretion disks generat ed by
their star partners [ 30– 32], while a case for a binary BH system re-
vealed via quasi periodic outﬂows studied in [ 33] and Pasham et al.
[34] also continued their systematic investigations using inf rared
dust echoes to identify dright Quasi periodic eruption sour ces.
As matter approaches the innermost stable circular orbits ( ISCOs)
within the disk, make a reasonable increment to friction whi ch gen-
erates strong X-ray [ 35], while QPOs are essential to examine the
physics of accretion disks and BH properties such as mass, sp in,
and charge. Both spectroscopic approaches, which analyze p ho-
ton frequency distributions, and timing methods, which inv estigate
time-dependent photon counts, are critical to the examinat ion of
these systems [ 36]. Ashraf et al. [ 37] studied the motion of test
particles around a Schwarzschild BH surrounded by a Dehnen- type
DM halo, analyzed how model parameters a ﬀect particle dynam-
ics, while the system was characterized by the mass of the BH,
the radius of the halo, and the density of the central halo. An alyt-
ical expressions for the particles’ energy, angular moment um, ef-
fective potential, and ISCOs derived, whereas the epicycli c oscilla-
tions near the equatorial plane investigated through radia l, vertical,
and orbital frequencies, along with periastron precession . Further-
more, particle collisions near the horizon and the resultin g center
of mass energy evaluated which revealed the strong dependen ce of
particle dynamics on the model parameters, also orbital mot ion and
QPOs testing around rotating Hairy BHs, while extensive stu dies
focused on QPOs in the vicinity of BHs under strong gravitati onal
ﬁelds [
38, 39].
The present work investigates the hydrodynamical and timin g
signatures of BHL accretion around a slowly rotating disfor mal
Kerr BH [ 40], whereas this analysis is motivated by the fact that
accretion ﬂows in the strong ﬁeld region can carry observabl e im-
prints of the underlying spacetime geometry. In particular , devia-
tions from the standard Kerr background may not only modify t he
near horizon ﬂow morphology, but may also alter the time depe n-
dent variability of the accretion rate, therefore, the stud y of BHL
accretion in a disformal Kerr geometry provides a useful sce nario
for connecting modiﬁed BH spacetimes with possible observa tional
signatures in X ray binaries, ultraluminous X ray sources, a nd ac-
tive galactic nuclei. In order to examine these e ﬀects systemati-
cally, we consider a slowly rotating disformal Kerr backgro und and
compare its accretion behavior with the corresponding Kerr refer-
ence case. The disformal model contains conformal and disfo rmal
parameters that control the deviation from the standard Ker r ge-
ometry while keeping the horizon location ﬁxed for the physi cally
allowed cases considered in this study. This setup enables u s to iso-
late the inﬂuence of the disformal modiﬁcation itself, rath er than
attributing the changes in the accretion dynamics to variat ions in
the BH horizon.
The numerical part of this work is devoted to solving the gene ral
relativistic hydrodynamical equations for supersonic mat ter falling
toward the BH through the BHL mechanism, while the simulatio ns
allow us to follow the formation and evolution of the post sho ck
region, including the development of shock cones, spiral li ke over-
densities, warped structures, and non axisymmetric ﬂow pat terns.
As shown in [ 41– 43], the formation and evolution of shock cone
structures can give rise to QPO type oscillatory behavior. T hese
studies also revealed that the generated QPO frequencies ar e not
universal, but are aﬀected by the BH spin, the dynamical properties
of the accreting ﬂow, and the parameters that encode modiﬁca tions
in the spacetime geometry. These features are diagnosed thr ough
two dimensional density maps on the equatorial plane, one di men-
sional azimuthal proﬁles, and time dependent density distr ibutions,
consequently, in this way, the study provides a direct conne ction
between spacetime parameters and the morphology of the accr et-
ing matter. A central objective of the paper is to show how di ﬀerent
disformal deviations a ﬀect the shock cone structure produced by
BHL accretion, however the weak deviation models preserve t he
general shock cone character, but they broaden, displace, a nd oscil-
late the downstream high density region relative to the Kerr case.
In contrast, stronger deviations can substantially deform the post
shock ﬂow, giving rise to mixed shock cone and spiral like con ﬁg-
urations. The azimuthal density and velocity diagnostics p rovide
an additional way to understand the near BH ﬂow structure, an d by
comparing the Kerr model with the slowly rotating disformal cases,
we show that even small deviations from the Kerr background c an
signiﬁcantly change the density enhancement, radial inﬂow behav-
ior, and angular motion of the post shock matter. These e ﬀects
become particularly important in the strong ﬁeld region, wh ere the
shock front, the opening angle of the cone, and the angular di s-
placement of the high density region are most sensitive to th e mod-
iﬁed geometry. Beyond the spatial morphology, this work als o ex-
amines how the modiﬁed ﬂow structure is transferred into the time
domain through the mass accretion rate. Since the shock cone and
spiral like overdense regions continuously modulate the am ount of
matter crossing the inner boundary, the accretion rate becomes a di-
rect diagnostic of the underlying hydrodynamical variabil ity. The
Kerr case produces comparatively weak and nearly steady osc illa-
tions, whereas the disformal models exhibit enhanced ampli tudes,
intermittent bursts, or coherent quasi periodic modulatio ns depend-
ing on the strength and direction of the deviation.
To identify the characteristic oscillatory signatures of t he sim-
ulated accretion ﬂows, we perform power spectral density an aly-
ses and decompose the dominant features using Lorentzian co m-
ponents, whereas this procedure allows us to extract QPO lik e
frequencies associated with the shock cone oscillations, w arped
post shock structures, and spiral density modulations. The Kerr
reference model mainly produces relatively stable high fre quency
components, whereas the weak disformal models shift the tim ing
power toward lower frequencies. Stronger deviations gener ate ei-
ther broad multi peak variability or state dependent oscill ations,
depending on the resulting hydrodynamical conﬁguration. A lso,
the numerically obtained QPO like frequencies are compared with

3
observational timing features reported in BH systems and by ap-
plying the standard mass scaling argument, the simulated fr equen-
cies can be related not only to Galactic stellar mass BH binar ies,
but also to ultraluminous X-ray sources and active galactic nuclei.
This comparison indicates that the Kerr reference model is m ore
naturally associated with high frequency QPO behavior, whi le the
weak disformal cases are more suitable for low frequency QPO like
variability. The strongly deformed cases, on the other hand , may be
relevant for irregular, burst like, or state dependent timing behavior.
This paper is structured as follows: In section II, we introduce the
slowly rotating disformal Kerr BH spacetime and discuss the essen-
tial features of the corresponding geometrical background , while
section III is devoted to the analysis of BHL accretion dynamics
and quasi periodic signatures around the slowly rotating di sformal
Kerr BH. In subsection III A, we investigate the two dimensional
rest mass density morphology of the accreting ﬂow, with part icular
attention to the formation and deformation of shock cone str uctures
under diﬀerent disformal Kerr models, however the azimuthal den-
sity distribution and the time dependent evolution of the ﬂo w are
examined in subsection III B. Section IV presents the timing prop-
erties of BHL accretion by analyzing the accretion rate vari ability
and the associated quasi periodic oscillation frequencies , while in
subsection IV A, we study the variations of the mass accretion rate
for di ﬀerent disformal Kerr conﬁgurations as well as discuss how
the model parameters inﬂuence the temporal behavior of the a ccret-
ing matter, and the power spectral density analysis used to i dentify
QPO signatures is described in subsection IV B. In section V, we
provide a mass scaled interpretation of the simulated QPO fr equen-
cies and compare them with possible observational counterp arts
of BHL induced variability in astrophysical BH systems and s ec-
tion VI summarizes the main ﬁndings of this work.
II. SLOWLY ROTATING DISFORMAL ROTATING KERR
BLACK HOLE
Motivated by the use of disformal transformations as a funda -
mental solution-generating method, we introduce here a new Kerr
black hole obtained via a disformal transformation. Our con struc-
tion starts from the Kerr stealth solution. To implement the disfor-
mal transformation, which is deﬁned as:
gi j → C(ϕ,X)gi j + D(ϕ,X)∂iϕ∂νϕ. (1sol1)
We begin by evaluating the gradient of the scalar ﬁeld conﬁgu ra-
tion, which yields
∂rϕ= −r
√
−2X0
∆ , ∂ θϕ=
√
−2X0a cos θ. (1sol2)
As an initial step in our analysis, we assume that the conform al
and disformal factors take the simple forms C(ϕ,X) = C0 and
D(ϕ,X) = D0. For the purposes of the present work, the speciﬁc
choice of the conformal factor is not essential, as it is typi cally in-
troduced to map between two given theories, often in conjunc tion
with a redeﬁnition of the scalar ﬁeld. The central ingredien t in our
framework is the disformal factor. Although, in principle, it may
be an arbitrary function of ϕand X, we restrict our attention, for
simplicity, to the case of a constant disformal factor, in ac cordance
with previous studies [ 44]. Nonetheless, toward the end of this pa-
per we will also consider a more general functional dependen ce for
the disformal factor, speciﬁcally of the form D = D(ϕ), thereby en-
suring that we remain within the Horndeski class of theories . The
line element describing the geometry of a rotating disforma l rotat-
ing Kerr BH is given by [ 40]
ds2 = −C0 (Ω1) dt2 +
C0
(
1 −2D0X0
C0
)
1 −2M
r
dr2
+ C0r2 (Ω2) dθ2 −4 aC0M sin2(θ)
r dtdφ
+ C0r2 sin2(θ)
(
1 −a(4D0X0) sin(θ) √r(r −2M)
C0 −2D0X0
)
dφ2, (1)
where
Ω1 =
aM(4D0X0) sin(θ)
√
r−2M
r5
C0 −2D0X0
+
(
1 −2M
r
)
,
Ω2 = 1 −sin(θ) √r(r −2M)(4aD0X0)
r2(C0 −2D0X0) .
The solution is obtained by implementing a disformal transf or-
mation on a Kerr stealth black hole. A central distinction fr om
previous constructions is that, for the speciﬁc seed conﬁgu ration
considered here, the disformal transformation preserves c ircular-
ity. Consequently, many of the geometric and physical prope rties
that render the Kerr spacetime particularly appealing are r etained.
We refer to the resulting geometry as the Circular Disformal Kerr
spacetime.
III. BHL ACCRETION DYNAMICS AND QUASI-PERIODIC
SIGNATURES AROUND A SLOWLY ROTATING DISFORMAL
KERR BLACK HOLE
In this section, we reveal the dynamical behavior formed as a
result of BHL accretion around a slowly rotating disformal K err
black hole with rotation parameter a = 0. 3M. Our aim here is to
show how the disformal spacetime parameters modify the morp ho-
logical structure formed around the black hole, the stabili ty state of
the matter, and the time-dependent variation of the plasma f ormed
as a result of accretion. By analyzing the rest-mass density on the
equatorial plane, the density proﬁles in the azimuthal dire ction, the
temporal variations of the ﬂow, and the resulting time-depe ndent
variations in the mass accretion rates, we aim to identify po ssible
hydrodynamical signatures of the underlying modiﬁed geome try.
These signatures are especially important because they may reveal
the formation of QPO oscillations in the accretion rate. Thu s, it
becomes possible to establish how the numerically obtained QPOs
are connected with the observed QPOs in black-hole systems.
To reveal the accretion dynamics around the black hole and th e
eﬀect of the spacetime parameters on the resulting physical me ch-
anisms, we numerically solve the GRH equations [ 42, 43, 45, 46].
Through these numerically solved equations, we investigat e the
behavior of matter that asymptotically falls supersonical ly from
the upstream region at the outer boundary toward the black ho le
through the BHL mechanism, together with the physical mecha -
nisms produced by this process. At the same time, we reveal th e
eﬀect of the spacetime parameters on the resulting physical me ch-
anisms. In our numerical modeling, an outﬂow boundary condi tion
in the radial direction is used in the other boundary regions out-
side the region where matter is injected toward the black hol e. In
this way, matter reaching the outer boundary and the inner bo und-
ary is allowed to leave the computational domain and fall tow ard
the black hole. On the other hand, periodic boundary conditi ons
are used in the azimuthal direction. Through the numerical s imula-
tions, we reveal the time evolution of the accreting matter a nd de-
termine whether a shock cone, a spiral overdensity region, a quasi-
circular structure, or other non-axisymmetric ﬂow behavio r forms
around the black hole. Thus, by means of these simulations, w e
directly study how the spacetime parameters control the for mation,
deformation, and oscillations of the accretion structure.

4
To reveal the eﬀects of the spacetime parameters on the resulting
physical mechanisms and, consequently, on the observable Q PO-
like structures, the parameter values given in Table I are modeled.
In order to compare the slowly rotating disformal Kerr black -hole
solutions, the classical Kerr solution is obtained by model ing the
cases C0 = 1 and X0 = 0 or D0 = 0, or the case X0 = 0 and D0 = 0.
On the other hand, the SKBH models represent di ﬀerent conﬁgu-
rations of the slowly rotating disformal Kerr black hole. He re, C0
is the conformal parameter that rescales the background met ric, X0
denotes the constant background value of the scalar-ﬁeld ki netic
term, and D0 represents the disformal coupling strength. The com-
bination C0 −2D0X0 is an important expression that controls the
regularity and Lorentzian signature of the spacetime. The v alue of
this expression must always be positive in order to obtain a p hys-
ical black hole. When C0 −2D0X0 = 1, the solution becomes the
classical Kerr solution, while values larger or smaller tha n unity
indicate the strength of the deviation from the Kerr solutio n. For
all parameter cases given in Table I, the black-hole horizon is lo-
cated at r+ = 2M. This allows us to reveal the e ﬀects of the dis-
formal parameters on the accretion dynamics, rather than th e ef-
fects that could arise from a change in the black-hole horizo n. By
comparing the results obtained from the SKBH1, SKBH2, SKBH4 ,
and SKBH5 models with the Kerr solution, we systematically r e-
veal how variations in expression C0 −2D0X0 aﬀect the resulting
shock-cone structure, density variations, ﬂow asymmetry, and time-
dependent changes in the accretion rate.
TABLE I. Model parameters used for BHL accretion simulation s around
a slowly rotating disformal Kerr black hole on the equatoria l plane. The
conformal parameter C0 rescales the background metric, X0 denotes the
constant background value of the scalar-ﬁeld kinetic term, and D0 is the
disformal coupling strength. The combination C0 −2D0X0 controls the
regularity and Lorentzian signature of the spacetime and mu st remain pos-
itive to ensure a physical black hole geometry. The event-ho rizon radius rh
is computed for M = 1 and spin parameter a = 0. 3M, and remains ﬁxed at
rh = 2 for all physically allowed parameter sets.
Model C0 X0 D0 C0 −2D0X0
Kerr 1.00 0.0 0.0 1.0
SKBH1 1.00 0.02 0.20 0.992
SKBH2 1.02 0.01 0.30 1.014
SKBH4 0.80 0.01 0.50 0.790
SKBH5 1.50 0.02 0.50 1.480
A. Two-Dimensional Rest-Mass Density Morphology of the BHL
Flow
In this section, we discuss the morphological structure for med
as a result of the accretion of matter around a slowly rotatin g dis-
formal Kerr black hole. In previous BHL accretion studies ar ound
Schwarzschild and Kerr black holes, it has been shown that ma tter
falling supersonically from the upstream region toward the black
hole is gravitationally focused and accumulates on the opposite side
of the black hole, namely in the downstream region, producin g a
dense and well-deﬁned shock region. The resulting cone is ge ner-
ally characterized by a compressed high-density wake, the f orma-
tion of a clear opening angle, and an oscillatory post-shock motion.
In our previous studies [ 41– 43], it was shown that shock-cone dy-
namics produces QPO oscillations, and that the resulting QP O fre-
quencies depend on the rotation parameter of the black hole, the
ﬂow parameters, and the modiﬁcation parameters of the space time.
Similar behavior has also been revealed in diﬀerent gravity theories
where the spacetime is modiﬁed. In these studies, it was show n that
the modiﬁed spacetime can signiﬁcantly change the morpholo gy of
the shock cone, the density distributions, the formation of diﬀer-
ent physical mechanisms, and the strength of the oscillatio ns in the
mass accretion rate [ 18, 47– 51].
Fig.1 shows the time evolution of the rest-mass density formed as
a result of accretion around a slowly rotating disformal Ker r black
hole for the SKBH1 model given in Table I on the equatorial plane.
As time progresses, the evolution of the resulting morpholo gy pro-
ceeds from the upper-left panel to the lower-right panel. In this
way, the time-dependent change of the morphology is present ed.
In the early stages of the simulation, shown in the upper-lef t panel,
a shock cone begins to form in the downstream region. Althoug h it
is not as well developed as in the classical Schwarzschild an d Kerr
solutions, the formation of the cone can still be observed. D iﬀerent
from the classical Kerr solution, in the SKBH1 model the open ing
angle of the cone increases with time, and a cone that covers a wider
region is formed. As time evolves, the high-density shock-c one re-
gion extends further in the azimuthal direction. Although t he open-
ing angle of the cone becomes wider, the density near the blac k
hole is observed to increase further. However, the wake form ed
in the downstream region does not appear at a ﬁxed position. I n-
stead, it starts to oscillate strongly in the azimuthal dire ction, and
this oscillation is clearly seen in Fig. 1 through the snapshots taken
at di ﬀerent times. This shows that the formed cone is not a sta-
tionary structure as a whole. Rather, as a result of the inter action
between the disformal spacetime geometry and the hydrodyna m-
ical e ﬀects of the matter falling supersonically toward the black
hole, the shape, width, and orientation of the dynamically e volving
post-shock region are continuously modiﬁed.
For the SKBH1 model in Fig. 1, the disformal parameters are
C0 = 1. 00, X0 = 0. 02, and D0 = 0. 20. From these values,
C0 −2D0X0 = 0. 992 is obtained. This value is slightly smaller
than that of the classical Kerr solution. Thus, this model re presents
a weak but non-negligible deviation from the Kerr solution. In both
cases, the horizon location remains the same. Since the hori zon
location is unchanged, the di ﬀerences seen in the shock morphol-
ogy are mainly associated with the modiﬁcation of the spacet ime
structure rather than a change in the black-hole size. The sl ight
decrease in the value of C0 −2D0X0 modiﬁes the geometrical re-
sponse of the ﬂow and causes a broader and less sharply collim ated
structure in the downstream region. The spreading of the mat ter
trapped inside the shock over a wider region in the azimuthal direc-
tion, together with the time-dependent change in the shock o pen-
ing angle, shows that the disformal correction strengthens the non-
axisymmetric deformation in the BHL accretion ﬂow. This res ult
is also physically important because such an oscillating sh ock cone
can periodically change the mass accretion rate and natural ly lead
to observable QPO-like peaks.
The SKBH2 model given in Fig. 2, similar to Fig. 1, shows the
time evolution of the rest-mass density on the equatorial pl ane
around the slowly rotating disformal Kerr black hole. Simil ar to
Fig.1 and to the classical Kerr solution, in the early stages of the
simulation, the matter falling supersonically toward the b lack hole
is gravitationally focused toward the opposite side of the black hole,
leading to the formation of a shock cone. In the SKBH2 model, t he
spacetime parameters are C0 = 1. 02, X0 = 0. 01, and D0 = 0. 30,
while C0 −2D0X0 = 1. 014. This value is slightly larger than that
of the classical Kerr solution. Thus, the SKBH2 model produc es
a weak positive deviation from the classical Kerr solution. These
changes modify the geometrical response of the accreting ﬂo w. In
this case, the resulting shock cone is still clearly observe d through-
out the evolution; however, it becomes more asymmetric, and the
time-dependent change in the shock-cone structure is clear ly seen
in Fig.2. In the early stage of the simulation, the cone formed in the
downstream region appears with a relatively narrow opening angle,
similar to the Kerr solution. However, with time, the shock c one
spreads over a wider region in the azimuthal direction, and its open-
ing angle changes from one snapshot to another. This shows that the
resulting shock cone does not settle into a stable conﬁgurat ion, but
instead the entire shock-cone structure undergoes a strong oscilla-
tory motion. Compared with Fig. 1, the SKBH2 morphology shows
stronger changes in the lateral position of the shock bounda ry, a
more pronounced deformation of the downstream high-densit y re-
gion, and larger ﬂuctuations in the density enhancement nea r the

5
FIG. 1. Time evolution of the rest-mass density distributio n on the equatorial plane for the SKBH1 model of the slowly rot ating disformal Kerr black hole.
The density is represented by the color scale and contour lin es, while the velocity vector ﬁeld is overlaid to show the dir ection of the accreting matter and
the ﬂow behavior after the shock cone starts to oscillate. Th e panels show the dynamical evolution of the BHL ﬂow from the u pper-left to the lower-right
panel. To resolve the near-black-hole accretion morphology and the downstream shock-cone structure in more detail, th e computational domain is zoomed
into the region −70M < x < 70M and −70M < y < 70M.
black hole. In particular, the panels show that the shock fro nt ex-
hibits a behavior that alternates between a more collimated shock-
cone-like structure and a broader structure. This indicate s that even
a small positive deviation from the classical Kerr solution can cause
signiﬁcant changes in the morphology of the shock cone by mod -
ifying the oscillatory motion, compression, and angular sp reading
of the matter accreting toward the black hole. Since the hori zon
remains ﬁxed at r+ = 2M, these di ﬀerences are not caused by a
change in the black-hole size but by the disformal modiﬁcati on of
the spacetime geometry itself. The numerical results of the SKBH2
model show that the morphology of the shock cone formed by BHL
accretion can undergo signiﬁcant changes even for small dev ia-
tions from the standard Kerr background. These changes strengthen
the non-axisymmetric behavior and signiﬁcantly modify the time-
dependent evolution of the accretion ﬂow in the downstream r egion.
In the SKBH4 model given in Fig.
3, the morphological struc-
ture formed by the matter accreting toward the black hole is s ub-
stantially di ﬀerent from the weak-deviation models SKBH1 and
SKBH2. In this model, the disformal parameters are C0 = 0. 80,
X0 = 0. 01, and D0 = 0. 50, and depending on these parameters,
C0 −2D0X0 = 0. 790 is obtained. This value is signiﬁcantly smaller
than the Kerr reference value C0 −2D0X0 = 1. Thus, the SKBH4
model represents a strong negative deviation from the stand ard
Kerr geometry. As a result of this deviation, a narrow and wel l-
developed shock cone does not form in the downstream region a s a
result of BHL accretion. Instead, as seen in the snapshots in Fig.3,
a more distorted and dynamically unstable accretion behavior is ob-
served. At the early times of the simulation, a high-density shock
region forms in the downstream region. However, the shock-c one
morphology seen in the SKBH1 and SKBH2 models rapidly disap-
pears. The matter accumulated in the downstream region spre ads
over a wider area in the azimuthal direction and causes the fo rma-
tion of a spiral-like dense region around the black hole. In a ddition,
as seen in Fig.
3, as time progresses, the regions where the matter is
dense become bent around the black hole. This shows that the p ost-
shock ﬂow is strongly a ﬀected by the modiﬁed gravity geometry.
One of the most important features of the SKBH4 model given
in Fig. 3 is that the resulting shock structure is strongly non-
axisymmetric and strongly time dependent. The shock front d oes
not oscillate only by changing its opening angle, as in the we ak-
deviation models, but also undergoes a signiﬁcant global de forma-
tion. In other words, the dense regions formed around the bla ck
hole rotate around the black hole, surround the black hole, a nd es-
pecially lead to the formation of spiral-like shock structu res. The
velocity vectors show that the matter is not simply advected down-
stream after being shocked, but is redirected into a circula ting pat-
tern around the black hole. These behaviors show that strong nega-
tive deviations in the term C0 −2D0X0 appear as a physical situation
that can explain the transition between the dominant classi cal BHL
shock-cone conﬁguration and the mixed shock-cone /spiral high-
density regions formed around the black hole, which can be us ed
to interpret observable data. Thus, the SKBH4 model shows th at
when the deviation from the Kerr background is su ﬃciently large,
the accretion morphology, compression, and angular moment um
transport around the black hole undergo signiﬁcant changes . Since
the black-hole horizon in these models is formed at 2 M, this shows
that the change in the physical mechanism observed here does not
originate from the black-hole horizon, but is completely a c onse-
quence of the disformal modiﬁcation of the spacetime. The SK BH4
model clearly shows that the spacetime parameters not only m odify
the density enhancement, but also lead to the formation of a n on-
axisymmetric hydrodynamical structure. This new hydrodyn amical
structure appears as a mechanism that can cause the mass accr etion
rate to vary with time and may lead to the observation of di ﬀerent
QPO-like frequencies from the same source.
In the SKBH5 model shown in Fig. 4, the accretion morphology
is presented for a case that deviates more strongly from both the
classical Kerr model and the weakly deviating SKBH1 and SKBH 2
models. In this case, unlike the SKBH4 model, the deviation o c-
curs in the positive direction rather than in the negative di rection.
In this model, the disformal parameters are C0 = 1. 50, X0 = 0. 02,
and D0 = 0. 50, giving C0 −2D0X0 = 1. 480, and the accretion be-
havior around the slowly rotating disformal black hole is sh own.
As seen in Fig. 4, this large positive deformation prevents the for-

6
FIG. 2. Same as Fig. 1, but for the SKBH2 model given in Table I. In this case, the disformal combination is C0 −2D0X0 = 1. 014, which is slightly larger
than the classical Kerr value. This weak positive deviation from the Kerr solution modiﬁes the shock-cone morphology, p roducing a more asymmetric and
time-dependent downstream structure.
FIG. 3. Same as Fig. 1, but for the SKBH4 model given in Table I. In this case, the disformal combination is C0 −2D0X0 = 0. 790, which is signiﬁcantly
smaller than the classical Kerr value. This strong negative deviation from the Kerr solution strongly modiﬁes the downs tream shock morphology, producing
a highly non-axisymmetric and time-dependent mixed shock- cone/spiral structure.
mation of a simple, stationary, and well-collimated shock c one in
the downstream region. Instead, the shocked matter produce s a
strongly warped and time-dependent morphological structu re, in
which its position, opening angle, and orientation change s igniﬁ-
cantly with time. In the snapshots corresponding to the earl y stages
of the simulation, the post-shock region is still observed t o form
in the downstream region. This shows that the BHL mechanism i s
active during the early stages of the simulation. However, d iﬀerent
from the classical Kerr black-hole model, the wake formed in the
downstream region is rapidly distorted, and the high-densi ty region
begins to warp around the black hole. After the formation of t his
mixed shock-cone /spiral morphological structure, a warped shock
cone is observed to persist around the black hole for a long ti me.
A key feature of SKBH5 sen in Fig. 4 is that, when the physi-
cal mechanism around the black hole is examined in general, e x-
cept for the transition time, the shock cone is not completel y de-
stroyed, but it is displaced and warped at a di ﬀerent angular posi-
tion. This situation is clearly seen especially in the last t hree snap-

7
shots at the bottom of Fig. 4. As seen there, the shock cone is still
very dense, but it appears at a di ﬀerent location and continues to
oscillate almost periodically throughout the evolution (s ee in Fig.
7) . The cone-like structure alternates between a compact dow n-
stream conﬁguration and a broader, curved, spiral-like pat tern. On
the other hand, from the velocity vector plots, it is seen tha t the
matter in the post-shock region is not only transported away , but
also rotates around the black hole or is redirected toward th e black
hole. This behavior shows that the strong positive deviatio n seen
in C0 −2D0X0 modiﬁes the e ﬀective hydrodynamical response of
the accreting matter. Accordingly, the resulting QPO-like behavior
is also modiﬁed. Compared with the result of the SKBH4 model
given in Fig.
3, in the SKBH5 model shown in Fig. 4, it is clearly
observed that the shock cone is warped, shifted around the bl ack
hole, and also undergoes a moderate oscillatory motion. Thu s, a
diﬀerent physical region emerges in the SKBH5 model. In other
words, the spacetime parameters not only deform or broaden t he
shock cone, but also generate a recurrent, non-axisymmetri c mo-
tion of the post-shock region.
B. Azimuthal Density Proﬁles and Time-Dependent Flow Evolu tion
Here, the one-dimensional proﬁles of the accretion dynamic s
around the slowly rotating disformal Kerr black hole are inv esti-
gated in the azimuthal direction for di ﬀerent models, in the region
close to the black-hole horizon, namely in the strong gravit ational
ﬁeld. In this way, the parameter-dependent changes of the ph ys-
ical mechanisms formed around the black hole are shown more
clearly. In Fig.
5, the rest-mass density, radial velocity, and the an-
gular velocity are plotted at r = 2. 66M, in the strong gravitational
ﬁeld, for both the classical Kerr black hole and the rotating dis-
formal Kerr models SKBH1 and SKBH2, with rotation parameter
a = 0. 3M, allowing for a direct comparison between them. These
one-dimensional cuts clearly reveal how even small changes in the
spacetime parameters modify the internal structure of the s hock
cone and the post-shock ﬂow. In the left panel of Fig.
5, it is seen
that, in the Kerr 03 model, the maximum density in the post-shock
region of the shock cone is shifted toward the positive φregion.
As discussed in detail in previous studies, this occurs as a r esult of
the warping of the spacetime. On the other hand, compared wit h
the Kerr case, the disformal models produce strong enhancem ents
in the density. The SKBH2 model produces the largest-amplit ude
peak. This indicates that even weak deviations from the Kerr back-
ground can increase the compression of matter inside the sho ck
region. At the same time, the e ﬀect of the parameter C0 −2D0X0 in
the disformal spacetime, given in Table I, is clearly seen when com-
pared with Kerr. When C0 −2D0X0 is smaller than the Kerr value,
it produces an e ﬀect opposite to the rotation direction of the black
hole, while in the model where C0 −2D0X0 is larger than the Kerr
value, it produces an eﬀect in the same direction as Kerr. Therefore,
the shift of the maximum amplitude is clearly observed. Howe ver,
in both disformal models, the opening angle of the resulting shock
cone is larger than that of the classical Kerr solution. The m iddle
panel of Fig. 5 shows the radial velocity variations for these mod-
els. As clearly seen, in the disformal models the radial velo cities
are shifted and the velocity transitions become broader. Th is shows
that the infalling matter behaves di ﬀerently after passing through
the shock-front region. In the right panel of Fig. 5, sharp jumps
and displaced discontinuities are observed in the angular v elocity,
as expected in a standard shock-cone structure. In the disfo rmal
models, changes in these features are observed depending on the
opening angle of the resulting shock cone. This indicates th at the
asymmetric azimuthal motion becomes more extended. Thus, t he
one-dimensional proﬁles in Fig. 5 show that not only the morphol-
ogy of the shock cone changes, but also the compression of the
matter trapped inside the cone, the radial inﬂow structure, and the
angular distributions undergo signiﬁcant changes in the ne ar-black-
hole region.
Fig.
6 presents the time-dependent azimuthal density evolution
for the SKBH4 and SKBH5 models after the accretion ﬂow has
already developed its main nonlinear structure. Therefore , these
panels can be considered as a complementary diagnostic for t he
snapshots shown in the lower rows of Figs.
3 and 4. In other words,
for these models, the time evolution of the post-shock regio n is
revealed from the later stage of the accretion morphology fo rmed
around the black hole until the ﬁnal stage of the simulation. For
the SKBH4 model, the density map shows a broader, irregular, and
strongly destroyed structure. This indicates that the stro ng neg-
ative deviation from the classical Kerr solution leads to th e for-
mation of a conﬁguration that is very di ﬀerent from the classical
shock oscillation. At the same time, it conﬁrms the formatio n of
a mixed shock-cone and spiral morphology. The density inter face
is not vertical or stationary. Instead, it bends and drifts w ith time.
This shows that the shocked matter around the black hole is co n-
tinuously redistributed, as seen in Fig. 3. In contrast, the SKBH5
model shows a more coherent behaviour, but unlike the classi cal
Kerr solution, it exhibits a time-dependent and axisymmetr ic-like
distribution around φ= 0 rad. This is consistent with the behavior
of the warped shock cone shown in Fig. 4 . At the same time, after
a certain time, a QPO is observed in the right panel of Fig. 6. This
shows that large negative and positive deviations generate diﬀerent
hydrodynamical regions. The time-dependent azimuthal var iations
shown in Fig. 6 are physically important because these behaviors
directly control the variation of the mass accretion rate an d provide
details about the hydrodynamical origin of the QPO-like var iations
discussed later.
IV . TIMING SIGNATURES OF BHL ACCRETION:
ACCRETION-RATE V ARIABILITY AND QPO FREQUENCIES
In this section, rather than focusing on the spatial behavio r of
the ﬂow morphology, we reveal how it evolves with time and how
it can be connected to observability. The azimuthal proﬁles and
two-dimensional density maps discussed in Section
III show that
the disformal parameters strongly modify the shock cone aro und
the black hole, produce spiral-like overdense regions, and generate
non-axisymmetric time-dependent motions. The spacetime p aram-
eters not only change the morphological properties of the dy nam-
ical structures, but also cause variations in the amount of m atter
falling through the inner boundary toward the black hole. Th us,
the direct signatures of these time-dependent variations a re seen
in the mass accretion rate. For this reason, the temporal beh avior
of the accretion rate provides a powerful diagnostic for con necting
the hydrodynamical response of the BHL ﬂow to observable qua si-
periodic variability.
The aim of this section is to quantify how di ﬀerent disformal
Kerr models transfer nonlinear shock dynamics into timing s ignals.
For this purpose, we ﬁrst reveal the variations in the mass ac cre-
tion rate for the Kerr, SKBH1, SKBH2, SKBH4, and SKBH5 mod-
els, and then compute the PSD analyses from these mass accret ion
rates. By ﬁtting the dominant PSD features with Lorentzian c om-
ponents, we obtain the characteristic QPO-like frequencies for each
spacetime conﬁguration. Thus, the oscillating shock cone, warped
post-shock structure, and spiral-density modulations are transferred
into a measurable frequency domain. In this way, we reveal wh at
kind of measurable e ﬀects the spacetime parameters used here pro-
duce in accreting black-hole systems.
A. Mass Accretion-Rate Variability Across Disformal Kerr M odels
In Fig.
7, the time-dependent mass accretion rates are given at
the inner boundary of the computational domain, namely in th e re-
gion closest to the black-hole horizon, for the slowly rotat ing dis-
formal Kerr models SKBH1, SKBH2, SKBH4, and SKBH5, to-
gether with the Kerr model. For the Kerr model, the accretion rate

8
FIG. 4. Same as Fig. 1, but for the SKBH5 model given in Table I. In this case, the disformal combination is C0 −2D0X0 = 1. 480, which is signiﬁcantly
larger than the classical Kerr value. This strong positive deviation from the Kerr solution modiﬁes the downstream shoc k morphology, producing a warped,
shifted, and time-dependent shock-cone /spiral structure around the black hole.
-2 -1 0 1 2
φ [rad]
0
100
200
300ρ [arbitrary unit]
Kerr  a=0.3M
SKBH1
SKBH2
r = 2.66M
-2 0 2
φ [rad]
-0.4
-0.38
-0.36
-0.34
-0.32
-0.3
v
r
/c
Kerr a=0.3M
SKBH1
SKBH2
r=2.66M 
-2 0 2
φ [rad]
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2v
φ
/c
Kerr a=0.3M
SKBH1
SKBH2
r=2.66M 
FIG. 5. One-dimensional azimuthal proﬁles of the rest-mass density, radial velocity, and angular velocity of the ﬂow mo rphology formed around the
slowly rotating disformal Kerr models SKBH1 and SKBH2 and th e Kerr black hole at r = 2. 66M. The proﬁles show how weak disformal deviations
modify the density enhancement, radial inﬂow transition, a nd azimuthal motion of the post-shock accreting matter near the black hole.
FIG. 6. Time-dependent azimuthal variation of the rest-mas s density for the SKBH4 and SKBH5 models, shown from the stage after the main nonlinear
accretion structure has formed until the ﬁnal time of the sim ulation. The panels show how the post-shock region evolves w ith time. While a mixed shock-
cone/spiral morphology appears in SKBH4, a more coherent, warped , quasi-periodically oscillating shock structure is obser ved in the SKBH5 model.

9
remains almost steady with small oscillations compared wit h the
other models. It produces weak oscillations around an almos t con-
stant value. This behavior is consistent with the standard B HL pic-
ture. Compared with the disformal cases, the Kerr case is use d
as the reference level. Thus, the variations in the other dis formal
models and the e ﬀects produced by the spacetime can be clearly
revealed.
In the SKBH1 model shown in Fig. 7, the disformal deviation
is weak and can be classiﬁed as negative with respect to the Ke rr
reference case. The accretion rate is larger than that of the Kerr case
and shows a moderate oscillatory behavior. This is consiste nt with
Fig.1, where the shock cone still exists, has a broader structure,
and oscillates in the azimuthal direction. Thus, the mass ac cretion-
rate curve shows that even small changes in the Kerr backgrou nd
can cause a signiﬁcant increase in the amount of matter captu red
by the black hole. At the same time, it produces a time-depend ent
oscillatory modulation. However, the variability is still relatively
smooth compared with the more strongly deformed models.
In the SKBH2 model shown in Fig. Fig. 7, the mass accretion
rate exhibits stronger variability and has a larger amplitu de than
those of the Kerr and SKBH1 models. This behavior is consiste nt
with the results shown in Figs. 2 and 5. This is because the SKBH2
model shows stronger density enhancement, a wider shock ope ning
angle, and a clear deformation of the shock cone in the downst ream
region. The large-scale oscillations that vary with time re peat regu-
larly. This shows that the shock cone does not only ﬂuctuate i rreg-
ularly, but also produces persistent quasi-periodic modul ations in
the accretion ﬂow. For this reason, the SKBH2 model, which ha s a
small positive deviation with respect to the Kerr model, app ears as
one of the clearest models.
In the SKBH4 model shown in Fig. 7, the accretion rate is
strongly irregular and intermittent. In this curve, sharp s pikes and
strong bursts are observed, especially at later times of the simu-
lation. This is directly consistent with the accretion morp hology
given in Fig. 3 and the azimuthal density variation shown in Fig. 6.
In the SKBH4 model, the classical shock cone is strongly dist orted
and transformed into a mixed shock-cone /spiral structure. Since
the shocked matter is rearranged around the black hole in an u nsta-
ble and non-axisymmetric way, the amount of matter falling toward
the black hole changes abruptly. Thus, the strong negative deviation
from the classical Kerr solution reﬂects the burst-like acc retion-rate
behavior of SKBH4 as a strongly nonlinear and unstable hydro dy-
namical response.
In the SKBH5 model shown in Fig. 7, the mass accretion rate
exhibits a very violent time-dependent variation, especia lly during
the early stages of the simulation. The amplitude of the vari ations
in this phase is very large. However, at later times, it conti nues to
oscillate with a lower amplitude. This behavior is consiste nt with
the two-dimensional ﬂow morphology shown in Fig. 4. This behav-
ior in the mass accretion rate again indicates that there is a strong
transition phase during the early stage of the simulation. L ater, it
conﬁrms that an axisymmetric-like shock cone around φ= 0 rad
and, at the same time, a warped oscillating shock cone around the
black hole are formed in the downstream region. The late-tim e be-
havior of the mass accretion rate also conﬁrms the coherent q uasi-
periodic azimuthal density pattern seen in Fig. 6. Thus, the SKBH5
model shows a di ﬀerent temporal regime from the SKBH4 model.
Instead of producing only irregular burst-like behavior, t he strong
positive disformal deviation generates a warped shock structure that
can repeatedly modulate the accretion rate.
B. PSD-Based Identiﬁcation of QPO Signatures
In Fig. 8, the PSD spectra and multi-component Lorentzian ﬁts
are shown for the Kerr model with rotation parameter a = 0. 3M and
for the disformal models SKBH1, SKBH2, and SKBH4. Fig. 8 con-
verts the time-domain variations shown in Fig. 7 into the frequency
domain, and thus we reveal the characteristic QPO-like freq uencies
numerically produced by the shock cone, warped post-shock ﬂ ow,
and spiral-density structures. In the proﬁles, the blue cur ve repre-
sents the numerically calculated PSD, while the Lorentzian compo-
nents decompose the dominant peaks, determine their centra l fre-
quencies, and reveal their coherence properties by calcula ting the
factor Q.
In the upper-left panel of Fig. 8, the PSD analysis and Lorentzian
components are shown for the Kerr reference model. It is seen that
the PSD produces several Lorentzian peaks, and these peaks o c-
cur approximately at 7 . 54 Hz, 14 . 43 Hz, 32 . 06 Hz, 42 . 99 Hz, and
68. 13 Hz. While the strongest low-frequency structure appears at
14. 43 Hz, the peaks at 42 . 99 Hz and 68 . 13 Hz have the largest Q
values. This shows that these peaks with larger Q values are nar-
rower and more coherent oscillatory components. These resu lts are
consistent with the behavior of the mass accretion rate disc ussed in
Fig. 7, which is almost steady but weakly oscillatory. In the Kerr
model, the resulting shock cone is relatively stable. There fore, the
Kerr model does not produce a single overwhelmingly dominan t
low-frequency modulation. Instead, the radial and azimuthal modes
trapped inside the shock cone are gradually excited during t he evo-
lution, producing multiple characteristic frequencies th rough the
fundamental modes and their nonlinear coupling. This situa tion
has been discussed in detail in our previous studies [ 52, 53]. As
a result of these physical processes, several relatively we ak peaks
distributed over a broad frequency range are formed.
In the upper-right panel of Fig.8, for the SKBH1 model, although
the deviation from the Kerr solution is small, signiﬁcant ch anges
are observed in the PSD. The dominant Lorentzian peaks are ob -
served at 2 . 96 Hz, 6. 62 Hz, 9. 64 Hz, 27. 25 Hz, and 47. 91 Hz, while
it is clearly seen that the strongest powers occur especiall y at the
low frequencies 2 . 96 Hz and 6 . 62 Hz. The quality factor of the
6. 62 Hz component is larger than that of the 2 . 96 Hz component.
This shows that 6 . 62 Hz is a more coherent oscillation mode. Al-
though the peak at 27. 25 Hz is seen to be very narrow and coherent,
its power is much lower compared with the 2 . 96 Hz and 6 . 62 Hz
peaks, which signiﬁcantly reduces its observability. Comp ared with
the Kerr solution, it is observed that the timing power in the SKBH1
model shifts toward lower frequencies. This is consistent w ith the
ﬂow morphology shown in Fig. 1. As discussed in Fig. 1, the shock-
cone structure is still preserved, but the cone becomes broa der and
its azimuthal oscillation is strengthened. Thus, the PSD an alysis for
SKBH1 shows that a weak negative disformal deviation can tra ns-
form a relatively steady Kerr-like shock cone into a more slo wly
oscillating post-shock structure.
In the lower-left panel of Fig. 8, for the SKBH2 model, the PSD
is organized in a sharper form. The main Lorentzian peaks occ ur at
3. 86 Hz, 7. 82 Hz, 18. 89 Hz, and 22. 94 Hz. While the strongest fea-
ture is formed at the low frequency of 3. 86 Hz, the higher-frequency
peaks with lower power, especially at 18 . 89 Hz and 22. 94 Hz, have
very large Q values. Although these peaks are very narrow and co-
herent, their observability is much lower than that of the ot her two
peaks. On the other hand, the peak at 7 . 82 Hz also has a high Q
value and an observable level of power. Therefore, due to its strong
coherence and very narrow structure, it appears as a suitabl e com-
ponent for observations. The PSD behavior found in this mode l
is consistent with the persistent and strong quasi-periodi c modula-
tion shown by the mass accretion-rate curve of SKBH2 discuss ed
in Fig. 7. At the same time, it is also consistent with the density
and velocity diagnostics given in Figs. 2 and 5. Thus, among the
weak-deviation models, SKBH2 provides the clearest exampl e of
how a small positive deviation from Kerr can produce a stable and
coherent QPO-like frequency pattern.
Finally, in the lower-right panel of Fig. 8, the PSD analysis of
the SKBH4 model is spread over a broader frequency range and i s
more complex. The Lorentzian components occur approximate ly
at 2. 43 Hz, 10. 52 Hz, 14. 44 Hz, 16. 47 Hz, and 29. 31 Hz. Unlike the
SKBH1 and SKBH2 models, in the PSD analysis of the SKBH4
model, several strong peaks distributed over a broad freque ncy
range are observed. The components at 2 . 43 Hz and 16. 47 Hz have

10
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
t/M
0
500
1000
1500
2000dM/dt [arbitrary unit]
Kerr a=0.3M
SKBH1
SKBH2
SKBH4
SKBH5
FIG. 7. Time evolution of the mass accretion rates calculate d at the inner boundary around the Kerr black hole together wi th the slowly rotating disformal
Kerr models SKBH1, SKBH2, SKBH4, and SKBH5 for a = 0. 3M. While an almost steady accretion occurs in the Kerr case plo tted as the reference
model, the disformal models generally show signiﬁcantly en hanced amplitudes and model-dependent behaviors. These di ﬀerences show how the disformal
spacetime parameters imprint the shock-cone, spiral, and w arped post-shock dynamics directly onto the accretion-rat e signal.
relatively low Q values. This shows that these peaks are broader
and almost non-coherent. On the other hand, the components a t
10. 52 Hz, 14 . 44 Hz, and 29 . 31 Hz indicate more coherent struc-
tures, which are embedded inside an overall turbulent signal. These
PSD and Lorentzian-ﬁt results are fully consistent with the morpho-
logical behavior of the SKBH4 model observed in Figs. 3 and 6. As
known in section III, in this model, the classical shock cone is com-
pletely destroyed and replaced by a mixed shock-cone /spiral struc-
ture. Therefore, the SKBH4 PSD reﬂects a combination of irre gular
burst-like accretion and localized coherent oscillatory m odes.
In Fig. 9, we perform the PSD analysis and Lorentzian ﬁtting
only for the SKBH5 model. Since two di ﬀerent hydrodynamical
states appear during the simulation in this model, we discus s the
possible spectral states observed in each hydrodynamical p hase. In
the upper-left panel of Fig. 9, the PSD is calculated from the mass
accretion rate over the whole simulation. Therefore, it con tains
a mixed PSD analysis of the initial transition phase and the l ater
warped-shock oscillation state. As a result, the Lorentzia n compo-
nents are observed around 1 . 13 Hz, 13. 21 Hz, 18. 56 Hz, 26. 94 Hz,
and 32. 00 Hz. However, since the low-frequency component has a
small Q value, it is seen that the signal produces broad and non-
coherent variability due to the dominance of the transition phase.
In the upper-right panel of Fig. 9, the PSD analysis of the ini-
tial transition part up to t = 20000M in the mass accretion rate
shown in Fig. 7 is presented, corresponding to the region where
large-amplitude accretion oscillations occur. In this int erval, the
PSD is dominated by a broad low-frequency structure located ap-
proximately at 8 . 53 Hz. Since its Q value is very small, it does
not produce a coherent oscillation. At the same time, peaks a round
29. 58 Hz, 54. 02 Hz, 72. 45 Hz, and 101 . 04 Hz are also observed in
the PSD analysis of the same interval. This shows that the ear ly
phase of the SKBH5 model is controlled by the violent and nonl in-
ear restructuring of the accretion dynamics. Therefore, th e result-
ing QPO modes are not clear and single. This behavior is consi stent
with Fig.4. In contrast, the lower panel of Fig. 9 represents the later
phase of the simulation, in which the system forms a warped sh ock
cone and oscillates around the black hole with a clear period . In
this region, the PSD peaks are more coherent and narrower. Th e
resulting Lorentzian components occur around 4 . 58 Hz, 18. 73 Hz,
30. 44 Hz, and 44 . 00 Hz. In this case, the peak at 4 . 58 Hz has both
a very strong amplitude and a strongly coherent, narrow stru cture.
Therefore, it appears as the strongest observable QPO-like struc-
ture. The strongest physical message is that SKBH5 produces two
distinct timing states: an early transient state with viole nt, broad-
band accretion variability and a later quasi-periodic state associated
with the recurrent motion of the warped shock cone. Thus, Fig . 9
shows that the strong positive disformal deviation in the SK BH5
model does not only shift the QPO frequencies, but also chang es
the entire temporal character of the accretion ﬂow. This is p roduced
by two diﬀerent physical mechanisms: a burst-like transition-phase
dynamics and a more coherent late-time warped shock-cone os cil-
lation phase.

11
20 40 60 80 100
F r equency  [Hz]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
PSD
1e−6
Kerr a=0 .3M -  M = 10 M
/uni2299
PSD
T otal L or ent.ian fit
Comp 1: f0=7.54 H., Q=11.03
Comp 2: f0=14.43 H., Q=5.88
Comp 3: f0=32.06 H., Q=17.12
Comp 4: f0=42.99 H., Q=40.76
Comp 5: f0=68.13 H., Q=307.14
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
F r equency [H0]
0 .0000
0.0002
0.0004
0.0006
0.0008
0.0010
0.0012
0.0014
PSD
SKBH1-Whole -  M = 10 M
⊙
PSD
T o- l Loren-0i n fi-
Comp 1: f0=2.96 H0 , Q=3.18
Comp 2: f0=6.62 H0, Q=10.10
Comp 3: f0=9.64 H0, Q=0.70
Comp 4: f0=27.25 H0, Q=124137.28
Comp 5: f0=47.91 H0, Q=19.62
5 10 15 20 25 30
F r equency  [Hz]
0 .000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
PSD
SKBH2 -  M = 10 M
⊙
PSD
T otal L or ent.ian fit
Comp 1: f0=3.86 H., Q=4.90
Comp 2: f0=7.82 H., Q=1716.84
Comp 3: f0=18.89 H., Q=94441.69
Comp 4: f0=22.94 H., Q=70845.60
20 40 60 80 100
F r equency  [Hz]
0 .0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
PSD
SKBH4 -  M = 10 M
⊙
PSD
T otal L or ent.ian fit
Comp 1: f0=2.43 H., Q=0.66
Comp 2: f0=10.52 H., Q=156.10
Comp 3: f0=14.44 H., Q=72170.76
Comp 4: f0=16.47 H., Q=1.37
Comp 5: f0=29.31 H., Q=72.26
FIG. 8. PSD spectra and multi-component Lorentzian ﬁts calc ulated from the mass accretion rate at r = 2. 3M are shown for both the Kerr model and
the slowly rotating disformal models SKBH1, SKBH2, and SKBH 4. The blue curve represents the numerically calculated PSD , while the Lorentzian
components show the dominant QPO-like peaks and their coher ence properties. Compared with the classical Kerr solution , the disformal models shift
the timing power and modify the peak structures. The physica l mechanisms formed around the slowly rotating disformal Ke rr black hole generate QPO
signatures associated with the shock cone, warped post-sho ck ﬂow, and mixed shock-cone /spiral morphology.
TABLE II. Comparison between observed QPO frequencies, observed black-hole masses, numerical frequencies, and the nu merically expected black-hole
masses obtained from the inverse mass-scaling relation. Th e numerical frequencies were calculated for a reference bla ck-hole mass of 10 M⊙.
Observed system Observed QPO frequency Observed mass Numer ical model Numerical frequency used Numerically expected m ass
GRS 1915+105 41 and 67 Hz 12 . 4+2. 0
−1. 8 M⊙ Kerr 42 . 99 and 68. 13 Hz 10 . 49 and 10. 17M⊙
GRO J1655–40 300 and 450 Hz 7 . 02 ±0. 22M⊙ Kerr 42 . 99 and 68. 13 Hz 1 . 43 and 1. 51M⊙
XTE J1550–564 184 and 276 Hz ∼9. 41M⊙ Kerr 42 . 99 and 68. 13 Hz 2 . 34 and 2. 47M⊙
Any BH LFQPOs 0 . 1–30 Hz Source class SKBH1–SKBH5 2–30 Hz ∼3. 1–3000 M⊙
M82 X–1 [ 54] 3 . 3 and 5. 1 Hz ∼156–380 M⊙ Kerr 42 . 99 and 68. 13 Hz 130 . 27 and 133. 59M⊙
NGC 5408 X–1 [ 55] 20 mHz or 15 mHz ∼1000–9000 M⊙ SKBH2/SKBH5 3 . 86 / 4. 58 Hz 1930 and 3053 M⊙
RE J1034+396 [56] 0 . 00027 Hz ∼(1–4) ×106 M⊙ SKBH5/Kerr 4 . 58 or 68. 13 Hz 1 . 70 ×105 or 2. 52 ×106 M⊙
V . MASS-SCALED QPO INTERPRETATION AND
OBSERV ATIONAL COUNTERPARTS OF SIMULATED BHL
V ARIABILITY
The QPO-like frequencies obtained from the Lorentzian deco m-
position provide a direct way to compare the numerically mod eled
BHL variability with observed black-hole timing signals. S ince the
numerical frequencies in this work are computed for a black- hole
mass of 10 M⊙, the comparison with other systems can be made
through the standard inverse-mass scaling of dynamical fre quen-
cies. Mass scaling is necessary because the characteristic dynami-
cal frequencies near the black hole scale approximately as o ne over
the black-hole mass. Therefore, the frequencies found in th is work
for a black hole with M = 10M⊙can be recalculated for black holes
with diﬀerent masses by using the following relation:
fobs = fsim
( 10M⊙
MBH
)
. (2)
Similarly, the black-hole mass can be estimated by using the fol-
lowing formula:
MBH = 10M⊙
( fsim
fobs
)
. (3)
Through this scaling, the same hydrodynamical mechanism ca n be
applied to stellar-mass black-hole binaries, ULXs, and AGN .
Thus, the hydrodynamical mechanism that produces frequenc ies
from a few Hz to tens of Hz for a black hole with M = 10M⊙pro-
duces frequencies at the mHz level when applied to intermedi ate-
mass black-hole sources, while for massive black-hole sour ces it

12
20 40 60 80 100
F r equency  [Hz]
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
PSD
SKBH5-Whole -  M = 10 M
⊙
PSD
T otal L or entzian fit
Comp 1: f0=1.13 Hz , Q=0.51
Comp 2: f0=13.21 Hz, Q=8.59
Comp 3: f0=18.56 Hz, Q=5.11
Comp 4: f0=26.94 Hz, Q=34.92
Comp 5: f0=32.00 Hz, Q=42.92
20 40 60 80 100
F r equency  [Hz]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
PSD
SKBH5-First -  M = 10 M
⊙
PSD
T otal L or entzian fit
Comp 1: f0=8.53 Hz , Q=0.33
Comp 2: f0=29.58 Hz, Q=6.33
Comp 3: f0=54.02 Hz, Q=237932.74
Comp 4: f0=72.45 Hz, Q=643.05
Comp 5: f0=101.04 Hz, Q=477814.36
20 40 60 80 100
F r equency [Hz]
0 .000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
PSD
SKBH5-Second  -  M = 10 M
⊙
PSD
T otal L or entzian fit
Comp 1: f0=4 .58 H., Q=385.07
Comp 2: f0=18.73 H., Q=1850.73
Comp 3: f0=30.44 H., Q=53.35
Comp 4: f0=44.00 H., Q=48.74
FIG. 9. It is the same as Fig. 8, but this time for the SKBH5 model. Here, three di ﬀerent PSD analyses are presented because two di ﬀerent physical states
appear with time in the SKBH5 model. The upper-left panel sho ws the PSD obtained from the mass accretion rate calculated o ver the whole simulation,
while the upper-right panel shows the PSD analysis of the ini tial stage of the simulation, namely the transition region w here strong oscillations occur. The
lower panel shows the PSD obtained from the later phase of the simulation, after the warped shock cone has formed. The Lore ntzian components show
the QPO-like peaks produced by these di ﬀerent hydrodynamical phases.
produces frequencies in the range from 0 . 0001 Hz down to 1 µHz.
Therefore, the QPO results numerically obtained here can be used
not only to compare with Galactic X-ray binary systems, but a lso to
compare the numerical and observational results by applyin g them
to ULXs and AGN QPO candidates. For example, the QPO-like
frequency of 4 . 58 Hz found for a black hole with M = 10M⊙ be-
comes 45. 8 µHz for the same mode around a black hole with mass
M = 106M⊙. This corresponds to a period of about 6 . 1 hours. If the
black-hole mass is M = 107M⊙, the same mode becomes 4 . 58 µHz,
and the corresponding period is 2 . 5 days. Thus, if the mass of the
observed source is known, the numerical frequencies found i n this
work can be directly shifted to the expected observed freque ncies
by using inverse-mass scaling.
When the numerical results are compared with observations s een
in Table
II, the Kerr reference model produces results that can be
more directly compared with HFQPOs observed in Galactic bla ck-
hole binaries. In particular, the coherent Kerr peaks at 42 . 99 Hz
and 68 . 13 Hz are close to the well-known QPO frequencies of
approximately 41 Hz and 67 Hz observed from the source GRS
1915+105. Belloni and collaborators discuss the recurrent appro x-
imately 67 Hz feature and the weaker approximately 41 Hz dete c-
tion in averaged RXTE observations, making this source the closest
stellar-mass counterpart to the Kerr reference frequencie s obtained
here [
39, 57]. This close relation shows that sources similar to GRS
1915+105 can exhibit high-frequency timing behavior through the
standard Kerr-like BHL shock-cone oscillation without req uiring
any strong disformal deviation.
The same frequency pair numerically found in the Kerr model
produces a mode coupling close to the 3 : 2 ratio. This is very i m-
portant because several observed black-hole binary system s show
this type of twin high-frequency QPO ratio. For example, the best-
known pair observed from the source GRO J1655-40 is 300 Hz and
450 Hz. On the other hand, simultaneous HFQPOs around 184 Hz
and 276 Hz have also been observed from the source XTE J1550-
564 [
58, 59]. These observed frequencies are larger than the numer-
ical frequencies calculated from the Kerr model for a black h ole
with M = 10M⊙. Therefore, these observational results and nu-
merical results cannot be directly matched because the freq uencies
do not agree exactly. However, the similarity in the frequen cy ra-
tio indicates that the nonlinear coupling of modes in the sim ulated
shock-cone system may produce the same type of harmonic stru c-
ture that is commonly discussed in the observational litera ture.
Weak disformal models are naturally connected with LFQPOs
because the observable frequencies obtained from the numer ical
results generally fall within this range seen in Table II. In black-
hole X-ray binaries, LFQPOs generally cover the frequency r egion
below 30 Hz and are commonly used as tracers of accretion-sta te
transitions [60]. In the SKBH1 model, strong low-frequency com-
ponents are found around 2 . 96 Hz and 6 . 62 Hz, while the SKBH2
model has remarkable components around 3 . 86 Hz and 7 . 82 Hz.
These frequencies directly fall within the LFQPO range obse rved
in Galactic black-hole binaries. Thus, SKBH1 and SKBH2 are b et-
ter candidates than the Kerr reference model for interpreti ng slowly
varying, coherent accretion-state oscillations.

13
Among the weak disformal deviation cases, the SKBH2 model
appears as the most observationally interesting case. The p air
formed at 3 . 86 Hz and 7 . 82 Hz appears as a strong low-frequency
component, while at the same time this pair represents a more co-
herent higher component. This behavior resembles the obser ved
tendency of black-hole binaries to show a dominant low-freq uency
QPO together with harmonic or secondary peaks. In this conte xt,
the SKBH2 model does not need to reproduce the exact 3 : 2 high-
frequency QPO ratio to be useful. The importance of this mode l is
that a positive disformal deviation produces a stable, narr ow, and
observable QPO-like pattern in the same frequency range. Th e fre-
quencies observed in this range are generally LFQPOs. This m akes
SKBH2 the best model in the present set for explaining persis tent
low-frequency QPO behavior in stellar-mass black-hole bin aries.
Among the numerically calculated models, SKBH4 is not a very
suitable model for clear twin-peak QPO systems. However, th is
model is much more suitable for broad-band noise and multipl e
transient peaks. The numerically calculated more coherent frequen-
cies at 10 . 52 Hz, 14. 44 Hz, and 29 . 31 Hz lie within the observable
LFQPO range. However, when the overall PSD behavior is con-
sidered, it is more complex and less stable. For these reason s, the
SKBH4 model is more suitable for explaining irregular or bur st-
like timing states. Observationally, this type of behavior is more
appropriate for explaining QPO systems with strong broad-b and
variability rather than isolated narrow peaks.
The SKBH5 model is especially important for state-dependen t
timing behavior. In the early-time PSD analysis of this mode l,
broad and weakly coherent peaks appear. In contrast, in the l ate-
time phase, a strong and coherent peak forms at 4 . 58 Hz. This
behavior can be related to observations because observed bl ack-
hole binaries generally produce QPOs that are strongly conn ected
to their accretion states. Thus, the SKBH5 model can be inter preted
as a model in which a violent transition phase produces a much
more coherent QPO-producing phase. Its late-time 4 . 58 Hz peak is
observationally more meaningful than the broad early-time peaks,
because it corresponds to the phase where the ﬂow has reached a
recurrent oscillatory conﬁguration.
The mass-scaling formulas given in Eqs.
2 and 3 allow us to
compare the numerical results with ULXs. The source M82 X-1
is especially important because the observed stable twin QP Os at
3. 3 Hz and 5 . 1 Hz produce a value close to the 3 : 2 ratio. These
frequencies have been reported as an important indicator for reveal-
ing the presence of intermediate-mass black holes [
61]. If the Kerr
pair at 42 . 99 Hz and 68 . 13 Hz is scaled to the M82 X-1 pair, the
implied black-hole mass is of order 100 M⊙. This places the source
M82 X-1 in the lower intermediate-mass range. At the same time, it
shows that the same simulated hydrodynamical mechanism can ex-
plain observed sources by applying mass scaling from Galact ic bi-
naries to ULX systems. In addition, when the SKBH2 frequenci es
3. 86 Hz and 7 . 82 Hz are scaled to the observed M82 X-1 frequen-
cies 3 . 3 Hz and 5 . 1 Hz, the corresponding black-hole masses are
approximately 11 . 7M⊙ and 15 . 3M⊙, respectively. Therefore, un-
like the Kerr high-frequency pair, the SKBH2 low-frequency pair
does not imply an intermediate-mass black hole for M82 X-1, b ut
instead corresponds to a stellar-mass black-hole range und er this
direct frequency scaling.
For low-frequency ULX QPOs, the disformal models are much
more useful. The source NGC 5408 X-1 shows a strong QPO
near 20 mHz, with evidence for a second feature near 15 mHz
[
62]. When the numerically obtained 3 . 86 Hz frequency in the
SKBH2 model is rescaled by using Eqs. 2 and 3, the correspond-
ing observed frequency becomes 20 mHz, and the black-hole ma ss
is calculated to be approximately M = 1900M⊙. Similarly, if
the numerical QPO frequency of 4 . 58 Hz in the SKBH5 model is
rescaled, the mass of the central black hole becomes approxi mately
M = 2300M⊙. Thus, SKBH2 and SKBH5 provide plausible hydro-
dynamical counterparts for ULX mHz QPOs if the central objec t is
in the intermediate-mass range.
The same argument can also be applied to massive black holes.
The source RE J1034 +396 is one of the best-known AGN QPO
candidates. Its observed frequency is approximately 0 . 00027 Hz.
The period corresponding to this QPO is approximately 1 hour
[
63]. If the late-time peak frequency of 4 . 58 Hz numerically ob-
tained in the SKBH5 model is scaled to this frequency, the mas s of
the central black hole is approximately M = 170000M⊙. On the
other hand, when the peak frequency of 68 . 13 Hz found in the Kerr
model is scaled to the observed frequency, the mass of the bla ck
hole in RE J1034 +396 becomes approximately M = 2. 5 ×106M⊙.
Both values fall in the mass range relevant for narrow-line S eyfert
1 galaxies, depending on whether the observed AGN oscillati on is
interpreted as the analogue of a low-frequency or high-freq uency
QPO.
Thus, as seen in Table II, the comparison between observational
results and numerical results shows that di ﬀerent numerical models
can explain di ﬀerent observational classes. The Kerr model ap-
pears as the best model for explaining HFQPOs such as the 41–
67 Hz features observed from the source GRS 1915 +105, while the
SKBH1 and SKBH2 models appear as the most suitable models
for LFQPOs in stellar-mass black-hole binaries. Here, the S KBH2
model produces the clearest coherent low-frequency patter n. The
SKBH4 model can be interpreted as the best model for explaini ng
observations in which irregular, multi-peak, burst-like t iming be-
havior appears. The SKBH5 model is the most suitable model fo r
state-dependent systems. In this model, after the transiti on phase,
a phase in which coherent QPOs are produced emerges. Thus, th e
disformal spacetime parameters do not simply shift the QPO f re-
quency; they select which observational timing class the si mulated
BHL accretion ﬂow resembles.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we reveal the dynamical structure and observational
signatures produced by BHL accretion around a slowly rotating dis-
formal Kerr black hole. By numerically solving the GRH equat ions
on the equatorial plane, we analyze how the disformal spacet ime
parameters modify the time-dependent behavior, stability, and mor-
phological structure of the matter falling supersonically toward the
black hole. The main aim of this study is not only to model the a c-
cretion dynamics, but also to reveal whether the resulting h ydrody-
namical variability carries QPO-like signatures. Thus, by connect-
ing these results with observed timing features, it becomes possible
to better understand black-hole systems. For this reason, i n this
work, we analyze two-dimensional density maps, one-dimens ional
azimuthal proﬁles, the time evolution of the mass accretion rate,
PSD analysis, Lorentzian decomposition, and mass-scaled o bser-
vational comparisons.
As a result of the numerical modeling, it has been shown that
even small deviations from the Kerr geometry signiﬁcantly m odify
the morphology of BHL accretion. In the SKBH1 model, where a
weak negative deviation is applied, the shock cone still continues to
exist. However, the opening angle of the cone becomes wider, and
its azimuthal oscillation becomes stronger. In the SKBH2 mo del,
where the deviation is weak but positive, the shock cone is st ill
observed, but the shock-cone structure in the downstream re gion
becomes more asymmetric and the density enhancement become s
more pronounced. These results show that weak disformal cor -
rections are su ﬃcient to modify the compression in the post-shock
region, the angular spreading, and the oscillatory motion.
In the case of strong deviations, it is observed that the accr etion
dynamics changes dramatically. In the SKBH4 model, where th e
disformal combination is signiﬁcantly smaller than the Ker r value,
the classical shock cone is destroyed and replaced by a stron gly
non-axisymmetric mixed shock-cone /spiral structure. The matter
in the post-shock region is redistributed around the black h ole. As
a result, irregular and burst-like accretion behavior is pr oduced. In
contrast, in the SKBH5 model, which has a strong positive dev ia-
tion with respect to the Kerr model, a warped and shifted shoc k-

14
cone structure is observed. In this case, the shock cone is no t com-
pletely destroyed. Instead, it oscillates around the black hole and
forms a recurrent late-time hydrodynamical state. Thus, th e sign
and strength of the disformal deviation control whether the ﬂow
behaves as a broadened shock cone, a distorted spiral struct ure, or
a warped oscillating post-shock region.
The one-dimensional azimuthal proﬁles provide further sup port
for these conclusions. The one-dimensional proﬁles of the d ensity,
radial velocity, and angular velocity show that the spacetime param-
eters do not only change the visual morphology of the ﬂow, but also
cause signiﬁcant changes in the internal structure of the sh ock re-
gion. In particular, compared with the Kerr solution, the di sformal
models show a signiﬁcant enhancement of the density in the po st-
shock region, changes in the radial velocity transition, an d strong
modiﬁcations in the discontinuities of the angular velocit y. These
changes show that, in the strong gravitational ﬁeld, the dis formal
geometry directly a ﬀects the compression of the matter, the struc-
ture of the radial infall toward the black hole, and the azimu thal
distribution of the matter in the post-shock region.
The mass accretion-rate analysis shows that the morphologi cal
diﬀerences formed around the slowly rotating disformal Kerr bl ack
hole are clearly seen in the time-dependent behavior of the m ass
accretion rate. In the Kerr model, an almost steady accretio n rate is
formed, although small oscillations are also observed. How ever, in
the disformal models, signiﬁcant variations in the mass acc retion
rate are revealed depending on the spacetime parameters and the
deviation. While moderate oscillations are observed in the SKBH1
model, it is shown that SKBH2 produces stronger and persiste nt
quasi-periodic modulations. On the other hand, in the SKBH4
model, irregular, intermittent, burst-type accretion is f ormed due
to the strongly distorted mixed shock-cone /spiral morphology. The
SKBH5 model produces two di ﬀerent temporal regions: an early
violent transition phase and a later coherent oscillation phase. Thus,
the accretion-rate signals act as a bridge that reveals the c onnection
between the hydrodynamical structure of the ﬂow and the obse rved
QPO-like timing signatures.
From the PSD and Lorentzian analyses, it is numerically ob-
served that each spacetime conﬁguration produces a di ﬀerent
frequency-domain signature. In the Kerr reference model, c oher-
ent peaks are numerically obtained around 42 . 99 Hz and 68. 13 Hz,
and these frequencies are found to be consistent with the HFQ POs
observed from the source GRS 1915 +105. In the SKBH1 model,
the deviation from Kerr shows that the timing power in the PSD
shifts toward lower frequencies. In this case, the observab le coher-
ent frequencies are calculated to occur around 2 . 96 Hz and 6. 62 Hz.
In the SKBH2 model, clear and highly coherent LFQPO behavior
is observed, especially at 3 . 86 Hz and 7 . 82 Hz. The numerical fre-
quencies obtained in the SKBH2 model show that this model ap-
pears as the most remarkable weak-deviation model for LFQPO
sources observed in the literature. The SKBH4 model produce s a
more complex PSD with multiple peaks embedded in a broad and
turbulent signal, making it more suitable for irregular or b urst-like
timing states. In the SKBH5 model, after the transition phas e, a
strong late-time coherent peak is observed around 4 . 58 Hz. This
model is especially important for explaining state-depend ent QPO
behavior.
As a result of the comparison between the numerical results a nd
observations, it has been shown that di ﬀerent models can explain
QPOs obtained from di ﬀerent black-hole sources observed in the
literature. In addition, by comparing the observational re sults with
the numerical results, a prediction has been made about what the
black-hole mass may be for some sources. It has been shown tha t
the Kerr model is the best model for explaining HFQPOs. This i s
because the numerically calculated QPO frequencies are fou nd to
be consistent with the 41–67 Hz range observed from the sourc e
GRS 1915+105. The weak disformal models SKBH1 and SKBH2
naturally show similarities with the LFQPOs observed in Gal actic
black-hole binaries. In particular, the numerical frequen cies calcu-
lated in the SKBH2 model are found to produce a clear coherent
low-frequency pattern. The SKBH4 model is found to be a model
that can explain observed sources showing broad-band noise , mul-
tiple transient peaks, and irregular timing behavior. The S KBH5
model is found to be highly consistent with observed sources in
which QPOs depend on the accretion state, because it naturally pro-
duces a transition from a violent early phase to a coherent la te-time
QPO-producing phase.
Finally, inverse-mass scaling is used to extend the frequen cies
numerically calculated for a black-hole mass of M = 10M⊙ to
intermediate-mass and massive black holes. In this way, whe n the
frequencies obtained numerically in diﬀerent models, ranging from
a few Hz to a few tens of Hz, are shifted to sources with di ﬀer-
ent black-hole masses, the resulting frequencies are found to vary
between the mHz and micro-Hz ranges. This allows the numer-
ical results to be compared with ULX sources such as M82 X-1
and NGC 5408 X-1, as well as AGN QPO candidates such as RE
J1034+396. Thus, the disformal spacetime parameters do not only
cause the QPO frequencies to shift, but also deﬁne the hydrod ynam-
ical region of the accretion ﬂow and allow us to determine whi ch
observational timing class is consistent with the numerica lly ob-
tained hydrodynamical mechanisms. This makes BHL accretio n
in disformal Kerr geometry a physically powerful framework for
connecting modiﬁed-gravity spacetime structure with obse rvable
black-hole timing signatures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
All numerical simulations were performed using the Phoenix
High Performance Computing facility at the American Univer sity
of the Middle East (AUM), Kuwait.
DATA A V AILABILITY STATEMENT
The data sets generated and analyzed during the current
study were produced using high-performance computing resources.
These data are not publicly available due to their large size and
computational nature, but are available from the correspon ding au-
thor upon reasonable request.
[1] B. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. Abbott, S. Abraham, F. Acernese, K. Ackley,
C. Adams, R. X. Adhikari, V . Adya, C. A ﬀeldt, et al., Phys. Rev. D
100, 104036 (2019).
[2] R. Abbott, T. Abbott, S. Abraham, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, A. Adams,
C. Adams, R. X. Adhikari, V . Adya, C. A ﬀeldt, et al., Phys. Rev. D
103, 122002 (2021).
[3] E. H. T. Collaboration, K. Akiyama, A. Alberdi, W. Alef, K. As ada,
R. Azulay, A.-K. Baczko, D. Ball, M. Balokovi ´c, J. Barrett, et al. ,
Ast. J. Lett. 875, L6 (2019).
[4] T. Johannsen, The Astrophysical Journal 777, 170 (2013).
[5] Z. Carson and K. Yagi, Phys. Rev. D 101, 084030 (2020).
[6] T. Johannsen and D. Psaltis, Phys. Rev. D. 83, 124015 (2011).
[7] V . Cardoso, P . Pani, and J. Rico, Phys. Rev. D89, 064007 (2014).
[8] G. O. Papadopoulos and K. D. Kokkotas, Class. Quant. Grav. 35,
185014 (2018).
[9] J. B. Achour, E. Gourgoulhon, and H. Roussille, JCAP 2025 (10),
012.
[10] R. Ghosh and K. Chakravarti, JCAP 2025 (04), 037.
[11] R. P . Kerr, Phys. Rev. Lett.11, 237 (1963).
[12] B. Carter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 26, 331 (1971).
[13] A. Tomimatsu and H. Sato, Phys. Rev. Lett. 29, 1344 (1972).

15
[14] J. Barrientos, A. Cisterna, M. Hassaine, K. Müller, and K. Pa llikaris,
Phys. Lett. B , 140035 (2025).
[15] H. Stephani, D. Kramer, M. MacCallum, C. Hoenselaers, and
E. Herlt, Exact solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations (Cambridge uni-
versity press, 2009).
[16] I. Robinson and A. Trautman, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 265, 463
(1962).
[17] M. Y ousaf, H. Asad, and M. Aslam, High Energy Density Phys. 57,
101221 (2025).
[18] O. Donmez, G. Mustafa, H. Chaudhary, M. Y ousaf, A. Bouzenada ,
A. Ditta, and F. Atamurotov, Phys. Dark Universe 52, 102271 (2026).
[19] O. Donmez, S. G. Ghosh, M. Y ousaf, G. Mustafa, and F. Atamurotov,
J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 2026 (04), 045.
[20] M. Y ousaf, A. Bouzenada, A. Ditta, E. Gudekli, M. Abd El-Rahm an,
I. Saidov, and F. Atamurotov, Int. J. Geom. Methods Mod. Phys .
https://doi.org/10.1142/S0219887826502166, 2650216 (2026).
[21] J. L. Synge, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 131, 463 (1966).
[22] A. Abdujabbarov, M. Amir, B. Ahmedov, and S. G. Ghosh, Phys.
Rev. D 93, 104004 (2016).
[23] M. Y ousaf, H. Asad, B. Almutairi, S. Hasan, and A. S. Khan, Phy s.
Scr. 99, 115270 (2024).
[24] P . Singh, S. Kala, H. Nandan, M. Y ousaf, F. Atamurotov, and
G. Mustafa, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 208, 118379 (2026).
[25] H. Asad, M. Y ousaf, B. Almutairi, L. Zahid, and A. S. Khan, Phy s.
Dark Universe 46, 101666 (2024).
[26] P . Channuie, A. Ditta, N. Kaewkhao, and A. Övgün, Phys. Dark U ni-
verse 50, 101963 (2025).
[27] M. Z. Bhatti, A. Adeel, and M. Y ousaf, Int. J. Geom. Meth. Mod.
Phys. 23, 2550209 (2026).
[28] A. Ashraf, A. Ditta, A. Bouzenada, M. Aslam, P . Channuie, F. A ta-
murotov, and M. Y . Malik,Eur. Phys. J. C 85, 383 (2025) .
[29] S. K. Maurya, A. Ditta, A. Bouzenada, A. Ashraf, A. Ali, and F. Ata-
murotov, Nucl. Phys. B 1020, 117139 (2025) .
[30] D. R. Pasham, R. A. Remillard, P . C. Fragile, et al., Science 363, 531
(2019).
[31] K. L. Smith, C. R. Tandon, and R. V . Wagoner, Astrophys. J. 906, 92
(2021).
[32] C. B. Singh, S. Mondal, and D. Garofalo, Mon. Not. R. Astron. S oc.
510, 807 (2022).
[33] A. Ditta, A. Bouzenada, M. Alomar, and M. Bin-Asfour,
Nucl. Phys. B 1019, 117099 (2025) .
[34] D. R. Pasham, E. Coughlin, S. van V elzen, and J. Hinkle, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.12078 (2025).
[35] A. Ashraf, A. Bouzenada, S. K. Maurya, A. A. Ibraheem, B. Ç ˙
IL,
E. Güdekli, and F. Atamurotov,
Phys. Dark Univ. 48, 101874 (2025) .
[36] R. A. Remillard and J. E. McClintock, Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.
44, 49 (2006).
[37] A. Ashraf, A. Ditta, A. Bouzenada, A. Abd-Elmonem, N. S. E. Ab -
dalla, and F. Atamurotov, Phys. Dark Universe 47, 101823 (2025).
[38] L. Rezzolla, in AIP Conf. Proc. , V ol. 714 (American Institute of
Physics, 2004) p. 36.
[39] T. M. Belloni, A. Sanna, and M. Mén-
dez,
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 426, 1701 (2012) ,
arXiv:1207.2311 [astro-ph.HE].
[40] J. B. Achour, A. Cisterna, and H. Roussille, J. Cosmol. Astro part.
Phys. 2026 (04), 041.
[41] F. Koyuncu and O. Dönmez, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 29, 1450115 (2014) .
[42] O. Donmez, O. Zanotti, and L. Rezzolla,
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 412, 1659 (2011) ,
arXiv:1010.1739 [astro-ph.HE].
[43] O. Donmez, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 39, 2450076 (2024) ,
arXiv:2405.15467 [gr-qc].
[44] T. Anson, E. Babichev, C. Charmousis, and M. Hassaine,
JHEP 01, 018, arXiv:2006.06461 [gr-qc].
[45] O. Donmez, Astrophys. Space Sci. 293, 323 (2004) ,
arXiv:gr-qc/0406073.
[46] O. Donmez and R. Kayali, Appl. Math. Comput. 182, 1286 (2006) ,
arXiv:gr-qc/0602053.
[47] A. Al-Badawi, F. Ahmed, O. Donmez, F. Dogan, B. Pourhassan,
i. Sakallı, and Y . Sekhmani,
Phys. Dark Univ. 51, 102206 (2026) ,
arXiv:2509.08674 [astro-ph.HE].
[48] O. Donmez and F. Dogan, Universe 10, 152 (2024) .
[49] O. Donmez, Eur. Phys. J. C 85, 1019 (2025) .
[50] G. Mustafa, S. G. Ghosh, O. Donmez, S. K. Maurya, S. Orzuev, an d
F. Atamurotov, JCAP 10, 068, arXiv:2506.16405 [gr-qc].
[51] O. Donmez, S. Murodov, and J. Rayimbaev,
Annals of Physics 486, 170350 (2026) .
[52] O. Donmez, JCAP 09, 006, arXiv:2402.16707 [astro-ph.HE].
[53] O. Donmez, JHEAp 45, 1 (2025) , arXiv:2408.10102 [astro-ph.HE].
[54] S. Mondal, B. Palit, and S. K.
Chakrabarti,
J. Astrophys. Astron. 43, 90 (2022) ,
arXiv:2208.05634 [astro-ph.HE].
[55] T. E. Strohmayer and R. F. Mushotzky, APJ 703, 1386 (2009) ,
arXiv:0911.1076 [astro-ph.HE].
[56] W.-H. Bian and K. Huang, MNRAS 401, 507 (2010) ,
arXiv:0909.1078 [astro-ph.CO].
[57] S. E. Motta and T. M. Belloni, Astron. Astrophys. 684, A209 (2024) ,
arXiv:2307.00867 [astro-ph.HE].
[58] T. E. Strohmayer, Astrophys. J. Lett. 552, L49 (2001) .
[59] R. A. Remillard and J. E. McClintock,
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 44, 49 (2006) ,
arXiv:astro-ph/0606352.
[60] A. Ingram and S. Motta, New Astron. Rev. 85, 101524 (2019) ,
arXiv:2001.08758 [astro-ph.HE].
[61] D. R. Pasham, T. E. Strohmayer, and R. F. Mushotzky,
Nature 513, 74 (2014) , arXiv:1501.03180 [astro-ph.HE].
[62] T. E. Strohmayer, R. F. Mushotzky, L. Winter, R. Soria, P . Uttley, and
M. Cropper, Astrophys. J. 660, 580 (2007) , arXiv:astro-ph/0701390.
[63] M. Middleton, C. Done, M. Ward, M. Gierlinski, and
N. Schurch,
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 394, 250 (2009) ,
arXiv:0807.4847 [astro-ph].