Title: Co-evolution of Supermassive Black Holes and their Host L* galaxies: implications for Milky Way and M31
Authors: Salvador E. Grimozzi, Maria Emilia De Rossi, Andreea S. Font
Published: 2026-05-15
Categories: astro-ph.GA

MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025) Preprint 19 May 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.0
Co-evolution of Supermassive Black Holes and their Host𝐿★
galaxies: implications for Milky Way and M31
Salvador E. Grimozzi1,2, María Emilia De Rossi2,3, Andreea S. Font4★
1Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Departamento de Física. Buenos Aires, Argentina
2CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Astronomía y Física del Espacio (IAFE), Buenos Aires, Argentina
3Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales y Ciclo Básico Común, Buenos Aires, Argentina
4Astrophysics Research Institute, Liverpool John Moores University, 146 Brownlow Hill, Liverpool L3 5RF , UK
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
Weinvestigatetheoriginofthescatterinthesupermassiveblackhole(BH)massesforgalaxies
in the𝐿 ★ regime, using theARTEMISandEAGLEsimulations. By classifying galaxies based
on their central BH / galaxy stellar masses ratios, we follow the evolution of galaxies with
the lowest and highest such ratios (denoted LBH and HBH, respectively). We find that the
propertiesofthesetwogalaxysamplesarecomparableat𝑧≈2butdivergesignificantlytowards
lower redshifts. Galaxies with less massive BHs were able to maintain higher gas fractions
and sustained star formation during their evolution, whereas those with more massive BHs
formed stars earlier, grew BHs faster and experienced more efficient feedback and subsequent
quenching. The simulations broadly match the observed scatter in the BH masses and galaxy
morphologies in the𝐿★ regime and explain the origin of this scatter in terms of differences
between merger histories. Galaxies with more active merger histories contain more massive
BHs at present time and tend to be elliptical, while galaxies with more quiescent histories
have less massive BHs and tend to be disc-like. Mergers enhance BH growth through higher
gas accretion rates onto central regions and direct BH-BH mergers. However, these channels
operate differently: in HBH galaxies, BHs grow primarily (≈90%) by gas accretion, whereas
in LBH they grow both through gas accretion (≈60%) and BH-BH mergers (≈40%). Our
resultssuggestthatthedifferentBHmassesinMWandM31couldbeexplainedbydifferences
in merger histories.
Keywords:methods:numerical–galaxies:evolution–galaxies:formation–galaxies:haloes
– (galaxies) quasars: supermassive black holes
1 INTRODUCTION
Supermassive black holes (SMBH; BHs, hereafter) are ubiquitous
intheUniverse,inhabitingcentralregionsofgalaxiesrangingmany
orders of magnitude in mass, from the brightest, most massive
galaxiesinclusterstodwarfgalaxies(Kormendy&Richstone1995;
Genzel et al. 2010; Kormendy & Ho 2013; Taylor et al. 2025). The
properties of BHs and their host galaxies are closely connected, as
evidencedbyavarietyofscalingrelationships,suchasbetweenBH
masses(𝑀 BH)andbulgemasses(𝑀 sph),totalstellarmasses(𝑀 ★),or
stellarvelocitydispersions(𝜎)(Magorrianetal.1998;Ferrarese&
Merritt2000;Häring&Rix2004;McConnell&Ma2013;Heckman
& Best 2014; Reines & Volonteri 2015). The𝑀BH −𝜎relation is
oneofthetightestBHscalingrelations(Shankaretal.2025),which
may be a consequence of𝜎being correlated with𝑀sph, or being
sensitive to the depth of the potential well in which BHs form
★ A.S.Font@ljmu.ac.uk
(Ferrarese&Merritt2000).Theseobservedtrendssuggestastrong
degree of co-evolution between BHs and their hosts galaxies.
The scatter in these scaling relationships may also contain
informationaboutthisco-evolution.Forexample,inthe𝐿 ★regime,
the Milky Way (MW) has one of the lowest-mass central BHs, Sgr
A*, of≈4.3×10 6 M⊙ (Gravity Collaboration et al. 2023), while
M31 has a central BH of≈1.4×10 8 M⊙ (Bender et al. 2005).
This is nearly a factor of2difference in BH masses for comparable
host stellar masses. However, M31 has an inner spheroid that is
more massive than the MW bulge (Reitzel et al. 1998), and shows
evidence of a massive accretion event at more recent times (Ibata
et al. 2001). Therefore, central BHs may retain information about
the assembly histories of galaxies, despite the vast differences in
spatial scales on which these two operate.
The connection between the growth of central BH and galaxy
propertiescanbeestablishedviaone(orboth)oftwoprimarychan-
nels: BH growth via smooth gas accretion or induced by galaxy
mergers. Although the former channel appears to have been domi-
©2025 The Authors
arXiv:2605.16501v1  [astro-ph.GA]  15 May 2026

2Grimozzi et al.
nantintheearlyUniverse,thelatterbecomesincreasinglyimportant
atlowerredshifts(𝑧),particularlyformassivesystems(Duboisetal.
2014;Bravoetal.2025).Mergerscandrivegasaccretionbyinduc-
inggravitationaltorqueswithintheinterstellarmedium(ISM).Tidal
forces effectively dissipate the angular momentum of the gas, driv-
ing it into nuclear regions where it serves as fuel for the central
BH(Jogee2006;Hopkins&Quataert2010).Mergersalsoresultin
thecoalescenceofcentralBHs.Galaxymergersalsodrivemorpho-
logical changes by modifying the angular momentum of baryons,
which helps to explain the observed correlations between galaxy
morphologiesandBHmasses(Greeneetal.2020;Graham&Sahu
2023). Although it is generally agreed that mergers are important
for BH growth, many questions remain about how this mechanism
effectively operates, e.g., whether they trigger AGN feedback and
what their relevance is across many scales in galaxy mass (Ellison
et al. 2019; Villforth 2023; Alexander et al. 2025).
TheMWstellarmassisaroundthecharacteristicmass𝑀 ★,c ≈
5×10 10 M⊙ wheresignificantvariationsintheglobalpropertiesof
localgalaxiesareobserved.Forexample,somestudiessuggestthat
the𝑀 BH −𝑀 sph relationcouldbedescribedbyadoublepowerlaw,
withachangeinslopeat≃𝑀 sph ∼5×10 10 M⊙:aremarkablysteeper
slope is obtained for galaxies below this mass than for galaxies
aboveit(e.g.,Graham&Scott2015;Davisetal.2019).Belowthis
characteristic mass, galaxies are often spirals and actively forming
stars, while above they tend to be ellipticals with little or no star
formation (Kauffmann et al. 2003; Baldry et al. 2006; Savorgnan
et al. 2016; Comparat 2022; Graham & Sahu 2023).
ThestrongnegativeAGNfeedbackinmassivegalaxiesisgen-
erally considered the primary mechanism driving these changes
in galaxy properties. AGN feedback regulates the gas supply, ef-
fectively shutting down star formation and transitioning galaxies
from the blue cloud to the red sequence. Either the heating of gas
producedbytheenergyreleasedbytheBHoritsejectionviaAGN-
driven outflows can suppress star formation1 in massive galaxies
(Croton et al. 2006; Cano-Díaz et al. 2012; Bischetti et al. 2022;
Chenetal.2022;Lammersetal.2023).AGNfeedbackaffectseven
thechemicalproperties ofgalaxiesandtheircircumgalactic media,
phenomena that are intrinsically coupled to the evolution of gas-
phase reservoirs and the broader star formation history (Taylor &
Kobayashi 2015; Li et al. 2024; Villar Martín et al. 2024); in par-
ticular, AGN feedback may be responsible for the flattening of the
mass–metallicity relation at𝑀★ ≳10 10 M⊙ (De Rossi et al. 2017).
MW-mass galaxies occupy a key transition regime between
twomajorfeedbackregimes:star-formation-drivenoutflowsinlow-
mass haloes and BH-driven quenching in massive systems. Bower
etal.(2017)showedthatthebaryonicflowsofgalaxiesdramatically
change when they reach the MW-mass regime, specifically that the
gas buildup at the center is blocked by stellar-driven winds in any
galaxy halo less massive than∼10 12 M⊙. The star formation in
these galaxies is regulated by a balance between outflows triggered
by supernovae (SNe) and gas infall. However, as the halo mass in-
creases, a hot corona is formed (White & Frenk 1991; Birnboim &
Dekel 2003), which stalls the SN-driven outflows; as gas collects
into the core, the black hole undergoes a phase of rapid, nonlin-
ear growth. By heating the halo gas, the AGN feedback halts the
1 Under certain conditions, positive AGN feedback is also possible, for
example, the star formation can be enhanced when the outflows generated
by BHs compress the gas in the ISM (Zinn et al. 2013; Schutte & Reines
2022; Venturi et al. 2023). Interestingly, there is evidence that both positive
andnegativefeedbackcanoccursimultaneouslywithinthesamegalaxy(see
Cresci et al. 2015).
inflow of cold material, which quenches galaxies once they reach
the mass threshold of∼1012 M⊙. In massive galaxies, stellar and
SN feedback becomes inefficient while AGN feedback dominates.
Remarkably, the bridge phase occurs around the halo mass of the
MW. The interplay between SN and AGN feedback can give rise
to various BH growth histories, which may explain the substantial
scatter in the present-day BH properties of𝐿★ galaxies (Trayford
et al. 2016; Terrazas et al. 2017, 2020; Habouzit et al. 2021).
Cosmological hydrodynamical simulations routinely incorpo-
rateAGNfeedbackingalaxiesthatmatchtheobservedpropertiesof
galaxies(e.g.,Springeletal.2005;Sijackietal.2015;Schayeetal.
2015;McCarthyetal.2017;Nelsonetal.2018;Davéetal.2019;Ni
et al. 2022; Huško et al. 2026; Schaye et al. 2025), with continuing
progress taking place in the modelling (Alexander & Hickox 2012;
Harrison 2017; Alexander et al. 2025). These simulations tend to
cover large volumes, encompassing orders of magnitude in galaxy
mass. Nevertheless, the𝐿★ regime has been extensively explored,
given its relevance to both SN feedback and AGN feedback. The
scatter in BH masses and the correlations between BH growth and
galaxy properties in this regime have begun to be explored more
recently, particularly in terms of the correlations with the mass and
formationtimesofgalaxyhaloes,orwiththecorrespondingbinding
energy (Davies et al. 2019, 2022, 2024; Roberts et al. 2026).
Inthisstudy,wefocusontheoriginofthescatterinthecentral
blackholemass–galaxystellarmassrelationinthe𝐿 ★regime.For
this, we useARTEMIS, a suite of zoomed-in, cosmological simula-
tions of42MW-mass galaxies (Font et al. 2020), and samples of
MW-mass galaxies extracted from a series of runs from theEAGLE
project (Schaye et al. 2015; Crain et al. 2015). We therefore as-
semble a large sample of MW-mass galaxies with diverse merger
histories that have formed under different assumptions of SN and
AGN feedback. TheARTEMISsimulations successfully reproduce
the main observed properties of MW analogues and their satellites
(Font et al. 2021, 2022; Grimozzi et al. 2024, 2025), whileEAGLE
simulationsmatchawiderangeofobservablesforgalaxiesonboth
small and large scales (Schaye et al. 2015). The physical prescrip-
tions in these two simulations are very similar, with differences
that are complementary in nature. TheEAGLEsimulations model
larger cosmological volumes and so contain many more galaxies
in the MW-mass range. They also include runs with variations of
SN and AGN feedback, which will also be analysed here.ARTEMIS
has higher resolution and can better resolve smaller merger events.
Therefore, a comparison between these two simulations allows us
to examine in more detail the interplay of physical processes and
mergers in generating the scatter in BH masses at MW-mass scale.
Thispaperisorganizedasfollows.InSection2,wesummarize
the main characteristics of theARTEMISandEAGLEsimulations. In
Section 3, we analyze correlations between current BH masses and
keyhostgalaxyproperties(§3.1),andstudytheevolutionarypaths
of galaxy populations at both ends of the scatter in BH masses
(§3.2)orinstellarspins,whichareproxiesformorphology(§3.3).
We also investigate whether the trends obtained from simulations
canbeexplainedbydifferencesinthemergerhistories,byfocusing
on two galaxies that are representative of the two BH-mass popu-
lations (§ 3.4). We discuss our results in Section 4 and present our
conclusions in Section 5.
2ARTEMISANDEAGLESIMULATIONS
ARTEMISare a suite of zoomed-in, cosmological hydrodynamical
simulationsofMW-massgalaxies.Thebaryonsarefollowedwitha
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

Co-evolution of Black Holes and𝐿 ★ Galaxies3
numerical resolution that is 8 times higher than in theEAGLERecal
(25 cMpcℎ −1)simulations 2,specificallydarkmatterparticlemasses
of1.17×10 5 M⊙ ℎ−1, and initial gas particle masses of2.23×
104 M⊙ ℎ−1. The force resolution (i.e., the Plummer-equivalent
softening) is125pcℎ −1.ARTEMISuses the same hydrodynamical
codeasintheEAGLEsimulations,andthesamesubgridparameters
asinEAGLERecalmodel,apartfromanadditionalre-calibrationof
parameters related to supernova feedback. A flatΛCDMWMAP9
cosmological model (Hinshaw et al. 2013) is adopted, with the
following parameters:Ω m =0.2793,Ω b =0.0463,ℎ=0.70,
𝜎8 =0.8211and𝑛 𝑠 =0.972. The sample of 42 MW-mass galaxies
usedherehavepresent-dayvirialmassesintherangeof6.7×10 11 <
𝑀200,crit /M⊙ <3.6×10 12 (Font et al. 2020).
TheEAGLEsuiteconsistsofseveralcosmologicalhydrodynam-
icalsimulationsrunwithamodifiedversionoftheGADGET-3code,
with periodic boundary conditions. The comoving side-lengths of
variouscubicboxesrangebetween12 cMpcℎ −1 and100 cMpcℎ −1,
including different levels of resolution (see Schaye et al. 2015,
McAlpine et al. 2016, for details). The assumed cosmological pa-
rametersare:Ω m =0.307,Ω Λ =0.693,Ω b =0.04825,ℎ=0.6777,
𝜎8 =0.8288,𝑛 s =0.9611(Planck Collaboration et al. 2014).
For this work, we use mainly the runs with box side length
𝐿=50 cMpcand an initial number of particles per species of
𝑁=752 3 (i.e., the ‘L050N0752’ model and its variants). The rea-
son is twofold: firstly, the large cosmological volume allows us to
assembleastatisticallyrepresentativesampleofMW-massgalaxies,
and secondly, these runs include variations of AGN feedback that
arerelevantforouranalysis;wealsostudyasetofsimulationswith
𝐿=25 cMpcand𝑁=376 3, which include variations of SN feed-
back(resultsofthesemodelsarepresentedintheAppendixA).The
50 cMpcrunsadoptinitialmassesof1.81×10 6 M⊙ ℎ−1forgasparti-
clesandmassesof9.70×10 6 M⊙ ℎ−1 fordarkmatterparticles.From
thereferenceEAGLErun(describedbelow),weselectedasampleof
201MW-massgalaxies;thesearecentralgalaxieswithpresent-day
virialmassesintherangeof6.7×10 11 < 𝑀 200,crit /M⊙ <3.6×10 12,
in the same range as theARTEMIShaloes. In the following, we out-
line the main subgrid prescriptions in these two simulation suites.
2.1 Subgrid models
Physical processes that cannot be resolved in the simulations are
implemented via subgrid models.ARTEMISapply the same sub-
grid prescriptions developed for theEAGLEproject and described
in Crain et al. (2015) and Schaye et al. (2015), including metal-
dependentradiativecoolinginthepresenceofaphoto-ionizingUV
background, star formation, stellar and chemical evolution, forma-
tion of BHs, stellar feedback from SN and stellar winds, as well as
AGN feedback.
Star formation is modeled with the prescription of Schaye
& Dalla Vecchia (2008), where gas with a density above𝑛𝐻 =
10−1 cm−3 (thecriticaldensityforonsetofthethermo-gravitational
instabilityinhydrogengas)canformstars.Aneffectiveequationof
state for the cold gas is also imposed in the subgrid physics. SNe
injectenergyintotheISMusingthekineticfeedbackprescriptionof
Dalla Vecchia & Schaye (2008). The chemical evolution is tracked
independently for 11 elements (H, He, C, N, O, Ne, Mg, Si, Fe, S
and Ca), whose abundances depend on the nucleosynthetic yields
of AGB stars, stellar winds and core collapse SNe (Wiersma et al.
2 Length units prefixed with ‘c’ (e.g., cMpc) refer to comoving distances,
and those prefixed with ‘p’ (e.g., pkpc) to proper distances.
Figure 1.Stellar spin (𝜆★) versus disc-to-total mass fraction,𝐷/𝑇, com-
puted by Thob et al. 2019), for galaxies with𝑀★ >10 9.5 M⊙ in theEAGLE
Recal-L025N0752 run. The dashed line represents the median relation and
the error bars the respective 25th and 75th percentiles.
2009). To calculate the mass loss and the resulting chemical com-
position, the model combines the nucleosynthetic yields of Marigo
(2001) and Portinari et al. (1998) with the fraction of stellar mass
in each particle reaching the end of the main sequence. The feed-
back and mass loss from SNIa are implemented separately, using
the yields of Thielemann et al. (2003).
The black hole growth model is based on the Springel (2005)
formalism, with subsequent refinements from Booth & Schaye
(2009) and Rosas-Guevara et al. (2015). Black holes are seeded
with a mass of10 5 M⊙ ℎ−1 in haloes with a total mass above
1010 M⊙ ℎ−1,byreplacingthedensestgasparticlewithacollision-
less black hole particle. Black holes can then grow by accretion of
gasorbymergingwithotherblackholes.Thegasaccretionratede-
terminestherateatwhichenergyisthermallyinjectedintotheISM.
A fraction of the rest-mass energy of the gas is released, powering
the AGN feedback. Black holes accumulate energy at a rate that
is proportional to their gas-mass accretion rate, thus increasing the
feedback energy reservoir. Once a certain threshold is reached, the
AGN feedback operates by stochastically heating the neighbouring
particles.Thisthresholdisequaltotheamountofenergyrequiredto
increasethetemperatureofagasparticlebyΔ𝑇 AGN.Whengalaxies
merge,theircentralBHsalsomerge,providedthattheymeetcertain
distance and velocity criteria.
IntheEAGLEreferencemodel(denotedwiththeprefix"Ref-"),
the subgrid parameters were calibrated to improve the matches to
the observed𝑧≈0galaxy stellar mass function, the stellar mass–
size relation, and the normalization of the𝑀 BH −𝑀 ★ relation.
TheARTEMISsimulationsuseessentiallythesamesubgridphysics,
but with parameters from theEAGLErecalibrated model (‘Recal-
L025N0752’;𝐿=25 cMpcℎ −1,𝑁=752 3) which improves the
matchwiththeobservationsonsmallscales.Inaddition,inARTEMIS
efficiency of SN feedback is further calibrated for a better match to
thestellarmass–halomassrelationaround𝐿 ★(Mosteretal.2018;
Behroozi et al. 2019). TheEAGLEreference model usesΔ𝑇AGN =
108.5 KwhileARTEMISusedtheEAGLErecalibratedmodel(“Recal-
") whereΔ𝑇AGN =10 9 K. For more details on the subgrid models,
the reader is referred to Schaye et al. (2015).
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

4Grimozzi et al.
Figure 2.𝑀BH −𝑀 ★ relation for simulations versus observations.ARTEMISgalaxies are shown in the left panel, with diamond symbols, andEAGLEgalaxies
on the right, with circles. Observational data from Greene et al. (2020) (and references therein) are shown with open triangles, coloured red for early-type
and blue for late-type galaxies. The symbols for simulated galaxies are colour-coded by their stellar spin,𝜆★. The dashed lines indicate the linear fits derived
from observations, for early (red), late-type (blue) and all (gray) galaxies. Solid lines in the right panel represent the linear fits toEAGLEgalaxies, for systems
with low (red) and high (blue)𝜆★, using350 pkpc km s −1 as a threshold to separate morphologies. The light blue and orange squares in both panels are the
measurements for MW (McMillan 2017; Gravity Collaboration et al. 2023) and M31 (Bender et al. 2005; Tamm et al. 2012).
2.2 Galaxy catalogues
All parameters used in this work come from the publicEAGLE
database(McAlpineetal.2016)andasimilardatabaseconstructed
from theARTEMISsimulations. These are physical parameters re-
lated to the BHs, such as masses or mass accretion rates; or param-
etersrelatedtothedifferentgalaxycomponents,suchasgas,stellar,
or dark matter masses, star formation rates, galaxy sizes, etc. The
identification of bound haloes and subhaloes was performed with
Friends-of-Friends(FoF) (Davis et al. 1985) andsubfindalgo-
rithms (Springel et al. 2001; Dolag et al. 2009). These databases
were also used for the identification of galaxy progenitors and the
construction of merger trees of MW-mass galaxies.
For morpho-kinematical properties of galaxies, we choose the
specific stellar angular momentum,𝜆★, defined as the stellar spin
per unit mass, as this is common to all databases and ensures a
consistent comparison across all simulations. We found that𝜆★
correlates well with the disc-to-total mass fraction,𝐷/𝑇. Fig. 1
shows the𝜆★ −𝐷/𝑇relation for MW-mass galaxies in the Recal-
L025N0752EAGLErun, using the𝐷/𝑇values computed by Thob
et al. (2019). Despite a significant scatter, galaxies with disc-like
morphologies (𝐷/𝑇≳0.5) are consistently associated with higher
𝜆★(≳350pkpc km s −1).
3 RESULTS
3.1 The scatter in the BH – galaxy stellar mass relation
Fig. 2 shows the𝑀BH −𝑀 ∗ relation for MW-mass galaxies in sim-
ulationsversusobservations.TheARTEMISgalaxies(leftpanel)are
shownwithdiamondsandgalaxiesfromtheEAGLERef-L050N0752
suite (right panel) are shown with circles. The colours correspond
to𝜆 ★, which serves as a proxy for morphology. Triangles show
observational data for early-type (red) and late-type (blue) galax-
ies compiled by Greene et al. (2020), while light blue and orange
squares represent the measurements for MW and M31. The dashed
lines indicate the linear fits derived from these observational data.
The solid red (blue) lines in the right panel correspond to linear
fits toEAGLEgalaxies with𝜆 ★ below (above) the350 pkpc km s−1
threshold.
The agreement in the normalizations of the𝑀BH −𝑀 ★ rela-
tions from simulations with the observations is expected, given the
calibration of the BH model (Booth & Schaye 2009). The good
agreement with the slopes, particularly the steeper slope for early
galaxies compared to that for late-types, can be considered to be a
successofthemodels(seealsothediscussioninSchayeetal.2015).
Thesimulationsalsoretrievetheobservedcorrelationinthescatter
of black hole masses at fixed𝑀★ with morphological properties,
i.e., at fixed𝑀 ★, early-type (low𝜆★) galaxies tend to host more
massive BHs than late-type systems (high𝜆★).
Inparticular,MWandM31representgoodexamplesofscatter
in observed BH masses at (nearly) fixed𝑀★. They also lie in the
vicinity of the two morphological types: MW is clearly associated
with late-type galaxies, while M31 lies around the transition zone
betweenlate-andearly-typegalaxies.Wenotethattheobservational
sample of Greene et al. (2020) includes galaxies with even lower
BHmassesthanthatoftheMWandhigherBHmassesthanthatof
M31 (at similar𝑀★ values3), which suggests that the models may
3 The observational sample of Greene et al. (2020) also includes a wider
stellarmassrangethanselectedfromthesimulations,henceitalsoshowsthe
evolution of BH masses and galaxy morphological types with stellar mass.
Here, however, we are concerned mainly with the scatter in𝑀BH at nearly
fixed𝑀 ★.
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

Co-evolution of Black Holes and𝐿 ★ Galaxies5
Figure 3.Correlations between𝑀 BH and average galaxy properties at𝑧=0in theARTEMIS(diamonds) andEAGLE(circles) simulations. From top-left to
bottom-right, we show the𝑀BH correlations with𝑀★,𝜆 ★, average galaxy stellar age and the fraction of star-forming gas. Systems with low, intermediate and
high𝑓 BH values are coloured in blue, black and orange, respectively. The squares with error bars in the top-left panel correspond to data for MW (blue) and
M31 (orange). On average, galaxies with higher𝑓BH tend to have more massive BHs, lower rotational support, older stellar populations, and less gas available
for star formation.
notexplainthefullobservedscatter.ThiswasalsonotedbyRoberts
etal.(2026),whocomparedanotherEAGLErun(thereferencemodel
ina100cMpcbox)withtheobservationsofGraham&Sahu(2023).
To further understand the origin of this scatter, we select from
thesimulationstwosamplesofgalaxieswithlowandhigh𝑀 BH/𝑀∗
ratios(henceforthdenoted𝑓 BH)tostudytheirevolution.Fig.2sug-
gests that these two categories should have different morphologies
and possibly different formation pathways. We therefore classify
galaxies in both simulations into three populations according to
their𝑓 BH ratio. Galaxies with𝑓BH above the 75th percentile of their
sample are defined as high𝑓BH (HBH, hereafter), and those with
𝑓BH belowthe25 th percentilearedefinedaslow𝑓 BH (LBH);therest
ofgalaxiesareconsideredintermediate𝑓 BH(IBH).Fig.3showsvar-
ious correlations between𝑀BH and host properties at𝑧=0, where
thethreepopulationsareshownindifferentshades(orangeforHBH,
blue for LBH and black/gray for IBH). Data from each simulation
arerepresentedwithdifferentsymbols(diamondsforARTEMISand
circles forEAGLE).
The top left panel of this figure shows the𝑀BH −𝑀 ★ rela-
tion again, this time highlighting the three𝑓BH populations in each
simulation.Wenotethatthe𝑓 BH valuesthatseparatethethreepop-
ulationsareslightlyhigherinEAGLE(2.6×10 −4,1.0×10 −3)thanin
ARTEMIS(1.7×10 −4,5.0×10 −4)galaxies,indicatingthat,atagiven
𝑀★,BHmassesareslightlyhigherinEAGLEthaninARTEMIS.This
may be due to the slightly different SN feedback subgrid param-
eters between these simulations (see section 2.1). Also, since the
EAGLErun covers a larger volume (𝐿=50 cMpc) thanARTEMIS, it
couldsampledenserenvironmentswhereBHsmaygrowmoreeffi-
ciently through mergers. However, despite these minor differences
in the𝑓 BH cuts, we note that MW and M31 are still close to their
corresponding𝑓 BH category.
The top-right panel shows the𝜆★ −𝑀 BH distributions. Al-
though these show a larger scatter than the𝑀BH −𝑀 ★ relation, a
clear correlation is seen between BH masses and stellar spins (i.e.,
morphology): galaxies with early-type morphologies (low𝜆★) tend
to have more massive BHs (high𝑓BH) than late-type ones. Galax-
ies hosting more massive BHs are expected to be more affected by
feedback over time; this leads to quenching of star formation by
heating the gas and gas outflows. In section 3.4 we will discuss
how mergers destabilize the rotational support in galaxies and fuel
the growth of BHs; in turn, SN and/or AGN feedback may further
inhibit the regrowth of a stable disc.
Thebottom-leftpanelshowstherelationbetween𝑀 BH andthe
mean stellar ages in simulated galaxies. The ages are computed as
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

6Grimozzi et al.
Figure 4.Evolution of median properties for both HBH (solid orange line with diamonds) and LBH (solid blue line with diamonds) galaxies inARTEMIS. The
shaded regions enclose the corresponding 25th and 75th percentiles. Dotted lines trace the evolution of two individual galaxies in the LBH (G25, blue) and
HBH(G22,orange)samples.Firstrow,inorderfromlefttorightshow:thestellarmass,star-forminggasfraction,non-star-forminggasfraction,andBHmass.
Second row, from left to right, show: the BH-to-stellar-mass ratio, stellar spin, specific star formation rate, and half-mass radius. Third row, from left to right
show: the stellar [Fe/H], SF gas (O/H), stellar [O/Fe], and SNIa-based stellar [Fe/H]. With the exception of stellar mass and chemical abundances, all other
properties analysed exhibit strikingly different evolutionary trends in LBH vs. HBH galaxies, since at least𝑧≈2.
Í
𝑖 ˜𝑚𝑖 (𝑡− ˜𝑡𝑖)/Í
𝑖 ˜𝑚𝑖 (McAlpine et al. 2016), where𝑡is the cosmic
time, ˜𝑡𝑖 istheformationtimeofthestarparticle𝑖and˜𝑚 𝑖 isthecorre-
sponding initial mass. This shows that galaxies with more massive
BHs formed their stars earlier. The bottom-right panel shows the
distributions of BH masses versus the star-forming (SF) gas frac-
tions in their host galaxies.𝑓 SF is defined as𝑀 SF/(𝑀 ★ +𝑀 SF),
where𝑀 SF is the total mass of gas available for star formation at
that time. This shows that galaxies with more massive BHs tend to
have lower cold (SF) gas fractions, which indicates that SN/AGN
feedback may have been more efficient in heating and/or removing
the gas in these galaxies.
3.2 The co-evolution of BH growth and host properties in
galaxies with high and low BH-to-stellar-mass fractions
Our results so far show that the BH masses correlate with key
galaxy properties at𝑧=0. In order to explore the origin of such
correlations, we tracked the main progenitors back in time and
studied their evolution. For clarity, we only show the results for the
ARTEMISsimulations.
In Fig. 4 we examine, for the LBH and HBH populations
identified before, the growth of their BHs in connection with the
evolution of various galaxy properties: stellar masses, the fraction
of star-forming gas,𝑓SF, and that of non star-forming gas, defined
as𝑓 NSF =𝑀 NSF/(𝑀 ★ +𝑀 NSF), where𝑀 NSF is the gas mass not
available for star formation; we also include the evolutions of the
stellar spins,𝜆★, of the specific star formation rates (sSFR) and of
thehalf-massradii(𝑅 50);fortheevolutionofstellarchemicalabun-
dances we track [Fe/H], [O/Fe] and SNIa-based [Fe/H] ([FeIa/H])
estimated using the stellar Fe associated only with SNIa nucle-
osynthetic yields; and for that of gaseous abundances, we follow
12+log(O/H). The solid blue lines show the running medians of
all these quantities for the LBH population and the solid orange
lines show the corresponding medians for the HBH population.
The shaded regions enclose the 25th and 75th percentiles in each
parameter. We also include two individual galaxies, G25 and G22
(shown with dotted lines), which represent typical systems in each
population, and which will be investigated in more detail later (see
section 3.4.3).
Although the stellar masses of both categories reach similar
values at𝑧=0, HBH galaxies tend to grow their stellar mass
faster at early times (between redshifts2−1), while LBH systems
display a more gradual increase, picking up at late times (𝑧 <1).
The enhanced star formation at early times in HBH galaxies is
accompanied by a faster growth in BH mass compared to that in
LBH systems. The evolution of𝑓BH shows a quick divergence in
the two categories from𝑧≃1onward, increasing sharply for HBH
galaxiesandremainingalmostconstant,atverylowvalues(≈10 −4),
for LBH systems. This indicates that in HBH galaxies BHs grow
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

Co-evolution of Black Holes and𝐿 ★ Galaxies7
Figure5.Evolutionofmedianpropertiesforbothlow𝜆 ★ (solidredlinewithdiamonds)andhigh𝜆 ★ (solidbluelinewithdiamonds)galaxiesinARTEMIS.The
shaded regions enclose the corresponding 25th and 75th percentiles. For the nomenclature, see Fig. 4. The differences we obtained previously for the evolution
of the LBH and HBH populations are consistent with those obtained for galaxies with high and low𝜆★, respectively.
veryefficientlycomparedwiththestellarcomponent,whileinLBH
galaxies, they both grow at similar rates.
The evolution of gas fractions also shows significant differ-
ences.Bothstar-forming(𝑓 SF)andnonstar-forming(𝑓 NSF)fractions
start with similarly high values at𝑧≈2, after which they begin to
diverge. In HBH galaxies, both values are low at the present time,
especially𝑓 SF (≲0.1). The LBH population is able to maintain
consistently higher gas fractions; while𝑓SF undergoes a slow de-
cline until𝑧=0, the hot gas fraction (𝑓NSF) generally remains high
(≃0.6−0.7). This suggests that HBH galaxies experience more
efficient gas outflows, while BH continue to grow. Consequently,
the cold, star-forming gas reservoir in these systems is depleted
and galaxies become quenched (most HBH galaxies have sSFR
<10 −11 yr−1 at present times). In contrast, the average sSFR in
LBH galaxies at𝑧=0is≃10 −10 yr−1, a value which is similar to
that of the present-day MW disc.
The morphological properties of the two populations paint a
similar picture: at early times (𝑧≈2), both types of systems have
low rotational support (𝜆★ ≈200 pkpc km s −1); after that, galaxies
withlowBHmassesgraduallyincreasetheirstellarspin,becoming
more discy, while those hosting more massive BHs maintain their
elliptical shapes; on average,𝜆★ increases by a factor≈6in LBH
galaxies and only by a factor of≈2in HBH systems. The galaxy
sizes,𝑅 50,growbyfactorsof≈3and≈1.6,respectively.Thehigher
sSFRinLBHgalaxiesmaintainsahighrotationalsupportthrough-
outthesegalaxies,preventingthegrowthofcentralBHs,whereasin
HBH systems the depletion of the cold gas reservoir through infall
onto the BH and the heating/expulsion of gas by outflows lead to
quenching of star formation and elliptical morphologies.
Interestingly,thedifferencesinthechemicalevolutionbetween
thetwopopulationsaremuchlessevident.Theevolutionsofstellar
abundances ([Fe/H], [O/Fe], and[FeIa/H]) are almost identical for
theLBHandHBHpopulations,andthescatterintheirdistributions
is very tight (apart from that of[FeIa/H]at lower redshifts). These
results are explained by the similar stellar masses in the two galaxy
populations and the well-known relation between stellar mass and
metallicity that these systems match. We also note that this scaling
relation is primarily sensitive to SN feedback, which implies that
metal enrichment must have been largely achieved during the early
times of enhanced star formation, before most of the growth of
central BHs and their possible AGN feedback.
The differences in the gas-phase metallicities ([O/H]) are also
small.TheslightlyhighervaluesinHBHgalaxiesat𝑧 <1couldbe
due to their higher𝑀★ at those times, and possibly related to their
more active merger histories during this period (see section 3.4).
Also,sinceHBHgalaxieshavelowergasmassfractions,theirstars
can enrich this low-mass, diffuse gaseous component more effi-
ciently.Ahighergasmetallicitywouldnormallyincreasethestellar
metallicity as the initial chemical composition of stars depends di-
rectly on that of the gas from which they form. However, the much
lower sSFR in HBH galaxies at later times prevents the increase of
their stellar abundances.
3.3 The evolution of galaxies with high and low stellar spin
Our findings show that the growth of central BHs is closely linked
withthemorphologicalchangesofhostgalaxies.AsshowninFig.4,
a clear dichotomy in morphology (traced by low/high𝜆★) exists
between galaxies with massive BHs versus those with less massive
BHs.However,the𝜆 ★−𝑀BHcorrelationisnotverytight(seeFig.3).
It is therefore instructive to examine the evolution of galaxies with
high and low𝜆★ separately. This would show how the properties of
galaxies that are disc-like or elliptical today evolve with time, and
when these start to diverge. For this, we perform a similar analysis
as before, but now separating galaxies based on their𝜆★ at𝑧=0:
those in the lowest 25th percentile (𝜆★ ≈474 pkpc km s −1) are
denoted theL𝜆sample, while those in the upper 75th percentile
(𝜆★ ≈1105 pkpc km s −1) are calledH𝜆. The remainder form the
intermediate𝜆 ★ population,I𝜆.
In Fig. 5 we compare the evolution of categoriesH𝜆(solid
blue line with diamonds) andL𝜆(solid red line with diamonds).
Generally, the trends of the low and high𝜆★ galaxies resemble
those of the high and low𝑓HB systems, respectively (see Fig. 4).
We find, in fact, significant overlap between these samples: theH𝜆
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

8Grimozzi et al.
Figure 6.Upper panels: cumulative mass accreted via mergers for different galaxy components. Bottom panels: cumulative accreted mass accreted for the
same components shown in the upper panels, but normalized by the maximum mass reached in the corresponding component by each galaxy. From left to
right: dark matter mass, stellar mass, BH mass, and baryonic mass. Symbols, line styles and colours follow the same convention as in Fig. 4.
sample includes 8 LBH (out of the11systems) and3IBH galaxies
(out of20), while theL𝜆sample includes7HBH (out of the11)
and4IBH systems.
More elliptical galaxies (L𝜆) tend to form their stellar mass
earlier,similartowhatwasobservedforsystemswithmoremassive
BHs(HBH),andconsistentwiththeolderagesoftheirstars(Fig.3).
This is indicative of an earlier formation time of the haloes inhab-
iting these galaxies and an early cessation of star formation. The
evolutions of𝑀BH (and𝑓 BH) in the two𝜆★ populations start to di-
vergeearly,between𝑧≈2−1(ifnotearlierfor𝑀 BH),inagreement
with the behaviour displayed by the HBH and LBH populations.
However, the separation between these two divergent paths is less
pronounced in the case of morphological types than for𝑓BH types
(compare Fig. 5 with Fig. 4). This indicates that morphologies do
notpreciselytracethegrowthofBHs,asseenbefore.Nevertheless,
there is clear evidence that BH grow faster in elliptical galaxies,
particularly in those systems that have established this morphology
at very early times. These results are similar to those obtained by
Roberts et al. (2026) using a sample of galaxies from theEAGLE
simulationsandusingtheco-rotationalparameter𝜅 c𝑜 todistinguish
morphologicaltypes(althoughinthecaseofseparatinggalaxiesby
𝜅c𝑜 the differences between the two evolutions appear slightly less
pronounced than when using𝜆★).
Interestingly, the scatter in the evolution shown in Fig. 5 is
different for the two populations (see also Fig. 4). For example,
ellipticalgalaxies(highBH-mass)showalargerscatterintheirBH
massgrowthevolution.Thismayindicatethatellipticalscouldform
under more varied merger histories or that galaxies with thin discs
require special conditions, such as more quiescent formation histo-
ries than average galaxies in this mass range. We will investigate
the merger histories in section 3.4.1.
All gas mass fractions (both𝑓SF and𝑓 NSF) and sSFR decrease
with time, more strongly for the elliptical types. This is consistent
with the behaviour already seen in galaxies with more massive
BHs, where gas reservoirs were depleted by early star formation
and more efficient feedback. The evolution of galaxy sizes,𝑅50,
largely resembles that of𝜆★ (as seen also in Fig. 4). The evolution
of galaxy sizes is more clearly separated in the case of samples
selected based on morphology (𝜆★) than on the BH mass fraction,
which is expected.
3.4 The role of mergers in the BH growth
As shown earlier, the central BH masses correlate well with host
galaxy properties, including morphologies, in that galaxies with
moremassive/lessmassiveBHstendtobeelliptical/discy,andvice
versa. The different evolutionary paths seem to emerge since at
least𝑧≈2. In the following, we investigate how merger histories
caninfluencetheseevolutionarypaths.Forsimplicity,wewillfocus
only on the two𝑓BH populations, LBH and HBH.
3.4.1 The merger-induced growth of BHs and galaxy components
Fig. 6 shows the evolution of accreted mass in the dark matter and
stellar components of the two samples and that of the accreted BH
mass in their respective hosts. The accreted mass tracks any addi-
tionalmassincorporatedintothehostthroughmergers.Specifically,
at each snapshot, we compute the mass of all subhaloes4 that will
mergewiththemainhalointhefollowingsnapshotandsumoverall
theirmassestoobtainthetotalaccretedmassatthattime.Wecom-
putetheaccretedmassesfordarkmatter(𝑀 DM,Acc),stars(𝑀 ★,Acc),
baryons, i.e., gas + stars (𝑀Bar,Acc) and BHs5 (𝑀BH,Acc). The plot
also includes galaxies G22 and G25 (which will be examined in
detail in section 3.4.3) as representative cases for each sub-sample.
The upper panels of Fig. 6 show the median cumulative ac-
cretedmassesfortheLBHandHBHpopulations.𝑀 DM,Accincreases
4 Wenotethat,inafewcases,subhaloesaretemporarilymissedbysubfind.
Inthosecases,welocatethesubhaloesattheimmediatesnapshotwhenthey
are identified.
5 Asnotedbefore,somesubhaloescannotbeidentifiedbysubfindatcertain
snapshots.ThisaffectsthetrackingoftheBHinthesesubhaloesalso.Inthis
case,weidentifythesharp(unphysical)declinesintheBHmassesandinsert
the value from the immediate snapshot where the subhalo was identified.
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

Co-evolution of Black Holes and𝐿 ★ Galaxies9
Figure 7.Left panel: the median number of satellite galaxies (and scatter) in LBH and HBH hosts across redshift. Only satellites with𝑀∗ ≥10 6 M⊙ are
considered. Middle panel: the median number of satellites with black holes in the two samples. Right panel: mean of the total black hole mass in satellites
hosting BHs. Symbols, line styles and colours follow the same convention as in Fig. 4.
sharply before𝑧≃2, then more gradually until𝑧≈0.25when it
flattens. Galaxies with more massive BHs generally accrete more
DM, particularly at early times (𝑧≲2). This confirms that the DM
haloes hosting galaxies with more massive BHs form earlier. The
accreted baryonic mass shows a trend similar to that of DM, which
showsthatbaryons(mainlythegasbroughtinbymergers)tracethe
gravitational potential of DM haloes more accurately.
However, the cumulative accreted mass in BHs (𝑀BH,Acc)
shows a more steady increase, indicating that it takes some time
for BHs to grow after mergers bring gas fuel. Interestingly, the
accreted mass in the stellar component,𝑀★,Acc, has a behaviour
similar to that of𝑀BH,Acc, which shows a close link between the
evolution of the two components. Both𝑀BH,Acc and𝑀 ★,Acc flatten
after𝑧≈0.5, as mergers become less frequent at recent times.
Overall, galaxies with more massive BHs today (HBH) ac-
creted more mass in all components, which is due to their early
formation times and more active merger histories (more massive
mergers).Inparticular,theaccretedstellarmassinHBHgalaxiesis
a factor of≈2higher than for the LBH population by the present
time, which is consistent with the similar difference in BH masses
between the two populations.
Perhaps a more accurate representation of growth by accre-
tion is by considering the fraction of accreted mass, i.e., the ratio
of the cumulative accreted mass by the corresponding maximum
mass of that given component during the whole galaxy evolu-
tion. This adjusts for any changes in baryonic mass (e.g., due to
gas depletion or stellar evolution) and accounts for intrinsic vari-
ations in component masses between galaxies. These results are
shown in the bottom panels of Fig. 6, where we plot the accreted
fractions for dark matter (𝑓DM,Acc =𝑀 DM,Acc/𝑀DM,Max), stars
(𝑓 ★,Acc =𝑀 ★,Acc/𝑀★,Max), BHs (𝑓BH,Acc =𝑀 BH,Acc/𝑀BH,Max)
and baryons (𝑓Bar,Acc =𝑀 Bar,Acc/𝑀Bar,Max). More drastic separa-
tions between the evolutions of the two populations can be seen in
this case, and the rates of growth are also changed (i.e., indicating
more recent accretion times).
Theaccreteddarkmattermassfractioninthetwopopulations,
𝑓DM,Acc,showsagainsimilarbehaviours,withaslightlyhighercon-
tribution of mergers in the case of high BH-mass (HBH) than for
low BH-mass (LBH) galaxies. HBH galaxies show a significantly
higher fraction of accreted stellar and baryonic masses. By𝑧=0,
they accumulate≈30%of stellar/baryonic mass through mergers,
comparedtoonly≈10−15%forLBHgalaxies.Also,asnotedbe-
fore,HBHgalaxiesdisplayawiderscatteraroundtheirmedian(see
Figs.4and5),whichinthecaseofaccretedfractionsbecomeseven
more pronounced (e.g., compare𝑓 ★,Acc and𝑓 Bar,Acc between the
two populations). This reflects more diverse evolutionary pathways
for high BH-mass systems.
The importance of mergers in HBH galaxy evolution is evi-
dencedbythelackofsignificantrotationalsupportintheirstarsover
time. Interestingly, the BH mass added by mergers shows different
trendsfromthoseobtainedforthedarkmatter,gas,andstellarcom-
ponents. In the case of the LBH sample,≈35%of the BH mass at
𝑧≈0was accreted at𝑧≳0.5. Fig. 4 shows that the corresponding
accreted BHs are not so massive (≲106 M⊙). However, the con-
tribution of mergers to the assembly of the BH mass is≲10%for
the whole sample of HBH galaxies at𝑧=0. These results imply
that the more efficient growth of BHs in HBH galaxies is fueled
primarily by gas accretion.
The average accretion patterns analysed so far indicate that
the faster growth of BHs in HBH galaxies is partly due to BH-BH
mergers (Fig. 6), but mainly to a more efficient gas accretion onto
central BHs. The enhanced gas accretion rate onto BHs in HBH
systems may lead to AGN activity and consequent heating of the
ISM and gas outflows. This would explain, in part, the lower gas
fractions and sSFRs obtained for the HBH population, compared
to the LBH sample (Fig. 4). At the same time, mergers induce star
formation and feedback from SNe, which can also lower the gas
fractions. The more merger-driven assembly hypothesis for HBH
galaxies is also supported by the weaker rotational support seen in
these systems. Although mergers subside below𝑧≈0.5in these
systems, as seen from the decrease in the accreted mass, discs are
still not able to form because the gas reservoir is already depleted
by this epoch.
3.4.2 Satellite populations of systems with high and low BH
masses
So far we examined the global accreted mass. A complementary
view on accretion histories is given by the population of dwarf
galaxiespresentaroundthehostatanygiventime.Thisgivesinsight
into the contribution of satellites to the accreted mass of their host
once they merge with it. In addition, given that the BH seed mass
(105 M⊙ ℎ−1) is comparable with the stellar mass of the smaller
dwarfs resolved byARTEMIS, only a small fraction of the entire
populationofsatelliteswouldhavetheirownBH.Wethereforealso
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

10Grimozzi et al.
Figure8.MergertreesofgalaxiesG22andG25.Eachsymbolrepresentsaprogenitoratagiven𝑧(leftaxes)ofthegalaxyatthetopofthetree.Eachgrayline
along a tree branch connects a progenitor to its immediate descendant at lower𝑧. The main branch (i.e., the main progenitor of the respective galaxy) is shown
on the right, highlighting the major mergers. Symbols are colour-coded according to𝜆★, with sizes that scale with𝑀★ (left panels) and𝑀BH (right panels).
In the right panels, galaxies without BH are shown with crosses.
track satellites that had a BH at the time of accretion onto the host.
We include only satellites with𝑀∗ ≥10 6 M⊙ in the analysis, to
avoid numerical resolution effects.
The left panel of Fig. 7 shows the median number of all satel-
lite galaxies located within the virial radius of their LBH or HBH
hosts at redshifts from𝑧≈2until the present time. There are no-
table differences between the two satellite populations, which are
likely caused by differences in virial masses of their host popula-
tions, namely HBH having higher mass haloes than LBH galax-
ies.Specifically,galaxieswithmoremassiveBHshaveconsistently
more satellites (ranging between∼11−16) than those with less
massive BHs (7−13). At𝑧≈0, the median numbers are16for
HBH and11for LBH systems, respectively. The implication is that
galaxieswithmoremassiveBHshadmoreactiveaccretionhistories,
which brought in more gas fuel. These results are also consistent
with the higher accreted masses and fractions examined earlier.
The middle panel of Fig. 7 shows a similar analysis, but only
for satellites that host a BH at the time of accretion. This shows a
sharper increase in the number of satellites between𝑧=2−0.5, in
bothsamples,likelyasaresultofthetimeittakesforthesatellitesto
becomemoremassiveandhostBHs.Themediannumberincreases
from1−2at𝑧≈2, in both samples, to∼6−7in HBH galaxies
compared to∼5for LBH systems. The differences are not large,
however, we note that these are mostly high mass satellites that are
likely to result in major mergers.
Finally,intherightpanel,weshowthemeanofthetotalblack
hole mass for satellites hosting BHs in the two host samples. (Note
that these are satellites that are not yet disrupted, so the running
mean shows the available reservoir of BH masses rather than the
effect of mergers). At higher redshift (𝑧≳1), BHs still have very
low mass in both populations, close to seed mass, so the total BH
mass in satellites is≲10 6 M⊙. After that, the total of BH masses
in satellites of HBH galaxies increases to a few<106 M⊙, reaches
values that are≈2times higher than the corresponding values for
the satellites of LBH systems. This reflects the higher number of
satellites at any given time and their slightly higher BH masses
due to the more massive satellites in HBH systems. Some of these
satellites eventually merge with their host. Below𝑧≈0.25, the
trend is switched, but this is likely due to HBH systems already
experiencing their major mergers, whereas LBH galaxies still have
high mass satellites orbiting around them. These results suggest
differencesinthehigh-massendofthesatellitepopulationbetween
the two samples in terms of number and time of accretion, with
consequences for the growth of central BHs in host galaxies.
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

Co-evolution of Black Holes and𝐿 ★ Galaxies11
Figure9.TheevolutionofgasaccretionrateontoBHs(leftpanels,leftverticalaxes,solidlines)andthegrowthofBHmassviaaccretionthroughBHmergers
(right panels, left vertical axes, solid lines) for galaxies G22 (upper panels) and G25 (bottom panels). Also shown is the evolution of𝑙merger parameter (all
panels, right vertical axes, dotted lines). Mergers correspond to peaks in𝑙merger. Massive mergers are generally associated with an increase in the gas accretion
rate onto BH and/or an increase in the BH accreted mass, though BH-BH coalescence (see text).
3.4.3 Two case studies for LBH and HBH galaxies
So far, we analysed the global accretion histories of the two galaxy
sub-samples.Wenowproceedtoexploreindividualmergerhistories
of two galaxies, each chosen to be typical cases for their parent
populations: G25 for LBH galaxies and G22 for the HBHs (see the
blue and orange dotted lines in Figs. 4, 6 and 7).
Fig. 8 shows the merger trees of these two galaxies, upper
panels for G22 and bottom panels for G25. On the left, we show
the stellar masses of progenitors, and on the right, the correspond-
ing black hole masses. Both symbols scale with the corresponding
masses and are colour-coded according to the morphology (𝜆★) of
the progenitor at that time. For clarity, we only show progenitors
with𝑀 ★ ≥10 5 M⊙ in the tree branches. Progenitors without BHs
are shown with crosses. It is evident from this figure that G22 ex-
perienced more mergers, both low- and high-mass (including more
minor mergers that occur between consecutive simulation snap-
shots). Consequently, there are more BHs deposited by mergers in
this galaxy than in G25. In addition, G22 has maintained a low𝜆★
(early-type morphology) throughout its evolution. G25 was able to
form a disc early on (𝑧≈2) but then experienced a massive merger
at𝑧≈1that temporarily changed its morphology to elliptical. Af-
ter a final merger, at𝑧≈0.5, G25 was able to form a stable disc
(𝜆★ =2000 pkpc km s −1, see Fig. 4).
To further evaluate the effect of mergers on the host galaxy
at any given snapshot, we introduce a parameter called the ‘level
of merger’,𝑙merger. This is defined asÍ
𝑖 𝑀★,𝑖/𝑀★,MP, i.e., the sum
over the stellar masses (𝑀★,𝑖) of all progenitors𝑖outside the main
branchatasnapshotpriortowhentheymergewiththemainbranch,
divided by the stellar mass of the main at that snapshot,𝑀★,MP. If
there are no mergers with the main progenitor (MP) at a given
snapshot,𝑙 merger is taken to be0. The𝑙merger values shown in Fig. 8
indicatethemostmassivemergersinG22andG25.Thisshowsthat
G22 experienced a more massive merger than G25, at a redshift of
≈1.5.This,andsubsequentfrequentminormergers,preventedthis
galaxy from forming a disk.
In Fig. 9 we investigate the evolution of the gas accretion rate
onto the central black hole (BH¤𝑀acc) and that of the accreted BH
mass (𝑀BH,Acc) in the two galaxies. We note that, due to the coarse
timesamplingofthesimulationoutputs,theaccretionrateontothe
BH does not accurately capture the instantaneous accretion rate,
showing high time variability (see McAlpine et al. 2016). Hence,
we only consider the overall trends for this quantity.
The gas accretion rate in G22 (top left panel) shows a rapid
increase around𝑧≈2, stabilizing at a value≈10 −3 M⊙yr−1 until
the present time, although with some minor fluctuations. The rapid
increase phase coincides with the highest peak in𝑙merger, which
represents the most major merger event experienced by this galaxy
at𝑡 L ≈10.5 Gyr. Through this merger, G22 accreted around12%
ofitsstellarmassatthattime.Severalothersmallerpeaksin𝑙 merger
(<0.01) are visible in this figure, being associated with minor
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

12Grimozzi et al.
mergers and possibly with some of the fluctuations (between≈
10−5 −10 −1 M⊙yr−1) in the gas accretion rate. The major merger
inG22isalsoassociatedwitharapidincreaseinaccretedBHmass
(top right panel), when𝑀 BH increases by a factor of≈2. Two
minor mergers contribute marginally to𝑀BH,Acc, at𝑡 L ≈8.5 Gyr
and𝑡 L ≈4 Gyr. Therefore, the results in the two upper panels in
Fig. 9 show that the BH in G22 grew primarily as a result of an
early major event. This event triggered gas accretion onto the main
BH, but also the coalescence of the two BHs.
These results are consistent with the behaviour shown by G22
in Fig. 6, which shows that most of the material was accreted at
𝑧≳1.Themergertree(Fig.8)showsmanyminormergersatrecent
times, with a final such event at𝑧≈0, but these did not contribute
significant mass. Several of these events contributed BHs, but of
verysmallmass.Themostmassivemerger“event”at𝑡 L ≈10.5 Gyr
was comprised of 6 individual progenitors that merged onto the
main brach at that epoch, only two of them having a BH.
InG25,thetypicalLBHgalaxy,thegasaccretionrate(bottom
left panel) decreases since𝑧≈2to a value of≈10 −7 M⊙yr−1
at present time, which is about 4 orders of magnitude below the
average value for G22 (Fig. 9). The most massive merger in this
system, at𝑧≃1, did not result in an increase in the gas accretion
rate but led to a significant increase in the mass acquired through
BH-BHcoalescence(bottomrightpanel).Anabruptchangeoccurs
in the gas accretion rate later on, at𝑧≈0.5, which could be caused
bythelastmergerinthissystem(seeFig.8andthechangeingalaxy
morphology at that time). At the time of the most massive merger,
at𝑡 L ≈8 Gyr, G25 accreted around10%of its stellar mass, while
the BH mass increased by a factor of≈3. No other mergers appear
to be significant afterwards (see also Figs. 6 and 8).
The trends obtained for G22 and G25 are common for their
respective parent populations. HBH galaxies tend to accrete more
mass via mergers than LBH systems, and also experience more
minor mergers along their whole formation histories. The richer
mergerhistoriesofHBHgalaxiesleadtoanincreaseintheir𝑀 BHvia
BH-BH mergers, but more importantly, such interactions dissipate
the angular momentum of baryons, facilitating the growth of BHs
via gas accretion and preventing the formation of a stable disc.
4 DISCUSSION
4.1 Comparison with previous studies
Our study has shown that the scatter in theMBH −M ★ relation is
associated with intrinsic galaxy processes, largely driven by merg-
ers. This is reflected in the distributions of galaxy properties, such
asgasfractions,specificstarformationrates,galaxysizes,andstel-
lar spins (morphology), which are correlated with the central BH
mass.Wehaveshownthatthesepropertiesarecomparableat𝑧≈2,
whichimpliesthatthescatterintheM BH −M★relationofMW-mass
progenitors should be much smaller at high redshift. From𝑧≈2
onward, these galaxies exhibit clear differences in their evolution-
ary paths. The two samples mainly analysed here, chosen based on
theircurrent𝑓 BH(≈BHmass),exhibitstronglydivergentpathsuntil
𝑧≈0in terms of their morphological properties, gas fractions and
starformation/quenchingstate.Theseresultsarenotunexpected,as
many other studies, using both simulations and observations, have
found that black hole mass is a strong predictor of galaxy proper-
ties, including their quenching (e.g., Piotrowska et al. 2022; Bluck
et al. 2023; Goubert et al. 2024; Lim et al. 2025). The approach in
our study was to assemble a statistically representative sample of
MW-mass galaxies to investigate the inter-connection between the
growth of BHs and host properties.
AsimilarapproachwastakenrecentlybyRobertsetal.(2026),
whousedEAGLEtoshowthatthescatterinthe𝑀 BH −𝑀 200 relation
correlates with morphology, specifically with the kinematical pa-
rameter𝜅 c𝑜. They also found that this scatter correlates even more
stronglywiththehalobindingenergy,𝐸 bind,andthatmergers(traced
by the global accreted fraction in these galaxies) are important in
determiningthe morphologicalevolutionof themaingalaxies. The
key role of the binding energy in the scatter of𝑀BH at fixed halo
mass was also highlighted by Davies et al. (2019), who linked it to
the ability of𝐿★ haloes to expel gas through AGN feedback. The
role of mergers in the scatter of the𝑀BH −𝑀 200 relation in the𝐿★
regime was also discussed by Davies et al. (2024) (see also Davies
etal.2022)whousedcontrolledsimulationsofaMW-massgalaxy.
OurresultssuggestthatMW-massgalaxiesmaybeaffectedby
multiple mergers and subsequent SN / AGN feedback during their
lifetime, and that it is the cumulative effect of these processes that
determines their evolutionary paths. The interplay between these
processesis,ofcourse,complexandmaynotbeeasilydisentangled.
Atthisgalaxymassscale,perhapsSNfeedbackisstilldominant(see
Appendix A), although AGNs could become important for some
galaxies, particularly for those with more massive black holes.
Other cosmological simulations indicate that AGN feedback
canaffectthemorphologicalpropertiesofgalaxies,includingthose
of MW-mass (Torrey et al. 2020; Getachew-Woreta et al. 2022;
Irodotou et al. 2022; Getachew-Woreta et al. 2025; Sivasankaran
et al. 2025). For example, using theHorizon-AGNsimulation,
Dubois et al. (2016) found that AGN feedback can lead to more
spherical galaxy shapes, including around the MW-mass range (al-
though MW is near the resolution limit for these simulations).
OuranalysisalsoindicatesthatBH-BHmergerstypicallycon-
tribute more to the BH mass in LBH galaxies in comparison to
those in HBH systems. This result agrees with that of Bravo et al.
(2025), who found that, at fixed galaxy stellar mass, BH growth in
galaxies with less massive BHs is merger driven, while in galaxies
with more massive BHs it occurs mainly via gas accretion.
4.2 Implications for MW and M31
Based on our classification scheme, MW could be identified as an
LBHgalaxy,whereasM31largelyfallsintotheHBHcategory.Our
results indicate that this distinction is physically motivated, arising
primarily from differences in their merger histories. The MW has
experiencedamajormerger,Gaia-Enceladus/Sausage(GES),about
8−9 Gyrago(Belokurovetal.2018;Helmietal.2018),afterwhich
it had an almost quiescent history (e.g., Wyse 2001; Ruchti et al.
2015).In contrast,M31 probablyhad amore activemerger history,
as demonstrated by its thicker and more disturbed stellar disc, the
more prominent inner spheroid, and its more numerous satellites
and tidal streams (e.g., McConnachie et al. 2009, 2018). The last
accretion and disruption of a massive satellite galaxy occurred≈
2−3 Gyrago (D’Souza & Bell 2018). This also appears to have
triggered a burst of star formation (Williams et al. 2015; D’Souza
&Bell2018).SimilardifferenceswerenotedbetweentheHBHand
LBHsamples:HBHgalaxieshavemoreactivemergerhistoriesand
less rotational support as a result than LBH systems.
AlthoughthesimulationsdonotincludeexactmatchesofMW
and M31, they suggest that the differences in the BH masses of
these two systems could be explained by differences in the merger
histories. Taking the example of G25, a disc galaxy with low BH
massliketheMW,itsmergerhistorywasfairlyquiescent,including
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

Co-evolution of Black Holes and𝐿 ★ Galaxies13
a single major merger at𝑡𝐿 ≃8Gyr that brought in the gas fuel to
catalyse the (re-)formation of the stellar disc. This is similar to the
mergerofGESwiththeMW≃8−9Gyrago,aneventthatshaped
the formation of the Galaxy disc (Belokurov & Kravtsov 2022). In
G25,themajormergeralsocontributed≈40%ofthefinalBHmass
through the coalescence of its BH (with a mass of a few105 M⊙)
with that of the main halo (see Fig. 8 and the blue dotted line in
Fig. 6). In the case of the MW, models of a merger of a central BH
fromGESwiththesupermassiveblackholepresentatthecenterof
theMWatthattime(a1:4massratio)canexplainthepropertiesof
Sgr A∗, such as the misalignment of its spin and its high amplitude
(Wang & Zhang 2024).
InthecaseofG22,whichisatypicalexampleoftheHBHpop-
ulation, a substantial fraction of its BH mass was achieved through
the enhanced gas accretion rate triggered by at least one major
merger (see Fig. 9). Similarly, the more massive merger in M31
than in MW couldhave driven gas inflows more efficiently, feeding
theBH.Itisalsoplausiblethat,givenitscurrenthighBHmass,M31
could have experienced some AGN activity in the past. Although
its BH appears to be currently dormant, there are some indications
thatbriefAGNepisodesoccurredrecently(e.g.,Zhangetal.2019).
5 CONCLUSIONS
Inthisstudy,weexaminedthescatterinthe𝑀 BH massesat(nearly)
fixed𝑀 ★ mass, using samples of MW-mass galaxies from the
ARTEMISandEAGLEsimulations. Our goal was to determine the
origin of this scatter. For this, we classified the simulated galaxies
according to the𝑓 BH =𝑀 BH/𝑀★ ratio, focusing on samples with
the 25% lowest and highest𝑓BH, respectively. We found significant
correlations between the central BH masses and various galaxy
propertiesat𝑧=0,suchasthegalaxystellarspin,meanstellarage,
and star-forming gas fraction, which motivated us to study the co-
evolutionofBHmassgrowthandgalaxypropertiesovertime.This
hasrevealedthesignificantroleofmergersandassociatedfeedback
in determining the outcomes in terms of BH growth and galaxy
properties. We then investigated in more detail the merger histories
oftworepresentativegalaxiesfromthelow-andhighBH-masscat-
egories and discussed the implications of this study for the growth
of BHs in MW and M31. We summarize in the following the main
conclusions:
•In both simulations, the BH mass at fixed𝑀★ correlates with
galaxymorphology,inqualitativeagreementwiththeobservedscat-
ter (e.g., Greene et al. 2020) (Fig. 2). Galaxies with less massive
BHs tend to have disc-like morphologies (higher stellar spin), and
thosewithmoremassiveBHstendtobeelliptical(lowstellarspin).
•BHmassescorrelatewithotherhostgalaxyproperties(Fig.3),
such as gas fractions and average stellar ages. Galaxies with more
massiveBHstendtoformtheirstarsearlier,consistentwithanearly
formation time of their halo. They also tend to have lower fractions
of star-forming gas, due to accumulated effects of feedback.
•We examined the co-evolution of BH growth and key galaxy
properties in the galaxy populations with lowest and highest𝑓BH
ratios (which broadly correlate with BH masses in our narrowM★
range). We found that the galaxy properties in the two samples are
similar at𝑧≈2but diverge soon afterwards. Differences of about
an order of magnitude in BH masses (or𝑓BH) at𝑧=0result in
differences of at least a factor of2in sSFRs, cold and hot gas
fractions, or galaxy sizes (Fig. 4). For cases when BHs grow more
efficiently(HBHgalaxies),thegasfractionsundergoasteepdecline,
leading to very efficient quenching by𝑧≈0. Galaxies with less
massive BHs continue to form stars until present day. In contrast,
chemicalabundancesaresimilarforallgalaxies,regardlessoftheir
finalBHmass.Thisisbecausemetallicitiestendtotrackcloselythe
growthinstellarmasswhichoccursearly(Fig.4),beforemostofthe
BH growth takes place. These results are consistent with chemical
enrichmentbeingdeterminedmostlybySNfeedback,whichdrives
the galaxy stellar mass – metallicity relation.
•By selecting galaxies according to their present-day stellar
spins, used as proxies for morphologies, we also found divergent
evolutionsfrom𝑧≈2.Theevolutionofgalaxiesbroadlyrepresent-
ing early/late types resembles that of galaxies with high/low BH-
masses (Fig. 5). However, the galaxy properties are not as strongly
separated as in the case of selection based on BH-mass (Fig. 4).
These results confirm that the morphological properties are closely
related to the evolution of their BHs, but also suggest that BH-
masses are stronger predictors of the gaseous-phase properties in
galaxies than morphologies.
•We investigated how galaxies with high and low BH masses
accrete mass, during or after mergers, in their dark matter haloes,
stellarandbaryonic(stars+gas)components,andcentralBHs.We
found that, in terms of absolute values, galaxies with more massive
BHs tend to accrete more mass in each of these components than
those with lower BH masses (Fig. 6, upper panels). This is likely
due to their overall higher virial masses. When normalizing to the
maximummassineachcomponent(toaccountforthedifferencesin
masses), we could determine the intrinsic contribution of mergers
toeachcategory(Fig.6,bottompanels).Wethusfoundthatmergers
contribute more to the stellar masses of host galaxies with massive
BHs (≈30%) than of galaxies with lower BH-masses (≈10%).
Mergers also tend to contribute more DM to galaxies that end up
having more massive BHs, although these fractions are typically
small (≲20%), most of DM halo formation having taken place at
higher redshifts (𝑧 >2).
•Areversedtrendisseenintermsofthemassaccreteddirected
into BHs via BH-BH mergers (Fig. 6, bottom row, third panel). In
galaxies with less massive BHs, this channel is more important,
contributing≈40%to the present-day mass, while in galaxies
with more massive BHs the contribution is≲10%. This implies
that in HBH galaxies gas accretion is the primary channel for BH
growth(contributing≈90%ofthefinalBHmass),whereasinLBH
galaxies the two channels are more even (≈60% gas accretion,
≈40%BH-BH mergers).
•Overall, galaxies with more massive BHs tend to have more
active merger histories, as shown by various indicators (higher ac-
cretedmassintotal,higherfractionalcontributionstothefinalDM
and stellar mass, etc). More frequent/more massive mergers result
in a diminished rotational support by generating instabilities in the
gasmotionsthatdissipatetheangularmomentumandenablegasto
migrate towards the central BH. Although mergers tend to subside
after𝑧≈0.5(seeFig.6),HBHgalaxiesstillcannotformdiscs,due
to their gas being depleted and low levels of star formation.
•WeinvestigatedfurtherthesatellitepopulationsoftheLBHand
HBH galaxies, by tracking their number across different redshifts.
WefoundthatgalaxieswithmassiveBHstendtohavemoresatellites
at any given time, including more massive ones that host their own
BHs (Fig. 7). High mass satellites tend to accrete late (𝑧≲1),
by which time their BHs also had time to grow. The differences
between number of satellites in the two galaxy samples are quite
small in terms of the mass they can contribute through direct BH-
BH mergers. However these differences are a determining factor in
terms of the gas content these satellites could provide to the host
and the gravitational instabilities they can generate.
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

14Grimozzi et al.
•We performed a more focused analysis of the merger histories
of two galaxies (G22 and G25), chosen as representative cases
of each of the two𝑓 BH galaxy populations (Figs. 8 and 9). The
HBH galaxy, G22, had many more low-mass mergers (𝑀★ ∼10 5 −
106 M⊙)downto𝑧≈0thanG25.Althoughtheseminormergersdid
notcontributesignificantmassandgenerallydidnothostBHs,they
prevented the formation of a stable disc in G22. Additionally, G22
had a massive merger between𝑧≈1.5which established its final
early-type morphology. In contrast, G25 was able to form a disc
earlyon(𝑧≈2)andthenreformitmorerecently(at𝑧≈0.5)aftera
massivemergerat𝑧≈1(Fig.8).Themoreactivemergerhistoryof
G22 also induced more dynamical perturbations that drove the loss
of angular momentum of the gas, enhancing the gas accretion rate
ontoBHbyfactorsofafewthaninthemorequiescentG25(Fig.9).
Our study has shown how the interplay between mergers and
internal galaxy processes, such as star formation and SN/ AGN
feedback (see Appendix A), can shape the evolution of𝐿★ galaxies
andultimatelydeterminethegrowthrateofcentralBHsandwhether
a system develops into a star-forming disc galaxy or evolves into
a quenched spheroidal system. It has also highlighted how the two
main channels for the formation of central BHs in𝐿★ galaxies, gas
accretionandBH-BHmergers,operatedifferentlydependingonthe
typeofmergerhistoriesandhowmergersarerelatedtothescatterin
BH masses and galaxy properties. MW and M31, as representative
cases of observed scatter in the BH/galaxy properties in the𝐿★
regime, could also have formed their central BHs through different
contributions from these channels. This scenario is plausible given
theknowndifferencesinthemergerhistoriesofthesetwogalaxies.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank the members of theEAGLEteam for making
their code available for theARTEMISproject. We used various
Python libraries, includingh5py(http://www.h5py.org/) and
AstroPy(AstropyCollaborationetal.2022),aswellasthepublicly
availableread_eaglemodule(https://github.com/jchelly/
read_eagle, The EAGLE team 2017). TheARTEMISproject has
received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) un-
der the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No 769130). SEG and MEDR ac-
knowledge support fromAgencia Nacional de Promoción de la
Investigación, el Desarrollo Tecnológico y la Innovación(Agencia
I+D+i, PICT-2021-GRF-TI-00290, Argentina). ASF acknowledges
support from UKRI (ST/W006766/1).
DATA AVAILABILITY
Data for theEAGLEsimulations used in this study (galaxy and
halo catalogues) are publicly accessible via SQL queries from the
following url:http://icc.dur.ac.uk/Eagle/database.php.
Data fromARTEMISsimulations and codes developed for the anal-
ysis of this paper can be shared on reasonable request with the
corresponding author.
REFERENCES
Alexander D. M., Hickox R. C., 2012, New Astron. Rev., 56, 93
Alexander D. M., et al., 2025, New Astron. Rev., 101, 101733
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2022, ApJ, 935, 167
Baldry I. K., Balogh M. L., Bower R. G., Glazebrook K., Nichol R. C.,
Bamford S. P., Budavari T., 2006, MNRAS, 373, 469
Behroozi P., Wechsler R. H., Hearin A. P., Conroy C., 2019, MNRAS, 488,
3143
Belokurov V., Kravtsov A., 2022, MNRAS, 514, 689
Belokurov V., Erkal D., Evans N. W., Koposov S. E., Deason A. J., 2018,
MNRAS, 478, 611
Bender R., et al., 2005, ApJ, 631, 280
Birnboim Y., Dekel A., 2003, MNRAS, 345, 349
Bischetti M., et al., 2022, Nature, 605, 244
Bluck A. F. L., Piotrowska J. M., Maiolino R., 2023, ApJ, 944, 108
Booth C. M., Schaye J., 2009, MNRAS, 398, 53
Bower R. G., Schaye J., Frenk C. S., Theuns T., Schaller M., Crain R. A.,
McAlpine S., 2017, MNRAS, 465, 32
BravoM.,LagosC.d.P.,ProctorK.L.,Chandro-GómezÁ.,PowerC.,2025,
ApJ, 993, 107
Cano-Díaz M., Maiolino R., Marconi A., Netzer H., Shemmer O., Cresci
G., 2012, A&A, 537
Chen Z., He Z., Ho L. C., Gu Q., Wang T., Zhuang M., Liu G., Wang Z.,
2022, Nature Astronomy, 6, 339
Comparat J., 2022, in 44th COSPAR Scientific Assembly. Held 16-24 July.
p. 2332
Crain R. A., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 450, 1937
Cresci G., et al., 2015, ApJ, 799, 82
Croton D. J., et al., 2006, MNRAS, 365, 11
D’Souza R., Bell E. F., 2018, Nature Astronomy, 2, 737
Dalla Vecchia C., Schaye J., 2008, MNRAS, 387, 1431
Davé R., Anglés-Alcázar D., Narayanan D., Li Q., Rafieferantsoa M. H.,
Appleby S., 2019, MNRAS, 486, 2827
Davies J. J., Crain R. A., McCarthy I. G., Oppenheimer B. D., Schaye J.,
Schaller M., McAlpine S., 2019, MNRAS, 485, 3783
Davies J. J., Pontzen A., Crain R. A., 2022, MNRAS, 515, 1430
Davies J. J., Pontzen A., Crain R. A., 2024, MNRAS, 527, 4705
Davis M., Efstathiou G., Frenk C. S., White S. D. M., 1985, ApJ, 292, 371
Davis B. L., Graham A. W., Cameron E., 2019, ApJ, 873, 85
De Rossi M. E., Bower R. G., Font A. S., Schaye J., Theuns T., 2017,
MNRAS, 472, 3354
Dolag K., Borgani S., Murante G., Springel V., 2009, MNRAS, 399, 497
Dubois Y., Volonteri M., Silk J., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 1590
Dubois Y., Peirani S., Pichon C., Devriendt J., Gavazzi R., Welker C.,
Volonteri M., 2016, MNRAS, 463, 3948
EllisonS.L.,ViswanathanA.,PattonD.R.,BottrellC.,McConnachieA.W.,
Gwyn S., Cuillandre J.-C., 2019, MNRAS, 487, 2491
Ferrarese L., Merritt D., 2000, ApJ, 539, L9
Font A. S., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 498, 1765
Font A. S., McCarthy I. G., Belokurov V., 2021, MNRAS, 505, 783
FontA.S.,McCarthyI.G.,BelokurovV.,BrownS.T.,StaffordS.G.,2022,
MNRAS, 511, 1544
Genzel R., Eisenhauer F., Gillessen S., 2010, Reviews of Modern Physics,
82, 3121
Getachew-Woreta T., Pović M., Masegosa J., Perea J., Beyoro-Amado Z.,
Márquez I., 2022, MNRAS, 514, 607
Getachew-Woreta T., Pović M., Perea J., Marquez I., Masegosa J., Mahoro
A., Mengistue S. T., 2025, Galaxies, 13, 84
GoubertP.H.,BluckA.F.L.,PiotrowskaJ.M.,MaiolinoR.,2024,MNRAS,
528, 4891
Graham A. W., Sahu N., 2023, MNRAS, 518, 2177
Graham A. W., Scott N., 2015, ApJ, 798, 54
Gravity Collaboration et al., 2023, A&A, 677, L10
Greene J. E., Strader J., Ho L. C., 2020, ARA&A, 58, 257
Grimozzi S. E., Font A. S., De Rossi M. E., 2024, MNRAS, 530, 95
Grimozzi S. E., De Rossi M. E., Font A. S., 2025, Boletin de la Asociacion
Argentina de Astronomia La Plata Argentina, 66, 297
Habouzit M., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 503, 1940
Häring N., Rix H.-W., 2004, ApJ, 604, L89
Harrison C. M., 2017, Nature Astronomy, 1, 0165
Heckman T. M., Best P. N., 2014, ARA&A, 52, 589
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

Co-evolution of Black Holes and𝐿 ★ Galaxies15
HelmiA.,BabusiauxC.,KoppelmanH.H.,MassariD.,VeljanoskiJ.,Brown
A. G. A., 2018, Nature, 563, 85
Hinshaw G., et al., 2013, ApJS, 208, 19
Hopkins P. F., Quataert E., 2010, MNRAS, 407, 1529
Huško F., et al., 2026, MNRAS, 547, stag324
Ibata R., Irwin M., Lewis G., Ferguson A. M. N., Tanvir N., 2001, Nature,
412, 49
Irodotou D., et al., 2022, MNRAS, 513, 3768
Jogee S., 2006, in Alloin D., ed., , Vol. 693, Physics of Active Galactic
Nuclei at all Scales. p. 143, doi:10.1007/3-540-34621-X_6
Kauffmann G., et al., 2003, MNRAS, 341, 33
Kormendy J., Ho L. C., 2013, ARA&A, 51, 511
Kormendy J., Richstone D., 1995, ARA&A, 33, 581
Lammers C., Iyer K. G., Ibarra-Medel H., Pacifici C., Sánchez S. F., Tac-
chella S., Woo J., 2023, ApJ, 953, 26
LiS.-L.,GrashaK.,KrumholzM.R.,WisnioskiE.,SutherlandR.S.,Kewley
L. J., Chen Y.-M., Li Z., 2024, MNRAS, 529, 4993
Lim S., Tacchella S., Maiolino R., Schaye J., Schaller M., 2025, MNRAS,
543, 2204
Magorrian J., et al., 1998, AJ, 115, 2285
Marigo P., 2001, A&A, 370, 194
McAlpine S., et al., 2016, Astronomy and Computing, 15, 72
McCarthy I. G., Schaye J., Bird S., Le Brun A. M. C., 2017, MNRAS, 465,
2936
McConnachie A. W., et al., 2009, Nature, 461, 66
McConnachie A. W., et al., 2018, ApJ, 868, 55
McConnell N. J., Ma C.-P., 2013, ApJ, 764, 184
McMillan P. J., 2017, MNRAS, 465, 76
Moster B. P., Naab T., White S. D. M., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 1822
Nelson D., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 475, 624
Ni Y., et al., 2022, MNRAS, 513, 670
PiotrowskaJ.M.,BluckA.F.L.,MaiolinoR.,PengY.,2022,MNRAS,512,
1052
Planck Collaboration et al., 2014, A&A, 571, A16
Portinari L., Chiosi C., Bressan A., 1998, A&A, 334, 505
Reines A. E., Volonteri M., 2015, ApJ, 813, 82
Reitzel D. B., Guhathakurta P., Gould A., 1998, AJ, 116, 707
Roberts R. J., Davies J. J., Crain R. A., 2026, MNRAS,
Rosas-Guevara Y. M., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 454, 1038
Ruchti G. R., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 450, 2874
Savorgnan G. A. D., Graham A. W., Marconi A., Sani E., 2016, ApJ, 817,
21
Schaye J., Dalla Vecchia C., 2008, MNRAS, 383, 1210
Schaye J., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 446, 521
Schaye J., et al., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2508.21126
Schutte Z., Reines A. E., 2022, Nature, 601, 329
Shankar F., et al., 2025, MNRAS, 541, 2070
Sijacki D., Vogelsberger M., Genel S., Springel V., Torrey P., Snyder G. F.,
Nelson D., Hernquist L., 2015, MNRAS, 452, 575
Sivasankaran A., et al., 2025, MNRAS, 537, 817
Springel V., 2005, MNRAS, 364, 1105
Springel V., White S. D. M., Tormen G., Kauffmann G., 2001, MNRAS,
328, 726
Springel V., Di Matteo T., Hernquist L., 2005, MNRAS, 361, 776
Tamm A., Tempel E., Tenjes P., Tihhonova O., Tuvikene T., 2012, A&A,
546, A4
Taylor P., Kobayashi C., 2015, MNRAS, 452, L59
Taylor M. A., et al., 2025, ApJ, 991, L24
TerrazasB.A.,BellE.F.,WooJ.,HenriquesB.M.B.,2017,ApJ,844,170
Terrazas B. A., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 493, 1888
The EAGLE team 2017, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1706.09899
Thielemann F.-K., et al., 2003, in Hillebrandt W., Leibundgut B., eds,
From Twilight to Highlight: The Physics of Supernovae. p. 331,
doi:10.1007/10828549_46
Thob A. C. R., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 485, 972
Torrey P., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 497, 5292
TrayfordJ.W.,TheunsT.,BowerR.G.,CrainR.A.,LagosC.d.P.,Schaller
M., Schaye J., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 3925
Venturi G., et al., 2023, A&A, 678, A127
Villar Martín M., López Cobá C., Cazzoli S., Pérez Montero E., Cabrera
Lavers A., 2024, A&A, 690, A397
Villforth C., 2023, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 6, 34
Wang Y., Zhang B., 2024, Nature Astronomy, 8, 1592
White S. D. M., Frenk C. S., 1991, ApJ, 379, 52
Wiersma R. P. C., Schaye J., Theuns T., Dalla Vecchia C., Tornatore L.,
2009, MNRAS, 399, 574
Williams B. F., et al., 2015, ApJ, 806, 48
WyseR.F.G.,2001,inFunesJ.G.,CorsiniE.M.,eds,AstronomicalSociety
ofthePacificConferenceSeriesVol.230,GalaxyDisksandDiskGalax-
ies.pp71–80(arXiv:astro-ph/0012270),doi:10.48550/arXiv.astro-
ph/0012270
Zhang S., Wang Q. D., Foster A. R., Sun W., Li Z., Ji L., 2019, ApJ, 885,
157
Zinn P.-C., Middelberg E., Norris R. P., Dettmar R.-J., 2013, ApJ, 774, 66
APPENDIX A: MODELS WITH VARYING SN AND AGN
FEEDBACK
Herewecomparethepropertiesof𝐿 ★galaxiesandtheircentralBHs
inseveralEAGLErunswithvariationsofSNandAGNfeedback.As
before,weselectcentralgalaxiesofMW-mass,i.e.,withpresent-day
virial masses between6.7×10 11 < 𝑀 200,crit /M⊙ <3.6×10 12.
We use threeEAGLEruns with varying SN feedback: i) a
reference model with fiducial SN feedback; ii) a model with
weak SN feedback, “WeakFB”; and iii) one with strong feedback,
“StrongFB”.Thelasttwomodelswereobtainedbyscalingthesub-
gridparameter𝑓 thbyfactorsof0.5and2,respectively.𝑓 threpresents
the fraction of the energy budget in Type II SNe used for thermal
heating (see Crain et al. 2015). All runs use the reference AGN
feedback (Δ𝑇AGN =10 8.5 K) and the same cosmological volume
(25cMpc on the side). Fig. A1 shows the evolution of median stel-
lar masses and gas fractions in MW-mass galaxies in these runs,
as well of the masses of their central BHs. In the weaker SN feed-
back model, the MW-mass galaxies form their stellar components
early (by𝑧≃1) and have higher BH masses. The cold and hot gas
reservoirs in these systems are also depleted early on. The opposite
behaviourisseeninthestrongerSNfeedbackcase.Neitherofthese
scenarios are consistent with formation of MW-mass galaxies, but
the result highlights the sensitivity of galaxy and BH properties to
this type of feedback. For example, changes in SN feedback effi-
ciency by a factor of 2 lead to variations on an order of magnitude
in𝑀 ★and𝑀 BH.Anotherinterestingresultisthatthescatterin𝑀 BH
for the two non-fiducial SN models is very narrow, which is also
inconsistentwiththeobservedscatterinthe𝐿 ★ regime(seeFig.2).
WerepeattheanalysisforthreeEAGLErunswithvaryingAGN
feedback: i) a model with the reference AGN feedback (Δ𝑇AGN =
108.5 K; also included in Figs. 2 and 3); ii) a model with increased
AGN feedback, “AGNdT9” (Δ𝑇AGN =10 9 K); and iii) one with
no AGN feedback. These were run in a cosmological volume of
50cMpcandusethefiducialSNfeedback(seeSchayeetal.2015for
details).AhigherΔ𝑇 AGNleadstomoreenergeticfeedbackepisodes,
generallycausingsmallerradiativelossesintheISM,whileasmaller
Δ𝑇AGN results in more intermittent AGN feedback. Fig. A2 shows
theco-evolutionofgalaxystellarmassesandgasfractionswithBH
masses for these runs. In this case, changes in AGN feedback do
not result in large variations in galaxy and BH properties, which
suggests that AGN feedback is not the dominant process at this
galaxyscale.However,ithasanoticeableeffect,particularlyatlater
times(𝑧≲1), when it facilitates the growth of BHs. This implies
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)

16Grimozzi et al.
Figure A1.Running medians for stellar and gaseous properties of MW-mass galaxies,𝑀★,𝑓 SF and𝑓 NSF, and their central BH masses,𝑀BH inEAGLEruns
with varying SN feedback. Blue lines represent the reference model, red lines the model with weak SN feedback and green lines the model with strong SN
feedback. The shaded regions enclose the corresponding 25th and 75th percentiles.
Figure A2.Running medians as in Fig. A1 but now forEAGLEruns with different AGN feedback. Blue lines represent the reference modelΔ𝑇AGN =10 8.5 K,
red lines the model withΔ𝑇AGN =10 9 Kand green lines the model with no AGN.
that AGN feedback is an essential subgrid physics ingredient for
modeling𝐿 ★ galaxies and their BHs.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
MNRAS000, 1–16 (2025)