Title: Impact of the axion-like self-interactions in gravitational atoms for LISA
Authors: Samuel Gómez Gómez, Xisco Jimenez Forteza, Carlos Palenzuela Luque
Published: 2026-05-17
Categories: gr-qc, astro-ph.HE, hep-ph

Impact of the axion-like self-interactions in gravitational atoms for LISA
Samuel G´ omez G´ omez,1,∗ Xisco Jimenez Forteza, 1,† and Carlos Palenzuela 1,‡
1Departament de F´ ısica, Universitat de les Illes Balears, IAC3 IEEC, Crta. Valldemossa km 7.5, E-07122 Palma, Spain
Ultralight bosons with self-interactions, such as axion-like particles, can form astrophysical Bose–
Einstein condensates around stars or compact objects, often referred to as gravitational atoms. In
this work, we adopt a recently proposed dynamical formation mechanism for these halos and estimate
their impact on extreme- and intermediate-mass-ratio inspirals when present around the primary
black hole. We show that, for signal-to-noise ratios≲100, LISA can distinguish gravitational wave-
forms from binaries embedded in such halo overdensities. Our analysis indicates that LISA can
probe boson massesm dm ∼10 −17–10−15 eV and decay constantsf a ∼3×10 10–6×10 12 GeV using
binaries with total massesM∼10 4–105 M⊙, assuming conservative DM densities consistent with
the central values of Navarro–Frenk–White profiles. Allowing for higher background densities and
different extreme-mass-ratio configurations further extends the accessible parameter space. More-
over, we find that for a binary configuration withM∼10 4M⊙,ρ dm = 104 GeV/cm3, and signal to
noise ratio SNR∼20, a particle mass ofm dm = 3.2·10 −15 eV and decay constant off a = 1.6·10 11
GeV maximize the dephasing due to dynamical friction, enabling the recovery of the particle param-
eters at the percent level. These results demonstrate that LISA can place constraints on axion-like
particle masses and self-interactions without requiring additional couplings to Standard Model fields.
I. INTRODUCTION
Gravitational-wave (GW) observations have revolu-
tionized modern astrophysics through the direct detec-
tion of compact binary coalescences across four observ-
ing runs of the LIGO–Virgo–KAGRA (LVK) network,
opening an entirely new observational window onto the
Universe and enabling precision studies of compact ob-
jects [1–4]. Next-generation detectors, including the
Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) [5] and the
Einstein Telescope [6–8], are expected to dramatically
extend our reach in frequency and sensitivity. GW ob-
servations open new opportunities to address important
questions in cosmology and astrophysics, and potentially
in fundamental physics [9–13]. Among these, one of the
most open problems is understanding the nature and dis-
tribution of dark matter (DM) [14–24].
The possible microscopic nature of DM is constrained
by its quantum spin, allowing for scenarios in which it
consists of bosons, fermions, or a mixture of both. In this
paper, we focus on the possibility that DM is composed of
light, or ultralight bosonic particles, which are a broad
class of hypothetical integer spin particles with masses
between 10−24 to 1 eV, that have recently attracted the
attention of a large part of the community, especially af-
ter the WIMP parameter space has become increasingly
constrained [25]. Moreover, although the ΛCDM model
exhibits outstanding agreement with current cosmolog-
ical observations, it remains very much unconstrained
for subgalactic scales (typically belowk≲0.1kpc −1),
and light bosons can address the small scale challenges
of ΛCDM by offering a rich phenomenology which can be
tested with astrophysical observations [26].
∗ samuel.gomez@uib.cat
† f.jimenez@uib.es
‡ carlos.palenzuela@uib.es
The most familiar example of a light boson coming
from well-motivated extensions to the Standard Model is
a pseudoscalar known as the axion [27], such as the QCD
axion, a pseudo-Goldstone boson originally proposed as a
solution to the Strong-CP problem [28–30]. More gener-
ally, light axions known as Axion Like Particles (ALPs)
are also a generic prediction of different extensions to
the Standard Model or are produced by the compacti-
fications of extra dimensions, such as the moduli fields
appearing in the different formulations of String The-
ory [31, 32]. In general, ALPs can have a wide range of
masses and interactions depending on their decay con-
stantf a, which can have values anywhere from the weak
scale (∼TeV) to the GUT or Planck scale, and their cou-
plings to photons, other matter fields, and themselves,
which are highly model-dependent.
Binary black holes (BBHs) with very unequal masses,
such as extreme mass ratio inspirals (EMRIs) or interme-
diate mass ratio inspirals (IMRIs), have been proposed
as promising scenarios for testing the presence of DM
overdensities. The presence of a DM cloud around a cen-
tral BH in one of these systems, can induce environmen-
tal effects on the smaller companion [33–35]. This has
been widely studied in the context of DM spikes and min-
ispikes [19, 20, 36, 37] without relying on microphysical
assumptions about the DM. These systems are primary
targets of LISA, the upcoming space-based GW detector,
making it uniquely suited to detect subtle environmen-
tal imprints on the waveform. LISA is sensitive in the
frequency bandf∼10 −4–10−1 Hz, with peak sensitiv-
ity aroundf∼3×10 −3 Hz. EMRIs, with mass ratios
q=m/M BH ∼10 −4- 10 −7, emit in the 10 −3–10−1 Hz
range and accumulate SNR coherently over∼10 4–105
cycles, achieving typical SNRs of∼20–100 atz≲0.5.
IMRIs, with mass ratiosq∼10 −2–10−4, emit in the
10−3–10−2 Hz range with SNRs reaching∼10 2–104 for
favorable configurations atz≲1.
Bosonic DM overdensities of light bosons or ALPs, are
arXiv:2605.17589v2  [gr-qc]  4 Jun 2026

2
known to form around rotating Kerr BHs, exponentially
growing by extracting energy and angular momentum
in the ergoregion, in a process known as a superradi-
ant instability [15, 38–40], forming macroscopic quan-
tum states known as gravitational atoms (GA). Allowing
scalar bosons to have quartic self-interactions, it has re-
cently been shown in [41] that GAs can be formed and
stabilized in gravitational potentials, while a relativis-
tic stationary framework is introduced in [42]. More re-
cently, in [43], the full non-linear case has been explored
in the context of numerical relativity, demonstrating that
BH spacetimes can stabilize the cloud growth and lead
to a stationary state.
Unlike previous studies based on phenomenological
DM profiles of superradiantly generated clouds, the
model in [41] which we consider, the GA grows through
a self-interaction–driven capture mechanism, which pro-
vides a direct link between the microphysical properties
of the bosonic field and its macroscopic gravitational im-
print. In this framework, the halo forms dynamically
from the ambient DM distribution and evolves over time,
rather than being assumed as a pre-existing static con-
figuration. We model the time-dependent growth of the
halo around the primary BH and compute its impact on
the orbital evolution of EMRIs and IMRIs, including the
effects of dynamical friction and accretion. These envi-
ronmental effects modify the GW phase evolution, lead-
ing to a characteristic dephasing in the LISA band. We
quantify the detectability of this signal and identify the
regions of parameter space in which such effects can be
probed for hosting BHs with massesM ⊙ ∈

104,10 7
.
Recent works such as [44–46] have studied these con-
figurations for specific GA overdensities, finding central
densities of order 10 21 GeV/cm3 or higher for a central
BH mass of 105 M⊙. In these scenarios, the gravitational
potential generated by the boson cloud must be taken
into account, particularly when the cloud mass becomes
comparable to that of the host BH [45]. The model
we use describes a dynamical GA formation seeded by
a realistic local galactic DM background densityρ dm ∼
103−104GeV /cm3, rather than assuming a fixed overden-
sity as an initial condition. In particular, the maximum
halo mass we obtain is of order 10 −6 MBH [41], which
justifies neglecting its self-gravity and treating the grav-
itational potential as dominated by the host BH. Within
this framework, the maximum GA densities achievable
near the BH horizon, for the largest BH mass we study
MBH = 107M⊙, areρ GA ∼10 20 GeV/cm3, and only for
background densities as large asρ dm ∼10 8 GeV/cm3,
which are beyond realistic galactic environments. More-
over, even allowing for such extreme background densi-
ties, the companion would not probe these peak values
for most of the binary evolution, since the GA density
profile decreases exponentially with radius, so that the
orbit-averaged density experienced by the secondary is
substantially lower than the central value.
To date, there is no direct evidence for the presence
of environments in current GW detector data. The most
stringent constraints come from [35], imposing the bound
ρ≲21 g cm −3 on the matter density. More recently, sim-
ilar constraints on scalar-field environments around com-
pact binaries have been obtained from LVK data using a
semi-analytic waveform model based on the nonrelativis-
tic Schr¨ odingerPoisson description of scalar fields around
BH binaries [47]. These constraints apply jointly to cen-
tral halo densities and particle masses, assuming superra-
diant priors. We note that if we apply the model of [41] to
BHs with masses within the LVK range∼(10–100)M ⊙,
we see that in order to obtain GA radii of the order of the
orbital length scale at LIGO frequencies, we require ALP
masses of∼(10 −12–10−13) eV, consistent with the fact
that the de Broglie wavelengths should be of the order of
the gravitational radii of the BHs. However, the densities
involved in this work are∼20 orders of magnitude larger
than those reachable within the formation timescales of
the mechanism we employ.
Throughout this work, we work in Planck units (G=
c=ℏ= 1) and adopt the spacetime signature [−1,1,1,1],
MBH is the mass of the primary central BH in the con-
sidered binaries, where the GA is forming;mis the
mass of the secondary BH; the chirp mass is defined as
Mc = (M BH m)3/5/(MBH +m) 1/5,q=m/M BH is the
mass ratio,Mis the total mass,ρ dm is the background
DM density;m dm is the ALP mass; andf a is the ALP
decay constant.
II. FORMA TION MECHANISM FOR
GRA VIT A TIONAL A TOMS
If the ALP is an axion with mass arising from weakly-
coupled instantons, it would be described by a periodic
potential with the form [41, 48]
V(ϕ) =−m 2
dmf2
a cos
 ϕ
fa

.(1)
wherem dm is the ALP mass andf a is the ALP decay
constant. Expanding the cosine
V(ϕ) = 1
2 m2
dmϕ2 + λ
4! ϕ4 +. . . ,(2)
we recover the case of a scalar field with quartic self-
interactions. The sign ofλdetermines whether the quar-
tic self-interactions are attractive (negative) or repulsive
(positive). It is useful to expressλin terms of a dimen-
sionful couplinggas
λ≡8gm 2
dm,(3)
with|g|= 1/
 
8f2
a

and|λ|= (m dm/fa)2. We conduct
our analysis using the decay constantf a, but the results
can be equivalently expressed in terms of the quartic cou-
plingλ, which provides a more model-independent de-
scription of the self-interactions.
Although some of these particles could couple weakly
to other interactions, such as the QCD axion, which

3
can couple to electromagnetism changing the QED la-
grangian via a termL int =g ϕγγ ϕFµν ˜F µν, whereF µν
is the electromagnetic strength tensor, ˜F µν its dual and
gaγγ is the axion-photon coupling, this is not always guar-
anteed for ALPs. Moreover, there is no direct observa-
tional evidence that DM couples to other Standard Model
sectors. We thus assume that this bosonic DM couples
to gravity, has weak self interactions coming from the
potential (1), and that other possible couplings are very
small.
In the more general case we work with a scalar field on
a generic spacetime background, whose action is given by
S=
Z
d4x√−g
"
1
16π R− 1
2 gµν∇µϕ∇νϕ
− 1
2 m2
dmϕ2 − λ
4! ϕ4
# (4)
Varying this functional with respect to the metric gives
the Einstein field equations coupled to a scalar field
Gµν = 8πTµν,(5)
with the energy-momentum tensor
Tµν =∇ µϕ∇νϕ−g µν
1
2 gλσ∇λϕ∇σϕ
+1
2 m2
dmϕ2 + λ
4! ϕ4
 (6)
Varying this action with respect to the axion fieldϕ, we
obtain the Klein-Gordon equation in a generic spacetime
(□g +m 2
dm)ϕ= λ
3! ϕ3,(7)
where□ gϕ=∇ µ∇µϕis the curved d’Alembertian. This
field equation of motion can be interpreted as arising
from a mean-field approximation, which remains valid
provided the field amplitude is small compared to the
characteristic field range, its de Broglie wavelength is
large relative to astrophysical length scales, and the field
has a high occupation number.
For individual, astrophysical BHs, the full description
would involve solving Eq. (7) for a BH metric. This is
what has usually been done numerically in a great part
of the literature to study the superradiance instability of
vector bosons around Kerr BHs [49, 50].
Fig. 1 shows the normalized density profiles for the
fundamental state of a GA (n= 1), its first excited state
(n= 2) formed by superradiance and a radial profile
for a DM spike [51]. Then= 1, l=m= 0 profile
is centrally peaked and decays monotonically and expo-
nentially from the origin. Then= 2, l=m= 1 profile
instead vanishes at the center, rises to a maximum at fi-
nite radiusr∼ O(a 0), and then decays smoothly at large
radii. In contrast, the DM spike exhibits a steep power-
law cusp near the origin, sharply decreasing and becom-
ing negligible at larger distances. Different DM profiles
FIG. 1: Density profiles for DM overdensities. The GA
fundamental state we are considering,n= 1, l=m= 0,
decays monotonically and exponentially from the origin.
The superradiant,n= 2, l=m= 1 profile, vanishes at
the center, rises to a maximum at finite radius
r∼ O(a 0), and then decays smoothly at large radii. In
contrast, the DM spike is characterized by a
pronounced power-law cusp near the origin, followed by
a rapid decline, becoming negligible at large radii.
Different DM profiles present in EMRIs will produce
different environmental imprints in the GW waveforms.
of halos hosting central massive BHs in EMRIs will pro-
duce different environmental imprints in the GW wave-
forms, potentially allowing us to differentiate between
DM models [52]. Other different DM profiles around BHs
have been used in the literature, such as NFW galactic-
like profiles [53], Hernquist [54] or Einasto [55] profiles.
Most of these profiles are all phenomenological in na-
ture, motivated by N-body simulations or observations,
and derived using Newtonian gravity alone, with the pos-
sible exception of superradiant clouds. Making the same
assumption, by working in the Newtonian regime, with
g00 =−(1 + 2Φ), g ij = (1−2Φ)δ ij where Φ is the New-
tonian gravitational potential, and in terms of a nonrel-
ativistic fieldψdefined as
ϕ≡ 1√2mdm
 
ψe−imdmt +ψ ∗eimdmt
,(8)
in the limit whereψis slowly varying, ˙ψ≪mψ, this
ansatz in Eq. (7) leads to the so-called Gross-Pitaevskii
equation [56, 57].

i∂t + ∇2
2mdm
−m dmΦ

ψ=g|ψ| 2ψ.(9)
There are two interesting choices for the gravitational
potential Φ. One is to take the potential generated by
the bosons themselves, such that we would obtain a self-
gravitating object known as a boson star, which are one
of the most popular exotic compact objects that have

4
been proposed as BH mimickers [58–60]. The other possi-
bility are GAs, which emerge by choosing the Newtonian
potential generated by an external object, i.e. Φ =V ex ≡
−MBH /r. Choosing the latter option, the GP Eq. (9)
reduces to

i∂t + ∇2
2mdm
+ α
r

ψ=g|ψ| 2ψ,(10)
with two couplings: the self interaction couplinggand
a gravitational couplingα≡M BH mdm, which measures
the strength with which the particles are pulled towards
the potential well.
In the absence of self-interactions (g= 0), the previous
equation reduces to the Schr¨ odinger equation with a 1/r
potential, being thus identical to the equation whose so-
lutions are the wave functions of the hydrogen atom, but
instead on depending on the electron massm e and the
fine structure constant (α= e2
4πε0
whereeis the electron
charge andε 0 is the electric constant), it depends on the
axion massm dm and the mass of the astrophysical ob-
jectM BH. These bound states have a Bohr radius of the
form
a0 = (mdmα)−1 = 1
MBH m2
dm
.(11)
Bound solutions (E <0) correspond to the well-known
hydrogenic wave functions, with ground stateψ (0) ∝
e−r/a0 and density profileρ∝e −2r/a0. Unbound so-
MBH
a0
FIG. 2: GA sourced by a BH of massM BH and a
background DM densityρ dm, creating a bosonic cloud
overdensity with density profileρ(r)∝e −2r/a0, with
ρ≫ρ dm. Its Bohr radiusa 0 = 1/(MBH mdm2) is
marked in red.
lutions or scattering states (E >0), correspond to trav-
eling waves which form a continuum of states, Ψ∝ψ k,
are parametrized by a three-vectorkand controlled by a
focusing parameter
ξfoc ≡ λdB
R⋆
.(12)
which is the ratio between the de Broglie wavelength
2π/kanda 0. If a star or BH with massM BH is em-
bedded in the galactic DM halo with local densityρ dm,
ultralight DM waves should encounter and scatter the
object. Forξ f oc ≪1, the DM behaves like a plane wave
and acts as if it is not affected by the external gravita-
tional potential, whereas ifξ f oc ≫1, the DM waves are
distorted and amplified close to and behind the astro-
physical body.
The full solution to Eq. (9), including self-interactions,
has been computed perturbatively for smallgin [41]. The
DM phase-space distribution is modeled as a Gaussian in
terms of the DM virial velocity,v dm and the local back-
ground densityρ dm. These would take different values
for different positions in the galactic DM halo.
By expressingψ=ψ (0)+ψ (1)+ψ (2)+. . ., whereψ (i>0)
indicates the perturbations toψ (0), andψin terms of
the sum of the bounded plus the scattering states,ψ=
ψnlm +ψ k, the perturbative solution for Eq. (10) has
been calculated in two steps:
•Before any bosons are present in the bound state
over times 0< t <∆t, only terms of orderψ (1)
in the perturbative expansion appear in Eq. (10)
and there is a change in the number of particles in
the halo induced by direct capture whose average
is given by
⟨ ˙Nnlm⟩= d
dt ⟨|c(1)
nlm(t)|2⟩.(13)
Herec (1)
nlm are the first order coefficients in the per-
turbative expansion, withl, n, mbeing the quan-
tum numbers for the different hydrogenic states.
•For times longer thant 0 >∆t, a number of bosons
are already present in the bound state. These par-
ticles can stimulate further capture through Bose
enhancement, and be simultaneously depleted via
scattering with the background DM waves. In this
case, the leading contribution to
D
˙Nnlm
E
appears
at second order such that,
D
˙Nnlm
E
= d
dt
c(1)
nlm(t)

2
+ 2
q
N(0)
nlm Re
D
˙c(2)
nlm(t)
E
.
(14)
By adding both Eqs. (13) and (14), and multiplying by
the mass of the ALPm dm, one arrives at the following
equation for the rate of change in the halo mass for a
particular energy level (n, l, m) [41]
˙M nlm
GA =C+ ΓM nlm
GA +. . . .(15)
At early times 0< t <∆t, the mass increases linearly
M nlm
GA (t) =Ct, whereCrepresents the mass accreted
per unit time. Att≃1/|Γ|the stimulated capture and
stripping become relevant.
If Γ<0, stripping overcomes stimulated capture
and the bound mass saturates to the constant value

5
Meq
⋆ ≡C/|Γ|. If Γ>0, stimulated capture over-
comes stripping, and the mass increases exponentially as
Mnlm ∝e Γt, starting from the initial valueC/Γ. The
first case was named as thedilute GAcase, and the
condition for its existence is equivalent to the condition
ξfoc ≡2πα/v dm ≪1. On the other hand, the second
case was named as thedense GAcase, which is equiva-
lent toξ foc ≫1.
This way, the spectrum of bound states Ψ nlm and the
rate of changeN nlm(t) in the number of particles bound
to thenlmlevel were calculated, and the results pro-
vide a formation mechanism for the GA that works over
timescales longer than the coherence time of the ultra-
light fieldτ dm ≡2π/mv 2.
For a dense GA forming in the exponential regime, the
results presented in [41] show that
Γ = 10ρ2
dm
192f4a m3
dmv2
dm
. (16)
and the density profile of the halo in its fundamental
state is given byρ=M (1,0,0)
GA (t)
ψ(1,0,0) (r)
2
, where
M(1,0,0)
GA ≈C 0 exp (Γt) (17)
with
C0 ≡ 8π3/2ρdm
m3
dmv3
dm
.(18)
andψ (1,0,0) is the hydrogen-like wave function in its fun-
damental state,
ψ(1,0,0) = 1p
πa3
0
exp

− r
a0

(19)
putting both together, this leads to the profile
ρ(r, t) = C0
πa3
0
exp (Γt) exp

−2r
a0

. (20)
In [41], the formalism was applied for an ALP withf a =
107GeV andm dm = 10−13eV, to a star like the Sun, and
the results predicted the existence of a GA around the
Sun with a Bohr radius of about 1 AU.
Once the density reaches a critical density
ρcrit ≡16f 2
a m4
dmM2
BH ,(21)
the self-interaction energy is negligible compared to that
of gravity (evaluated atr≃R ⋆). It has been proven
both for the case of Gross-Pitaevskii and in full numerical
relativity that regardless of the quartic coupling sign the
cloud must saturate [43, 44]. Therefore, we will assume
that a saturated cloud always forms, independently of
the sign of the self-interaction coupling.
Fig. (3) shows the contour maps ofρcrit/ρdm, as a func-
tion of the DM particle massm dm and the axion decay
constantf a for two BH massesM BH = 10 4 M⊙ (left)
andM BH = 10 5 M⊙ (right). In both panels the crit-
ical density increases toward the upper-right corner of
the parameter space, i.e., for large values of bothm dm
andf a, consistent with Eq. 21. Superimposed white con-
tour lines indicate the timescaleτ crit (in Myr) (defined
in Eq.24) at which the cloud reaches its critical density,
which follows a similar but slightly rotated gradient di-
rection with respect toρ crit. The overall structure of the
contour maps is consistent between the two BH masses,
with the higher-mass case exhibiting a shifted parameter
range toward slightly larger values off a. Regions where
the formation timescale exceeds the age of the universe
(τ > t universe ≃1.38×10 4 Myr) are astrophysically ir-
relevant, as the GA cannot form within a Hubble time.
The GAs described in our work have different char-
acteristics than those generated by superradiance. No
rotation is required and, for suitable values of the ALP
parameter space, the formation timescales involved are
different. For example, in the case whereM BH mdm ≪
1, the ratio between the generic formation mechanism
timescale (τ GA ≡1/Γ) and the superradiant instability
timescale (τSR) is [15, 61]
τGA
τSR
∼ C f4
a m13
dm M9
BH v2
dm
ρ2
dm
χ ,(22)
whereCis a numerical coefficientO(C)∼1 andχthe di-
mensionless spin of the BH. This relation implies a strong
dependence on the BH mass, scaling asτ GA/τSR ∝M 9
BH.
For representative valuesχ∼0.5,f a ∼10 11 GeV,m dm ∼
10−16 eV, in the mass rangeM BH ∈[10 4,10 8]M ⊙, this
ratio spans many orders of magnitude; it is≪1 for lower
masses, indicating that the self-interaction-driven forma-
tion mechanism is faster than the superradiant instabil-
ity, while for sufficiently large masses it becomes≫1, so
that superradiance dominates.
Notice that not only the formation timescales are radi-
cally different: the growing mode of the GA generated by
self interactions, is in its fundamental state,n= 1 and
l= 0, whereas the dominant growing mode in the su-
perradiant case hasn= 1 andl= 1. Thus, they posses
different density profiles which can have an impact on
their astrophysical signatures.
III. SETUP
In this work we focus on the EMRI scenario, where
a GA is forming around a central massive BH, while a
smaller companion inspirals within the generated over-
density.
Fig. 4 illustrates an EMRI with a primary BH mass
MBH and a secondary with massm. Around the mas-
sive BH a GA is forming from a local background DM
densityρ dm, wherea 0 is the characteristic cloud radius.
The secondary BH orbits the primary on an approxi-
mately circular orbit, depicted as a dashed circle, at a
separationr 2 ≳a 0. As it moves through the cloud, it

6
FIG. 3: Contour maps of the critical densities of the clouds for a BH withM BH = 104M⊙ andρ dm = 103GeV /cm3
(left) andM BH = 105M⊙ andρ dm = 104GeV /cm3(right) as given by 21. The white lines show the different values
of the time at which the cloud reaches its critical densityτ crit in Myrs. The critical density increases asm dm andf a
increase. A similar behavior is observed forτ crit, albeit with a slightly rotated gradient direction.
experiences environmental effects that alter its orbital
evolution, providing a potential observational signature
of the GA through GW emission.
The DM overdensity seen by the secondary BH is going
to be equal to the local density of the GA formed in the
central supermassive BH, evaluated at the companion’s
position plus the background DM density, which will be
negligible with respect to the former for suitable regions
of parameter space. Therefore, from Eq. (20) and using
Kepler‘s lawr=r 2 =
 
MBH /(πfGW)21/3
, we obtain
ρ(fGW , t) =ρ GA +ρ dm =
C0
πa3
0
exp (Γt) exp
 
− 2
a0
M1/3
BH
(πfGW )2/3
!
+ρ dm.(23)
Next, we estimate the timescale over which the GA
reaches saturation density. This critical timeτ crit can be
obtained by equating the GA density atr= 0 to the crit-
ical density at such time, namelyρ(r= 0, τ crit) =ρ crit,
which yields
τcrit = 64m3
dmf4
a v2
dm
ρ2
dm
ln
2π−1/2mdmf2
a v3
dm
MBH ρdm
+ 1

.
(24)
The orbital evolution of the binary can be calculated
from an energy balance equation. Since the dissipation
timescale is much longer than the orbital timescale, the
system evolves adiabatically, and the orbital evolution is
determined by the total power loss from both GW emis-
sion and environmental effects,
˙E=− ˙EGW − ˙EDF − ˙EACC,(25)
where ˙EGW is the energy loss caused by GW emission,
˙EDF is the energy loss caused by dynamical friction (DF)
MBH
a0
m
r2
FIG. 4: An EMRI with a central BH of massM BH
creating a bosonic cloud overdensity and a secondary
BH of massmis placed with its approximate circular
orbit shown as a dashed circle. We expect thatr 2 ≳a 0
in order to see the environmental imprint in the binary
evolution.
and ˙EACC is the energy loss caused by (ACC). HereEis
the total orbital energy, given by
E=− 1
2 M5/3
c M −2/3v2 (26)
and the power emitted by GWs for a circular binary at
leading Post-Newtonian order is given by the standard
quadrupole formula [62], namely
˙EGW = 32
5 M10/3
c M −10/3 v10 (27)

7
For a realistic accretion process 1, arising from flows of
particles falling into the potential of the companion BH,
standard benchmarks such as the Bondi-Hoyle-Lyttleton
accretion rate [63, 64] can be approximately applied for
self-interacting ultralight bosons [44]. This accreted mass
rate can then be written in terms of the density in Eq.
(20) evaluated at the companion positionr 2, namely
˙m=4πλm2ρ(r2(f), t)
(v2 +c 2s)3/2 .(28)
Hereλis a dimensionless fudge factor of order unity that
accounts for the detailed hydrodynamics of the ACC flow,
which we took to beλ= 1, andc s is the sound velocity
of the halo [44], which is given by
c2
s = 3λ ρGA(r2, t)
4m4
dm
.(29)
We have checked that, for all the explored parameter
space (f a, mdm) where we have numerically found de-
phasing,v/c s ≳O(10) and (v 2 +c 2
s)3/2 ≈v 3, at least for
the formation timescales considered in this work.
In this context, Eq. (28) can be used to compute the
power emitted by ACC, assuming thatmin the total
orbital energy depends on time, that is,
˙EACC = 1
2
dm
dt v2 (30)
DF is caused by the gravitational pull of the smaller BH,
which induces a DM overdensity in its wake. This over-
density exerts an attractive force that opposes the mo-
tion, causing the BH to lose energy and momentum. This
effect, first studied by Chandrasekhar for a medium com-
posed of collisionless particles with non-relativistic veloc-
ities [65], was found to be
˙EDF = 4πm2ρ(r2, t)
v I[fGW].(31)
HereIis the Coulomb factor which, for ultralight bosons,
takes the following form [66, 67]
I(x) = Cin(x) + sinc(x)−1, x= 2m dm r v,(32)
where sinc(x) = sin(x)/xand Cin(x)
Cin(x) =−
Z ∞
x
cost
t dt
=γ E + lnx+
Z x
0
cost−1
t dt,
(33)
1 We have also considered the generic formation mechanism in
Eq. (15) as an ACC effect, leading to the perturbative solution
˙m=C0 + Γm. However, we have verified that the accretion de-
scribed by this formation process is completely negligible, since
the binary evolution timescale is not sufficient to generate a sig-
nificant GA overdensity aroundM BH .
withγ E the Euler–Mascheroni constant. By using Eq.
(25) and the different expression for the energy losses
previously discussed (27), (31) and (30), we obtain a dif-
ferential equation for the evolution of the GW frequency
[35], namely
˙fGW = 96
5 π8/3M5/3
c f11/3
GW
+ 12q ρ(f GW , t)|I[fGW]|+ 6q ρ(f GW , t)
(34)
This equation can be solved numerically to obtain the
GW frequency. The phase can be calculated integrating
in time
ϕ(t) = 2π
Z tmax
tmin
fGW(t)dt,(35)
and the number of cycles would beN cyc =ϕ(t)/2π. The
environmental contribution effectively enters the phase
evolution with a negative power of the orbital velocity,
corresponding to a−5.5PN negative PN correction (see
Appendix VII for details). Importantly, this contribu-
tion has a frequency dependence different from the lead-
ing vacuum term,ϕ vac(f)∝ M −5/3
c f −5/3
GW , and therefore
cannot be absorbed into a simple redefinition of the chirp
massM c.
Therefore, the impact of the halo on the inspiral is de-
termined by the interplay between the growth timescale
of the GA, the coalescence timescale of the binary, and
the critical timescale associated with the saturation of the
halo. Observable effects arise when the halo reaches suf-
ficiently large densities many cycles before merger. We
explore the parameter space spanned byf a,m dm and
MBH, fixingρ dm to realistic values andm= 10M ⊙. In
our work we have fixedv dm = 2.4×10 5m/s, noting that
these velocities should change at different galactic posi-
tions, but that choosing different values within a realistic
range does not significantly affect our results.
A. P ARAMETER RANGES
The range of possiblem dm will be determined by the
size of the central BH and the coalescence time. In princi-
ple, there are no strict lower bounds for the ALPs masses
coming from particle physics; however, the de Broglie
wavelength should not exceed the size of the smallest ob-
served structures, givingm dm ≳10 −22 eV [26], while the
Lyman-αforest pushes this bound up tom dm ≳10 −21 eV
[68]. To find observable effects, we need at leasta 0 ≥R s,
whereR s is the Schwarzschild radius of the BH. This sets
a minimumm dm which we will be able to constrain
mmin
dm = 1√
2MBH
.(36)
The minimum values, for the central BH masses explored,
are

8
MBH mmin
dm
104 M⊙ 1.1×10 −14 eV
105 M⊙ 3.47×10 −14 eV
106 M⊙ 1.1×10 −15 eV
107 M⊙ 3.47×10 −15 eV
More precisely, in order to work with a GA description
based on a Newtonian approximation, we should expect
a0 ≫R s. However, for all of the massive BH populations
explored in this work, this condition is naturally satis-
fied within them dm range where measurable dephasing
occurs, mainly because the mass range capable of gen-
erating a halo overdensity within a realistic timescale is
primarily determined by the condition that the de Broglie
wavelength (λdB ∼1/(m dmvdm)) is of the same order as
the BH gravitational radius.
In Fig.5 we show the ratioρ GA/ρdm of the GA den-
sity, as given by Eq.(20), to the background DM density,
for a BH withM BH = 104M⊙ and background density
ρdm = 104GeV/cm3. This ratio, displayed as a function
of the DM particle massm dm, is evaluated at a orbital
separation such thatf(r 2) = 10−4Hz for three represen-
tative values of the ALP decay constantf a. The over-
density is confined to a specific window inm dm. This is
because, at lowm dm,ρ GA(f(r2), t) is suppressed by the
1/a3
0 factor, sincea 0 ∝m −2
dm causes the cloud to become
increasingly diffuse. Conversely, at highm dm, the expo-
nential factore −2r/a0 drives a rapid suppression as the
cloud becomes more compact than the orbital separation.
The resulting peaked structure shifts toward lowerm dm
and reaches different amplitudes for different values offa,
consistent with changes in the GA formation timescales
imposed by this parameter. This behavior directly un-
derlies the triangular morphology seen in the parameter
space maps of Fig. 6. On the other hand, the decay con-
stantf a is a free parameter for ALPs, with a reasonable
range being
108 GeV≲f a ≲10 18 GeV,(37)
where the lower bound comes from astrophysical con-
straints such as stellar cooling and SN1987A by assuming
a coupling to matter [69]. We do not consider any extra
couplings here and will not entertain such small values
for this parameter. The upper bound comes from the
requirement that the effective field theory remains valid
below the Planck scale [48]. In practice, the main impact
that the strength of the self interactions, mediated by
λ= (m dm/fa)2, have in our results, is in how they affect
the formation timescale, via Γ andτ crit.
The broad range of possible values forf a andm dm al-
lows us to find very different values forρ crit and thus
differentτ crit. In the most general case, the GA forma-
tion starts at a different time than the start of the binary
inspiral. We defined this timescale ast 0.
IMBHs or EMBHs, with 10 4 ≲M BH/M⊙ ≲10 7 are
expected to arise atz≳10 through several channels, in-
cluding remnants of massive Population-III stars forming
in minihalos [70] [71], runaway stellar mergers in dense
FIG. 5: Density profile ratios taken at the initial orbital
positionr(f 0 = 10−4Hz) and a BH mass of
MBH = 105M⊙ as a function of the particlem dm. The
overdensity appears within specific ranges ofm dm,
consistent with the physical limits of the profile: at low
mdm, the 1/a 3
0 factor in Eq. (20) suppresses the
overdensity sincea 0 ∝m −2
dm, whereas at highm dm, the
suppression is driven by thee −2r/a0 term. Combined
with the GA formation timescales set byf a.
primordial clusters [72], and direct-collapse scenarios in
atomic cooling halos [73]. In standard cosmology, objects
formed atz∼10–30 have lookback times of∼13.3–
13.7 Gyr, corresponding to∼(0.96–0.99)t universe. We
thus have chosen a reasonable value for the GA formation
starting time oft 0 ∼0.9t universe. Our results are not sig-
nificantly affected by a choice of, e.g.,t 0 ∼0.96t universe,
or less than 0.9t universe; however, the timescales involved
must all be of cosmological order in order to produce
sufficiently dense GAs.
We focus on high but realisticρ dm values. In the inner
regions of the Galaxy, the DM distribution is expected
to follow a centrally concentrated profile, such as a cuspy
Navarro-Frenk-White profile [53]
ρNFW(r) = ρs
(r/rs) (1 +r/r s)2 ,(38)
whereρ s is a characteristic density andr s is the scale
radius of the halo. Typical DM densities therefore in-
crease rapidly toward the galactic center, reaching val-
ues orders of magnitude larger than in the outer regions
of the galaxy. For a Milky-Way-like galaxy, typical val-
ues arer s ∼5 kpc, with a normalization massM 0 =
(4/3πr3
s)ρs ∼3×10 11M⊙ and thusρ s ∼20 GeV cm −3
[74]. At radii much smaller than the scale radius (r≪
rs), the profile approaches a cuspy behavior,
ρNFW(r)≃ρ s
rs
r .(39)
Evaluating this expression at, for example,r∼1 pc

9
yields
ρNFW(1 pc)∼ρ s
5 kpc
1 pc ∼10 4-105 GeV cm−3,(40)
In principle, we can achieve larger values if we go to
smaller values ofr. As we explore different values of
MBH, we choose the smallest order-of-magnitudeρ dm
that produces a detectable effect over a large region of
parameter space. We can increase the reachable GA den-
sities considered in this work if we assume that higher
values can be achieved by the NFW model, or if we as-
sume that the IMRI or EMRI we are focusing on is lo-
cated near the vicinity of a supermassive BH in a galactic
center, where we expect to find a DM overdensity not de-
scribed by the NFW halo model itself, but caused by, for
example, the vicinity of a DM spike. We note however
that the formation formalism will produce a detectable
GA as long asρ dm ≪ρ crit. As we explain in section
IV, we have found that, for bigger BHs, we needed to
increaseρ dm in order to obtain an observable effect.
B. DEPHASING
We have solved numerically Eq. (34) and obtained
the phase by integrating the numerical solution as in
Eq. (35). We used an adaptive step-size integrator based
on the LSODA Python algorithm, which automatically
switches between stiff and non-stiff methods, with rel-
ative and absolute tolerances set to 10 −10 and 10 −15,
respectively. The integration was performed over an in-
terval such that the initial frequency isf 0 = 10 −4Hz
and the final frequency is the one at the Innermost Sta-
ble Orbit (ISCO),f ISCO . For reference, for a BH of mass
MBH = 104M⊙ isf ISCO ≃0.43Hz.
Fig. 6 shows the maximum dephasing computed as
δϕ= max(ϕ DF −ϕ B) between binaries embedded in
the GA overdensity and in the background DM density
ρdm for different values off a andm dm. The integra-
tion is performed over a ten years window, chosen be-
tweenf 0 andf ISCO , such that the maximum dephasing
is achieved. The left panel is forM BH = 10 4M⊙ and
the right panel forM BH = 105M⊙. For the first panel
the maximum dephasing is obtained at values around
mdm = 3.2·10 −15 eV andf a = 1.58·10 11 GeV, whereas
for the second panel, this happens atm dm = 6.3·10 −17
eV andf a = 2·10 12 GeV. The white contour lines de-
note the regions with different values ofτ crit/t0. Reduc-
ingt 0 several orders of magnitude lowers the white line
atτ crit/t0 = 1, shrinks the region in parameter space
with larger dephasing (coloured region) and lowers the
maximum dephasing value. The maximum dephasings
involved shown in Fig. 6 (left), are of the order of les
than one orbital cycle, whereas the maximum density is
of order the critical densityρ crit = 7.25·10 11GeV /cm3.
Several cycles of dephasing can be obtained for these and
other central BH masses if we increaseρ dm, always keep-
ing it lower than the achieved GA density. The achieved
dephasing is detectable by LISA, as we show in section
IV.
Finally, the triangular shape with a diagonal cut in
the white line arises both because the involved formation
timescales, as it is shown in Fig. 3 as given by Eq. (24),
and because of the dependence of the density profile on
the particle parameters given by equation (20) and ilus-
trated in Fig. 5.
IV. DETECT ABILITY AND
DISTINGUISHABILITY
In this section we focus on two distinct but related
questions: first, whether LISA is sensitive enough to de-
tect these signals at all; and second, whether the DM-
induced corrections to the waveform are distinguishable,
both between waveforms generated for different pairs of
(mdm, fa), or from those of a background DM inspiral,
which for small realistic values corresponds effectively to
a vacuum inspiral. A figure of merit of GW analysis is
the mismatch between any two waveforms with strains
h1 andh 2,
M ≡1− ⟨h1 |h 2⟩p
⟨h1 |h 1⟩ ⟨h2 |h 2⟩
.(41)
The noise-weighted inner product is given by
⟨h1 |h 2⟩= 4 Re
Z fmax
fmin
˜h1(f)˜h2(f)
Sn(f) df,(42)
with ˜a(f) denoting the Fourier transform ofa(t) and
Sn(f) the one-sided LISA noise power spectral den-
sity [75]. We define the SNR of a GW signalh(t) as
SNR2 ≡ ⟨h|h⟩.(43)
The distinguishability of two waveforms is defined as (see
Appendix VII for a derivation),
SNR≳ D√
2M
,(44)
whereDis the dimension of the parameter space consid-
ered. This quantity has a direct physical interpretation
as the minimum SNR required to distinguish between
two waveforms at 1−σconfidence level. In our case,
these are waveforms from systems immersed in the GA
overdensity,h GA, and waveforms from systems immersed
in the local DM background,h BG. As we did for the de-
phasing, we have computed the mismatchM(h BG|hGA),
by aligning the signals during 10 years of their respective
evolution, choosing the time window so as to constrain
the largest region of parameter space.
Fig. 7 shows the minimum SNR required to distinguish
a signal embedded in an ALP cloud from its vacuum
counterpart across the ALP parameter space (f a, mdm)
for BH with massesM BH = 104M⊙ (first row),M BH =

10
FIG. 6: Maximum accumulated dephasing, defined as max(ϕ DF −ϕ B) withϕ DF andϕ V being the phase of the
BBH immersed in the GA cloud and in the backgroundρ dm = 104GeV /cm3 andρ dm = 105GeV /cm3, for
MBH = 104M⊙ (left) andM BH = 105M⊙ (right) respectively. White lines denote the quantity τcrit
t0
. The region
where we find visible dephasing forms a triangular shape. This shape is explained both by the dependence ofρ GA in
mdm, and the formation timescales involved for the whole combination of parameters.
105M⊙ (second row) andM BH = (106 −10 7)M⊙ (third
row left and right). The SNR is shown in the range
SNR∼10–100, consistent with expectations for EMRIs
and IMRIs observable by LISA [76]. We set a detectabil-
ity threshold SNR th = 10, such that lower values are
truncated. Thus, we have found that the environmental
effects generated by the cloud are distinguishable from
vacuum evolution across all binary configurations con-
sidered in this work for signal-to-noise ratios SNR≥10,
corresponding to DM densities ofρ dm = 10 3 GeV/cm3
(first row),ρ dm = 104 GeV/cm3 (second row), andρ dm =
(105 −10 7)GeV/cm3 (third row, left and right panels).
We observe a minimum SNR contour region with a tri-
angular shape consistent with the maximum phase de-
viation shown in Fig. 6. This is the region where the
forming or saturated GAs have achieved the maximum
densities permitted by the formation mechanism and its
range in ALP masses is consistent with the halo den-
sity profile given in Eq. 20, which exhibits two distinct
regimes:a 0 ≪r(f GW) anda 0 ≫r(f GW), depending on
the value ofm dm and the position of the orbiting BH,
as illustrated in Fig. 5. The white contour lines mark
regions of different values for,τ crit/t0. Asm dm andf a
increase,τ crit generally becomes larger, consistent with
Eq. (24), shifting the contours toward longer saturation
times. Moreover, higher values ofρ dm are required as
increases. In Fig. 8 we explain this behaviour by plotting
the relative change in the GA density at the companions
initial positionr(10 −4 Hz) with respect toρ dm, for differ-
ent central BH massesM BH. The overdensities increase
with the background local density and reach a plateau
atρ GA =ρ crit. This is because orbiting companions in
EMRIs with more massive central BHs have orbital radii
larger than the radii at which we should find the peak
of the GA density, which should be located at the center
r= 0 (in practice truncated at the horizon). On the other
hand, asM BH increases,m dm must decrease in order to
satisfy the requirementa 0 ≫2m. To achieve sufficiently
high densities, the critical density Eq. (21) requiresf a
to increase accordingly, and since Γ (Eq.(16)) is more
sensitive to changes inf a than inm dm, the background
densityρ dm must compensate by increasing as well. The
plots reveal a degeneracy between the model parameters,
consistent with the analytical structure of Eqs.(16) and
(21): different combinations ofm dm andf a can yield
identical values of both the formation timescale and the
maximum achievable GA density. In Fig. 9, we show the
DM particle parameter range which can be potentially
constrained by this model. We take the minimum and
maximum values for each parameterf a andm dm as the
minimum and maximum values which produce a dephas-
ing detectable with SNR≤100. GAs generated during
cosmological times around different EMRI configurations
can probem dm ∼10 −15–10−19 eV andf a ∼10 11–1017
GeV. This calculation includes both conservative back-
ground DM densities and higher density configurations.
Cases forM BH >10 7M⊙ are not shown but can be com-
puted analogously.
A. P ARAMETER ESTIMA TION
To quantify the precision with which the ALP pa-
rameters (f a, mdm) can be constrained, we performed a
Bayesian parameter estimation analysis by sampling the
posterior distribution from the Fisher-Matrix inspired

11
FIG. 7: Contour maps in the (m dm, fa) parameter space quantifying the distinguishability of GA-induced dephasing
in the waveforms. Each panel corresponds to a different choice of the primary massM BH andρ dm. We show:
{MBH /M⊙, ρdm/(GeV/cm3)}: (upper left){10 4,10 4}, (upper right){10 5,10 5}, (lower left){10 6,10 6}, and (lower
right){10 7,10 7}. The SNR is shown in the range SNR∼20–100, consistent with the expected values for EMRIs and
IMRIs observable by LISA. Values below 10 are disregarded (no detection), while values above 100 are capped. For
higher central BH mass, higherρ dm are needed in order to find sufficient dephasing. High values indicate that the
DM effect is weak and a large SNR would be required to distinguish the waveform from the background DM case,
while low values indicate strong dephasing detectable at modest SNR. White lines denote the quantity log(τ crit/t0)
The white line at log(τ crit/t0) = 0 separates the regions between evolving and saturated GAs. The region forms a
triangular shape. These are explained by the dependence onm dm of the density profile from Eq. 20 and the
formation timescales involved for the whole combination of parameters.
likelihood [77, 78]
logL=−SNR 2 M

hGA(ffid
a , mfid
dm)
 hGA(fa, mdm)

.
(45)
where the mismatchMis computed between a waveform
generated at the fiducial injection values and a template
evaluated at (f a, mdm). We adopt flat priors over the
logarithmic parameter space consistent with the ranges
in Fig. 7 and inject signals at SNR = 20, correspond-
ing to the minimum detection threshold for EMRIs with
LISA [76].
In Fig. 10 we show the resulting posterior distributions
for two representative injection points chosen to lie near
the region of maximum mismatch in each configuration,
as it can be inferred from Fig. 7. Both the injected and
recovered parameters are organized in Table I. In both
cases the posterior peaks at the injected values, confirm-
ing accurate parameter recovery. We found a degeneracy
between the parameters, mainly arising from the struc-
ture of Eqs. 16 and 21, which is also reflected in the
distinguishability contours shown in Fig. 7. The uncer-
tainty onf a ranges from−22.0% to +24.0%, whilem dm
is constrained within−34.6% / +42.7%. For the sec-

12
(MBH , ρdm) (104M⊙,103 GeV/cm3) (105M⊙,104 GeV/cm3)
ffid
a [GeV] 1.585×10 11 1.995×10 12
mfid
dm [eV] 3.162×10 −16 5.888×10 −17
fa [GeV]
 
1.479+0.471
−0.331

×10 11  
1.862+0.486
−0.313

×10 12
mdm [eV]
 
3.162+1.624
−1.073

×10 −16  
6.166+1.597
−1.268

×10 −17
TABLE I: Fiducial and recovered parameter values for the two benchmark configurations.
FIG. 8: Relative change in the GA density at the
companions initial positionr(10 −4 Hz) with respect to
ρdm, for different central BH massesM BH. The
parametersf a, mdm for the different BH masses are
chosen such that they yield the maximum dephasing.
The curves reach a plateau atρ GA =ρ crit
ond configuration the 1σcredible intervals reach−17.4%
/ +24.5% forf a, and−20.9% / +26.3% form dm. We
have focused only on performing parameter estimation
in the ALP parameters because they are completely un-
correlated withM c, which can be recovered from the
quadrupolar vacuum evolution term in Eq. 34. This
same argument applies to any standard effect with a non-
negative PN order, such as spin-orbit coupling (1.5 PN),
spin-spin interactions (2 PN), gravitational self-force cor-
rections at 1 PN and higher, or tidal deformability at
5 PN [79]. Introducing eccentricity would add higher har-
monics atf n =nf orb. At leading adiabatic order and for
quasi-circular inspirals, the cloud-induced dephasing of
the (ℓ, m) harmonic scales linearly with the azimuthal
number,δΦ ℓm ≃ m
2 δΦ22 since all harmonics are sourced
by the same underlying correction to the orbital phase.
Therefore higher modes beyondm= 2 would add phase
information but is not expected to qualitatively alter the
environmental effects signature.
In Fig. 11 we have calculated the fractional parame-
ter uncertaintiesσ θ/θ, for each parameterθ=f a, mdm
and two representative injection points chosen to lie near
FIG. 9: Ranges form dm (upper plot) andf a (lower
plot) that which can be constrained for different BH
massesM BH and background DM densitiesρ dm. These
include three conservative values for
ρdm ∼(10 3 −10 5) GeV/cm3 for the smaller pair of
masses we exploreM BH = 104M⊙ andM BH = 105M⊙,
an more speculative values of
ρdm ∼(10 6 −10 8)GeV /cm3 to the pair of more massive
BHs we exploreM BH = 106M⊙ andM BH = 107M⊙.
We take the minimum and maximum values for each
parameterf a andm dm as the minimum and maximum
values which produce a dephasing detectable with
SNR≤100.
the region of maximum mismatch, as a function of SNR
ρ. They decrease monotonically with increasing SNR
for both parameters, approximately following a SNR −1
scaling consistent with Fisher-matrix expectations. For
SNR = 20, we find fractional uncertainties at the level
ofσ mdm /mdm, σfa /fa ≳10% for the first binary config-
uration andσ mdm /mdm, σfa /fa ≲10% for the second
one. At SNR∼80, these improve to∼2%−3% for
both configurations. These results show that both pa-
rameters can be recovered with small uncertainties for
the expected LISA SNR range between 20−100.
In Fig. 12 we show the spatial distribution ofσ θi /θi
across the (m dm, fa) parameter space for a fixed SNR =
20. These were calculated by recovering different param-
eter injections in logL. By marking in gray the region

13
FIG. 10: Posterior distributions obtained from the likelihoodL=−SNR 2 Mcomparing dynamical-DM waveforms
with injected signals with a conservative SNR = 20. Each panel corresponds to a different binary configuration and
DM density,M BH = 104M⊙,ρ dm = 104GeV /cm3 (left) andM BH = 105M⊙,ρ dm = 105GeV /cm3 (right). The
off-diagonal panel shows the joint posterior, with filled contours enclosing the 68% and 95% credible regions. The
diagonal panels show the marginalized one-dimensional posteriors, with dashed vertical lines indicating the 16th,
50th, and 84th percentiles. Titles report the median and the 1σcredible interval for each parameter. The joint
recovery with four parameters of both the particle and the binary masses does not alter these results due to the PN
order at which the DF effect dominates.
where we have computed the mismatchM(h BG|hGA),
whereh v is the strain in vacuum andh GA is the strain for
EMRIs embedded in a GA, the fractional uncertainties
are smallest in the region of highest mismatch, consistent
with the fact that the regions where the ALP parameters
can be most precisely constrained correspond to those
producing the strongest environmental effect, and thus
the likelihood from Eq. 51 is most sharply peaked.
Specifically, within the most sensitive regions of the
parameter space (yellow points), the fractional uncer-
tainties reach values as low asσ i/θi ≈0.05%−0.3%,
corresponding to∼5%–30%. Toward the periphery of
the dephasing region (dark purple points), the fractional
uncertainties increase toσ X /X∼1.5–3.0, indicating
that parameter recovery becomes significantly degraded.
We note that near the boundary of the detectable re-
gion, where the mismatch approaches zero, the poste-
riors broaden and the parameters become strongly cor-
related. Consequently, parameter estimation should be
treated with caution outside the gray contour region, as
the inherent degeneracies in those regimes prevent a ro-
bust recovery.
V. DISCUSSION
In this work, we have investigated the impact of ALP
self-interactions on the formation and evolution of GA
surrounding massive BHs in EMRIs and IMRIs, and as-
sessed their potential imprint on GW observations in
the LISA band. By incorporating a realistic dynamical
formation mechanism for bosonic halos [41] and model-
ing their effect on binary evolution, we have shown that
these environments can induce observable dephasing in
the GW signal when the cloud becomes sufficiently dense
and long-lived.
We explored ultralight boson massesm dm ≲10 −14 eV,
with self-interactions parametrized by the ALP decay
constantf a, sourced by EMRIs and IMRIs with a cen-
tral BH with mass in the range 10 4–107 M⊙. Therefore,
we have studied the effects of the cloud on the phase
evolution of the small object and compare them to the
EMRI/IMRI scenario in the DM background.
We have found that large values ofm dm lead to the
formation of clouds with small Bohr radii, for which DF
becomes inefficient and the orbit of the secondary re-
mains largely unaffected. Conversely, smaller values of
mdm produce more extended clouds, but with lower den-
sities (ρ∼a −3
0 ), resulting again in a weak impact on the
orbital evolution. As a consequence, only an intermedi-

14
FIG. 11: Fractional parameter uncertaintiesσ fa /fa andσ mdm /mdm as a function of the SNR for different system
configurations from one-dimensional posterior distributions for the injected values log 10(fa) = 11.2
log10(mdm) =−15.5 forM BH = 104M⊙,ρ dm = 104GeV /cm3 (left) and log 10(fa) = 12.3 log10(mdm) =−16.2 for
MBH = 105M⊙,ρ dm = 105GeV /cm3 (right). As expected from Fisher-matrix theory, the fractional uncertainties
decrease monotonically with increasing SNR, approximately following a SNR −1 scaling.
ate range ofm dm andf a leads to significant dephasing
in the GW signal.
On the other hand, the set of values off a, given a
particular range of boson masses, sets the timescale and
critical density at which the GAs form, such that the
values of the decay constants explored here are such so
the timescales involved in order to achieve sufficiently
high densities are of the order of the age of the universe.
Our results show that LISA could probe boson masses
in the approximate rangem dm ∼(10 −17–10−15) eV and
decay constantsf a ∼(3×10 10–6×10 12) GeV under con-
servative assumptions for the ambient DM density in the
rangeρ dm ∼(10 3 −104)GeV /cm3 and central BH masses
ofM BH ∼(10 4–105 M⊙). Using a Fisher Matrix frame-
work, we have studied the fractional uncertaintiesσ θi /θi
change for bothm dm. For SNR = 20 these range from
less than∼10% in the high-mismatch region to∼50%–
80%. In both configurations, points lying closer to the re-
gion of high mismatch exhibit systematically smaller frac-
tional uncertainties, consistent with the expectation that
stronger DM induced dephasing leads to tighter poste-
rior distributions, and become increasingly degenerate in
the boundaries of this region. For increasing SNR these
uncertainties decrease monotonically, approximately fol-
lowing a SNR −1 scaling. For SNR≳80 and masses
MBH = 104M⊙ andM BH = 105M⊙, the fractional un-
certainties on the halo parameters improve to near the
percent.
Allowing for background density orders of magnitude
higher,ρ dm ∼(10 6 −10 7)GeV /cm3, we show that the
range of parameters over which we can impose con-
straints gets broader, up tof a ∼10 16 GeV and down to
mdm ∼ ×10 −19 eV. This combination of tiny masses and
highly suppressed couplings situates the field well beyond
the reach of laboratory-based searches, instead pointing
to ALPs arising from high-energy symmetry breaking or
compactification scenarios [31], naturally interpreted as
members of the broader ”axiverse” predicted in many ul-
traviolet completions. Although the misalignment mech-
anism for a conventional axion potential underproduces
the DM abundance for the plotted values ofm dm and
fa, other scalar potentials or different production mech-
anisms could provide the correct abundance [41]. We
note however that these constraints can be made model-
independent by changingf a forλ, and that the particles
are inferred solely through their gravitational influence,
mirroring the only interaction for which DM currently
has direct empirical support.
Our results are broadly consistent with previous stud-
ies in the sense that self-interacting bosonic environments
can produce measurable dephasing in the LISA band, but
the physical regime considered here is different. Equilib-
rium and self-gravitating configurations, such as those
studied in Refs. [44–46], can reach much larger central
densities, and therefore often predict larger environmen-
tal effects. In our case, however, the cloud is not imposed
as an equilibrium overdensity: it is generated dynami-
cally from a realistic ambient halo density through the
capture mechanism of Ref. [41]. As a result, the maxi-
mum cloud mass remains small,∼10 −6MBH, so neglect-
ing the self-gravity of the cloud and treating the potential
as dominated by the host BH is self-consistent. This also
explains why the dephasings we obtain are smaller than
in some equilibrium-cloud models, while remaining de-
tectable by LISA in a well-defined region of parameter
space.
An important extension of this work would be the in-
clusion of eccentric EMRI configurations. In this paper,
we have restricted our analysis to quasi-circular inspi-
rals, which provide a useful first approximation but do

15
FIG. 12: Fractional parameter uncertainties for the DM halo parametersm dm (left panels) andf a (right panels),
obtained from one-dimensional posterior distributions at each injection point in the (m dm, fa) parameter space with
SN R= 20. These are forM BH = 104M⊙ withρ dm = 104GeV /cm3 for the upper plots andM BH = 105M⊙ with
ρdm = 105GeV /cm3 for the lower plots. The parameter ranges off a andm dm are chosen to coincide with the
regions of detectable mismatch between waveforms produced by binaries embedded in the background DM density
and in a GA, which are marked in gray. Lighter (yellow) colors indicating better parameter recovery. Points closer
to the region of high mismatch (or less needed SNR to be detectable as in Fig. 7) show smaller fractional
uncertainties, consistent with the expectation that better-constrained parameters correspond to stronger DM
induced dephasing. For both configurations, fractional uncertainties range from∼20%–80% in the high mismatch
region up to∼150%–200% near the boundaries, for bothm dm andf a. Towards these boundaries, the parameters
become increasingly degenerate, leading to reduced robustness in the inferred uncertainties.

16
not capture the full range of astrophysically relevant sce-
narios. Eccentricity can significantly affect both the or-
bital evolution and the GW signal, potentially enhanc-
ing or modifying the impact of the boson cloud on the
phase evolution. Another possible extension could be in-
cluding the effects of DF on the higher harmonics of the
GW signal, which enter the phase evolution in a man-
ner analogous to the dominant (2,2) mode. Specifically,
for a given harmonic (ℓ, m), the phase contribution from
DF can be expressed as a simple scaling of the domi-
nant mode phaseϕ DF
ℓm = m
2 ϕDF
22 , whereϕ DF
22 denotes the
DF-induced phase shift of the (2,2) mode. This rela-
tion allows one to incorporate DF consistently across all
relevant harmonics without recalculating the phase from
scratch for each mode.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Joshua Eby, Laura Sberna and Gianfranco
Bertone for insightful comments on this work.
This work was supported by the Universitat de
les Illes Balears (UIB) with funds from the Pro-
grama de Foment de la Recerca i la Innovaci´ o de
la UIB 2024-2026 (supported by the yearly plan of
the Tourist Stay Tax ITS2023-086); Spanish Minis-
terio de Ciencia, Innovaci´ on y Universidades (Beat-
riz Galindo, BG22-00034), the Spanish Agencia Es-
tatal de Investigaci´ on grants PID2022-138626NB-I00,
RED2024-153978-E, RED2024-153735-E, funded by MI-
CIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and the ERDF/EU;
and the Comunitat Aut` onoma de les Illes Balears through
the Conselleria d’Educaci´ o i Universitats with funds from
the ERDF (SINCO2022/18146 - Plataforma HiTech-
IAC3-BIO).
The authors thankfully acknowledge the computer re-
sources at MareNostrum 5 and the technical support pro-
vided by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC)
through grants No. RES-AECT-2025-3-0048, RES-
AECT-2025-3-0011, RES-AECT-2025-3-0040 and from
the Red Espa˜ nola de Supercomputaci´ on (RES).
The authors gratefully acknowledge the computer re-
sources at Artemisa, funded by the European Union
and the Conselleria of Education, Research, Culture
and Sports of the Generalitat Valenciana through the
Project IDIFEDER/2018/048 of the Operative Pro-
gramme FEDER 2014-2020 of the Comunitat Valen-
ciana, with the financial support from the MCIU
with funds from the European Union NextGenera-
tionEU (PRTR-C17.I01) and Generalitat Valenciana
(ASFAE/2022/024), as well as the technical support
provided by the Instituto de F´ ısica Corpuscular, IFIC
(CSIC-UV).
VII. APPENDIX
A. Parameter estimation and assessment of
detectability
We compare two waveforms by computing their mis-
match
M ≡1− ⟨h1|h2⟩p
⟨h1|h1⟩⟨h2|h2⟩
.(46)
The noise-weighted inner product is given by
⟨h1|h2⟩= 4 Re
Z fmax
fmin
˜h1(f) ˜h∗
2(f)
Sn(f) df,(47)
with ˜a(f) denoting the Fourier transform ofa(t) and
Sn(f) the one-sided LISA noise power spectral density
[80]. We define the SNR of a GW signalh(t) as
SNR2 ≡ ⟨h|h⟩.(48)
For a model described by parametersθ= (θ 1, θ2, . . . , θn),
with observed datad, and given the likelihoodL(θ) =
P(d|θ), we sample the posterior distribution defined by
Bayes’ theorem,
P(θ|d) = P(d|θ)P(θ)
P(d) ,(49)
whereP(θ|d) is the posterior probability distribution of
the parameters,P(θ) is the prior, and
P(d)≡ Z=
Z
P(d|θ)P(θ) dθ(50)
is the Bayesian evidence (or marginal likelihood), which
acts as a normalization constant independent ofθ. For
parameter estimation, inference is based on the posterior,
while for model selection one compares evidences.
Neglecting noise, the log-likelihood for a GW signalh 1
and templateh 2 reduces to
logL ≃ − 1
2 ⟨h1 −h 2 |h 1 −h 2⟩+ const,(51)
where the additive constant depends only onS n(f) and
is independent of the waveform parametersθ, so it plays
no role in parameter estimation. Assuming that both
waveforms have the same norm,⟨h 1|h1⟩=⟨h 2|h2⟩=
SNR2, which holds when the two signals differ only in
phase and time of coalescence and not in amplitude, we
expand the inner product:
⟨h1 −h 2 |h 1 −h 2⟩=⟨h 1|h1⟩+⟨h 2|h2⟩ −2⟨h 1|h2⟩
= 2 SNR2 −2⟨h 1|h2⟩
= 2 SNR2 M,(52)
where in the last step we used the definition (46), with
⟨h1|h2⟩. Thus, dropping the additive constant, the log-
likelihood can be approximated as
logL ∼ −SNR 2 M.(53)

17
On the other hand, in the high-SNR regime, which is par-
ticularly relevant for long-lived LISA sources, the norm
of the waveform differenceδh=h 1 −h 2 can be approxi-
mated as [81]
∆ logL= logL(θ 1)−logL(θ 2)
≃ 1
2 ⟨δh|δh⟩= 1
2 |δh|2.(54)
A standard criterion for two signals to be observationally
distinguishable is that the likelihood changes by anO(1)
amount, i.e.
|δh|≳1.(55)
For nearby signals (M ≪1), expanding to leading order
inMgives
|δh|2 = 2⟨h|h⟩ M= 2 SNR 2 M.(56)
Combining (55) and (56) immediately yields the de-
tectability requirement
SNR≳ 1√
2M
.(57)
This relation shows that smaller waveform mismatches
require proportionally higher SNR to be distinguishable
in the data.
B. Post-Newtonian terms
We have considered the case of an evolving GA with a
radial profile, and have shown that the timescale for the
halo formation is generally longer than the timescale for
the binary evolution. Focusing on the region of parame-
ter space (fa, mdm) which causes a higher mismatch with
respect to the vacuum waveforms, by making the approx-
imationρ GA ∼ρ crit = 16f 2
a m4
dmM2
BH, the accumulated
orbital phase depending on frequency can be computed
analytically in terms
t(fGW) =
Z f max
GW
f min
GW
df ′
GW
1
fGW
=
= f2
GWπ
12q ρ 2F1
 
6
11 ,1; 17
11;− 8f11/3
GW M5/3
BH π8/3
5ρ
!
(58)
ϕ(fGW) =
Z f max
GW
f min
GW
df ′
GW
2πf ′
GW
f ′
GW
=
= fGW
12q ρ fGW 2F1
 
3
11 ,1; 14
11;− 8f11/3
GW m5/3π8/3
5ρ
!
(59)
whereρ=ρ(f, t) is given by (20). Although exact, the
expressions in (58) and (59) involve Gauss hypergeomet-
ric functions 2F1 whose argument mixes contributions
from all PN orders, making it impossible to read off the
PN order of the DF correction directly from these results
without. In the lines of [35], is possible to expand the
integrand forρ GAm≪1 and use the stationary phase
approximation. At leading post-Newtonian order and for
the dominantm= 2 harmonic, the Fourier transforms of
the plus and cross polarizations read [81]
˜h+,×(fGW ) =A +,×(fGW )e iϕ+,×(fGW ),(60)
Focusing on the phase, this is given for both polarizations
as
ϕ+ ≈2πf GW t(fGW )−φ(f GW )− π
4 (61)
ϕ× =ϕ + + π
2 (62)
By and this approximation for the integrands in (58) and
(59) leads to the result for the phase
ϕ+ ≈2πf t c −φ c − π
4
+ 3
128ηπ5/3M5/3f5/3
GW
(1 +δ DF +δ ACC)
(63)
where
δDF ≈ − 25ρ
304

π8/3η2M5/3
BH f11/3
GW
 .(64)
δACC ≈ − 125ρ
1824π 8/3η3M5/3
BH f11/3
GW
(65)
as in [35]. In order to identify the leading PN order
for this term, we just have to recall that at 0PN, the
GW phase evolution scales as ˙fGW ∝f 11/3
GW , with PN
parameterx∼(πM BH fGW)2/3. Sinceδ DF ∝f −11/3
GW ∼
x−11/2, it corresponds to a−11/2 =−5.5PN correction.
In the limitf a → ∞ ⇒ρ→0, the standard vacuum
frequency evolution is recovered.
In order to identify the leading PN order for this
term, we just have to recall that at 0PN, the GW phase
evolution scales as ˙fGW ∝f 11/3
GW , with PN parameter
x∼(πM BH fGW)2/3. Sinceδ DF ∝f −11/3
GW ∼x −11/2, it
corresponds to a−11/2 =−5.5PN correction. Similarly,
sinceδ ACC ∝v −11 ∼x −11/2, it also enters at−5.5PN
order. In the limitf a → ∞ ⇒ρ→0, the standard
vacuum frequency evolution is recovered.
Because these corrections enter at negative PN order,
they are particularly relevant for the early inspiral. The
distinct frequency scaling of the−5.5PN term prevents
it from being absorbed into a redefinition of the chirp
mass, and explains why we did not find any correlation
in the parameter estimation for the DM parameters and
the binary intrinsic parameters.

18
[1] B. P. Abbottet al., Physical Review X9(2019),
10.1103/physrevx.9.031040.
[2] R. Abbottet al., Physical Review X11(2021),
10.1103/physrevx.11.021053.
[3] R. Abbottet al., Physical Review X13(2023),
10.1103/physrevx.13.041039.
[4] T. L. S. Collaboration, the Virgo Collaboration, and
the KAGRA Collaborationo, “Gwtc-4.0: Updating the
gravitational-wave transient catalog with observations
from the first part of the fourth ligo-virgo-kagra observ-
ing run,” (2025), arXiv:2508.18082 [gr-qc].
[5] M. Colpiet al., “Lisa definition study report,” (2024),
arXiv:2402.07571 [astro-ph.CO].
[6] A. Abacet al., Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle
Physics2026, 081 (2026).
[7] M. Branchesiet al., Journal of Cosmology and Astropar-
ticle Physics2023, 068 (2023).
[8] M. Maggioreet al., Journal of Cosmology and Astropar-
ticle Physics2020, 050050 (2020).
[9] K. G. Arunet al., Living Reviews in Relativity25(2022),
10.1007/s41114-022-00036-9.
[10] A. Askaret al., Classical and Quantum Gravity36,
143001 (2019).
[11] N. Yunes and X. Siemens, Living Rev. Rel.16, 9 (2013),
arXiv:1304.3473 [gr-qc].
[12] V. Cardoso, S. Hopper, C. F. Macedo, C. Palenzuela,
and P. Pani, Physical Review D94(2016), 10.1103/phys-
revd.94.084031.
[13] E. Bertiet al., “Black hole spectroscopy: from theory to
experiment,” (2025), arXiv:2505.23895 [gr-qc].
[14] G. Bertone, D. Croon, M. Amin, K. K. Boddy, B. Ka-
vanagh, K. J. Mack, P. Natarajan, T. Opferkuch,
K. Schutz, V. Takhistov, C. Weniger, and T.-T.
Yu, SciPost Physics Core3(2020), 10.21468/scipost-
physcore.3.2.007.
[15] R. Brito, V. Cardoso, and P. Pani,Superradiance: New
Frontiers in Black Hole Physics(Springer International
Publishing, 2020).
[16] V. Cardoso, . J. Dias, G. S. Hartnett, M. Middleton,
P. Pani, and J. E. Santos, Journal of Cosmology and
Astroparticle Physics2018, 043043 (2018).
[17] R. Brito, S. Ghosh, E. Barausse, E. Berti, V. Cardoso,
I. Dvorkin, A. Klein, and P. Pani, Physical Review D96
(2017), 10.1103/physrevd.96.064050.
[18] C. F. B. Macedo, P. Pani, V. Cardoso, and L. C. B.
Crispino, The Astrophysical Journal774, 48 (2013).
[19] K. Eda, Y. Itoh, S. Kuroyanagi, and J. Silk,
Physical Review Letters110(2013), 10.1103/phys-
revlett.110.221101.
[20] K. Eda, Y. Itoh, S. Kuroyanagi, and J. Silk, Physical
Review D91(2015), 10.1103/physrevd.91.044045.
[21] B. J. Kavanagh, D. A. Nichols, G. Bertone, and D. Gag-
gero, Physical Review D102(2020), 10.1103/phys-
revd.102.083006.
[22] F. Duque, C. F. Macedo, R. Vicente, and V. Car-
doso, Physical Review Letters133(2024), 10.1103/phys-
revlett.133.121404.
[23] M. Sasaki, T. Suyama, T. Tanaka, and S. Yokoyama,
Classical and Quantum Gravity35, 063001 (2018).
[24] N. Bartolo, V. De Luca, G. Franciolini, M. Peloso,
D. Racco, and A. Riotto, Physical Review D99(2019),
10.1103/physrevd.99.103521.
[25] G. Arcadi, D. Cabo-Almeida, M. Dutra, P. Ghosh,
M. Lindner, Y. Mambrini, J. P. Neto, M. Pierre, S. Pro-
fumo, and F. S. Queiroz, The European Physical Journal
C85(2025), 10.1140/epjc/s10052-024-13672-y.
[26] E. G. M. Ferreira, The Astronomy and Astrophysics Re-
view29(2021), 10.1007/s00159-021-00135-6.
[27] L. Hui, J. P. Ostriker, S. Tremaine, and E. Witten, Phys.
Rev. D95, 043541 (2017).
[28] R. D. Peccei and H. R. Quinn, Phys. Rev. Lett.38, 1440
(1977).
[29] S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett.40, 223 (1978).
[30] F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett.40, 279 (1978).
[31] A. Arvanitaki, S. Dimopoulos, S. Dubovsky, N. Kaloper,
and J. March-Russell, Physical Review D81(2010),
10.1103/physrevd.81.123530.
[32] P. Svrcek and E. Witten, Journal of High Energy Physics
2006, 051051 (2006).
[33] E. Barausse, V. Cardoso, and P. Pani, Physical Review
D89(2014), 10.1103/physrevd.89.104059.
[34] E. Barausse, V. Cardoso, and P. Pani, Journal of
Physics: Conference Series610, 012044 (2015).
[35] G. Caneva Santoro, S. Roy, R. Vicente, M. Haney, O. J.
Piccinni, W. Del Pozzo, and M. Martinez, Phys. Rev.
Lett.132, 251401 (2024), arXiv:2309.05061 [gr-qc].
[36] H. Zhao and J. Silk, Physical Review Letters95(2005),
10.1103/physrevlett.95.011301.
[37] P. S. Cole, G. Bertone, A. Coogan, D. Gaggero, T. Kary-
das, B. J. Kavanagh, T. F. M. Spieksma, and G. M.
Tomaselli, “Disks, spikes, and clouds: distinguishing en-
vironmental effects on bbh gravitational waveforms,”
(2022), arXiv:2211.01362 [gr-qc].
[38] W. H. Press and S. A. Teukolsky, Nature238, 211 (1972).
[39] D. Baumann, G. Bertone, J. Stout, and G. M.
Tomaselli, Physical Review D105(2022), 10.1103/phys-
revd.105.115036.
[40] G. M. Tomaselli, T. F. Spieksma, and G. Bertone, Jour-
nal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics2023, 070
(2023).
[41] D. Budker, J. Eby, M. Gorghetto, M. Jiang, and
G. Perez, “A generic formation mechanism of ultralight
dark matter solar halos,” (2023), arXiv:2306.12477 [hep-
ph].
[42] H. S. Chia, C. Doorman, A. Wernersson, T. Hinderer,
and S. Nissanke, JCAP04, 018 (2023), arXiv:2212.11948
[gr-qc].
[43] J. C. Aurrekoetxea, J. Marsden, K. Clough, and P. G.
Ferreira, Physical Review D110(2024), 10.1103/phys-
revd.110.083011.
[44] A. Boudon, P. Brax, P. Valageas, and L. K. Wong, Phys-
ical Review D109(2024), 10.1103/physrevd.109.043504.
[45] A. Banik, J. H. Kim, and X.-Y. Yang, “Boson stars
hosting black holes,” (2025), arXiv:2511.03788 [gr-qc].
[46] P.-H. Chavanis, Eur. Phys. J. Plus134, 352 (2019),
arXiv:1909.04709 [gr-qc].
[47] S. Roy, R. Vicente, J. C. Aurrekoetxea, K. Clough,
and P. G. Ferreira, Physical Review Letters136(2026),
10.1103/fv9z-zkxx.
[48] D. J. Marsh, Physics Reports643, 179 (2016).
[49] D. Pereiguez, M. de Amicis, R. Brito, and R. P.
Macedo, Physical Review D110(2024), 10.1103/phys-

19
revd.110.104001.
[50] J. C. Degollado, C. A. Herdeiro, and E. Radu, Physics
Letters B781, 651655 (2018).
[51] P. Gondolo and J. Silk, Physical Review Letters83,
17191722 (1999).
[52] P. S. Cole, G. Bertone, A. Coogan, D. Gaggero, T. Kary-
das, B. J. Kavanagh, T. F. M. Spieksma, and G. M.
Tomaselli, Nature Astronomy7, 943950 (2023).
[53] J. F. Navarro, C. S. Frenk, and S. D. M. White, The
Astrophysical Journal490, 493508 (1997).
[54] J. Einasto, Trudy Astrofizicheskogo Instituta Alma-Ata
5, 87 (1965).
[55] L. Hernquist, Astrophys. J.356, 359 (1990).
[56] E. P. Gross, Nuovo Cim.20, 454 (1961).
[57] L. Pitaevskii, Physics Letters A221, 1418 (1996).
[58] S. L. Liebling and C. Palenzuela, Living Reviews in Rel-
ativity26(2023), 10.1007/s41114-023-00043-4.
[59] M. Bezares, C. Palenzuela, and C. Bona, Physical Re-
view D95(2017), 10.1103/physrevd.95.124005.
[60] M. Bezares and C. Palenzuela, Classical and Quantum
Gravity35, 234002 (2018).
[61] S. R. Dolan, Physical Review D76(2007), 10.1103/phys-
revd.76.084001.
[62] M. Maggiore,Gravitational Waves: Volume 1: Theory
and Experiments(Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK,
2008).
[63] H. Bondi, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.112, 195 (1952).
[64] H. Bondi and F. Hoyle, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.104,
273 (1944).
[65] S. Chandrasekhar, Astrophysical Journal97(1943),
10.1086/144517.
[66] L. Hui, J. P. Ostriker, S. Tremaine, and E. Witten, Phys-
ical Review D95(2017), 10.1103/physrevd.95.043541.
[67] D. Traykova, R. Vicente, K. Clough, T. Helfer, E. Berti,
P. G. Ferreira, and L. Hui, Physical Review D108
(2023), 10.1103/physrevd.108.l121502.
[68] V. Iri, M. Viel, M. G. Haehnelt, J. S. Bolton, and
G. D. Becker, Physical Review Letters119(2017),
10.1103/physrevlett.119.031302.
[69] G. Raffelt and A. Caputo, inProceedings of 1st Gen-
eral Meeting and 1st Training School of the COST Ac-
tion COSMIC WSIPers PoS(COSMICWISPers), COS-
MICWISPers (Sissa Medialab, 2024) p. 041.
[70] P. Madau and M. J. Rees, The Astrophysical Journal
551, L27L30 (2001).
[71] A. Heger, C. L. Fryer, S. E. Woosley, N. Langer, and
D. H. Hartmann, The Astrophysical Journal591, 288300
(2003).
[72] S. F. Portegies Zwart and S. L. W. McMillan, The As-
trophysical Journal576, 899907 (2002).
[73] A. Loeb and F. A. Rasio, The Astrophysical Journal432,
52 (1994).
[74] X. Ou, A.-C. Eilers, L. Necib, and A. Frebel, “The dark
matter profile of the milky way inferred from its circular
velocity curve,” (2023), arXiv:2303.12838 [astro-ph.GA].
[75] P. Amaro-Seoaneet al., “Laser interferometer space an-
tenna,” (2017), arXiv:1702.00786 [astro-ph.IM].
[76] L. C. W. W. Group, “Waveform modelling for the laser
interferometer space antenna,” (2023), arXiv:2311.01300
[gr-qc].
[77] X. Jim´ enez Forteza, T. Abdelsalhin, P. Pani, and
L. Gualtieri, Phys. Rev. D98, 124014 (2018),
arXiv:1807.08016 [gr-qc].
[78] K. Chatziioannou, A. Klein, N. Yunes, and N. Cornish,
Phys. Rev. D95, 104004 (2017), arXiv:1703.03967 [gr-
qc].
[79] L. Blanchet, “Post-newtonian theory for gravitational
waves,” (2024), arXiv:1310.1528 [gr-qc].
[80] T. Robson, N. J. Cornish, and C. Liu, Classical and
Quantum Gravity36, 105011 (2019).
[81] C. Cutler and . E. Flanagan, Physical Review D49,
26582697 (1994).