Title: Mars, a Post-Habitable Planet?
Authors: Matteo Crismani, Richard Cartwright, Michael Chaffin, Sara Faggi, Stephanie Milam, Geronimo Villanueva
Published: 2026-05-22
Categories: astro-ph.IM, astro-ph.EP

1 
Mars, a Post-Habitable Planet? 
Authors: Matteo Crismani matteo.crismani@csusb.edu, Richard Cartwright, Michael Chaffin, 
Sara Faggi, Stephanie Milam, Geronimo Villanueva  
 
1. Introduction: Mars provides a critical analog to once habitable exoplanets that have 
since lost their surface liquid water. The current atmospheric state of Mars retains the 
chemical fingerprints of that transition, including isotopic signatures of atmospheric 
escape and climate evolution. As the closest accessible example of a terrestrial world 
with definitive evidence for once supporting liquid water on its surface, Mars presents a 
unique opportunity to test hypotheses about planetary habitability and atmospheric 
evolution in a spatially and temporally resolved way.  
 
Observations of Mars with HWO will inform the interpretation of exoplanet spectra by 
helping to constrain climate models, water loss estimates, and understanding of 
atmospheric escape. Such observations will also support our understanding of the 
variability and physical processes that drive Martian climate today, including cloud and 
dust storm formation, as well as atmospheric circulation.  
 
 
Figure 1: Potentially habitable planets presented in relation to a conservative and optimistic 
habitable zone boundary (Image Credit: G. Lowry). We have included Mars, which receives ~44% 
of the terrestrial insolation. Mars is scaled to match its relative size to Earth and is clearly within 
the “Conservative Habitable Zone” but has long since lost habitability. 
 


2 
While HWO will not achieve the fine spatial resolution of in situ spacecraft or orbiters, it 
will offer unparalleled spectral resolution and signal-to-noise, particularly in the 
ultraviolet, providing an essential complement to ongoing and future Mars missions. 
HWO's ability to observe the full Martian disk and exosphere in temporally resolved 
campaigns could be transformative for multi-scale atmospheric modeling and (via 
dayside aurora measurements) magnetospheric modeling, especially when used in 
conjunction with orbital datasets. 
  
Beyond its scientific value, HWO’s observations could serve a dual role in supporting 
operational planning for robotic and human exploration. One speculative but compelling 
opportunity is the development of space weather and climate services for Mars. Global 
dust storms remain largely unpredictable beyond a few days, yet they pose significant 
risks to solar power generation, surface visibility, and potentially to landing systems for 
future crewed missions. HWO’s long-term monitoring of dust opacity, cloud formation, 
and atmospheric motion, particularly wind patterns, could help establish predictive 
thresholds for when regional dust events are likely to grow into planet encircling dust 
storms. Improved wind vector measurements from HWO observations would provide 
critical constraints on atmospheric models, enhancing their utility for short-term 
forecasting. In this way, HWO could lay the foundation for global Martian weather 
prediction, a direct benefit to mission planning and surface asset safety. 
 

3 
 
Figure 2: Mid-UV (200 - 340 nm) observations of Mars from the orbiting MAVEN spacecraft 
highlighting the presence of ozone (pink), clouds forming above the Tharsis volcano region 
(white) and regional dust events (reddish brown). While HWO may not achieve spatial resolutions 
at this scale, the increased spectral resolution and signal to noise will provide an invaluable 
resource to advance Mars science. (Image Credit: NASA, MAVEN, University of Colorado) 
 
2. Science Goal: Quantify Mars as an analog to young habitable exoplanets and 
characterize the conditions for and processes leading to loss of habitability. 
Understanding present day Mars is a necessary prerequisite for building confidence in 
models that describe ancient Mars, a planet warm and wet enough to support rivers and 
lakes, even if only transiently, and by analogy, understand rocky exoplanets near the 
edge of the star’s habitable zone, which might experience transient surface habitability, 
or subsurface habitability (i.e., in an ocean beneath a global ice layer as hypothesized 
for Kepler 62f and other “cold ocean” exoplanets).  


4 
 
Figure 3: (Top) An observed spectrum of Mars in the UV from MAVEN, which demonstrates the 
variation in the airglow layer as a function of altitude, and the source of the emissions. (Image 
Credit: Jain et al. 2015) (Bottom) An observed spectrum of Mars compared to the best fit model in 
the IR from JWST, with several important molecular absorption features. (Image Credit: NASA, 
ESA, CSA, STScI, Mars JWST/GTO Team) 
 
3. Science Objectives:  
 
● Measure spatial and temporal variability in the upper atmosphere atomic D/H ratio 
and/or lower atmosphere H2O/HDO which serve as traces (and tracers) of atmospheric 
escape and water loss. 
● Track clouds, ozone, and dust across Martian seasons and years to constrain drivers of 
the current Martian climate.  
● Observe the Martian atmosphere from the UV through NIR to build comprehensive 
models of composition, circulation, and variability.  


5 
● Conduct short term campaigns (hours to days) for cloud and atmospheric motion 
tracking, and long-term campaigns (over months to years) to capture seasonal and 
interannual variations.  
● Investigate coronal emissions of H, C and O atoms in the UV to quantify atmospheric 
loss to space. 
● Constrain magnetospheric structure and processes via observations of dayside spectral 
signatures of precipitating particles, including solar-wind driven proton aurora and patchy 
proton aurora observable as Doppler-shifted H spectrum emission. 
 
4. Physical Parameters: 
● Dayside atmospheric composition, including water vapor, ozone, isotopic ratios, 
as a function of latitude, longitude, local time, and season.  
● Temporal changes in clouds, dust, and ozone in reflected and emitted light 
across UV to IR wavelengths.  
● Full disk brightness and morphology of the disk, atmosphere and corona as Mars 
rotates (diurnal / longitudinal changes) and otherwise evolves with time 
(responding to solar input, dust activity, seasonal, and interannual variations). 
● Coronal hydrogen, carbon, oxygen emissions in the FUV and MUV. 
  
5. Description of Observations: A UV/VIS Integral Field Spectrograph (IFS) on HWO 
offers an ideal platform for addressing these goals. A later generation NIR IFS would 
provide highly complementary data. Observations would include: 
  
● Full disk and coronal imaging spectroscopy of Mars during various phases of the 
Martian year. IFS mosaic-ing may enhance spatial resolution at the cost of 
temporal observation cadence of the full disk. 
● UV observations of thermospheric and coronal composition, and lower 
atmosphere ozone, ideal wavelength range: ~80 - 700 nm, minimum wavelength 
range: ~100 - 400 nm  
● NIR (up to 1.5 micron) observations for water vapor and isotopic ratios 
● Multiwavelength snapshots of Mars’ dayside 
● Coordinated rapid response campaigns for events like dust storms or solar 
events 
● Contemporaneous or simultaneous multiband observations to characterize 
atmospheric motion and compositional changes.  
 
6. Impact on Requirements: Designing HWO for Mars observations would have a modest 
impact on design requirements, with the main challenge being the brightness of the NUV 
+ Visible dayside disk. As a superior planet, Mars observations are in general not as 
technically challenging as Venus, because they can be made at large solar elongation 
angles. 
 
● Visual Magnitude: -2.94 (closest) to +1.86 (farthest); Mean ~+0.71 
● Apparent Diameter: 3.5 to 25.1 arcsec (Mean ~15.5) 

6 
● FoR Requirements: Must accommodate full-disk and corona (~3+ Rmars total) 
● Solar Avoidance Constraints: Like Venus; must avoid observing too close to 
conjunction 
● Spectral resolution requirements:  
○ Proton aurora and D/H measurements: ~100 km/s at 121.6 nm for proton 
aurora observations (R~1000), ~5 km/s at 121.6 nm for upper 
atmosphere D/H observations (R~20,000), ~1 km/s at 121.6 nm for 
spectral separation and direct detection of escaping H component. 
○ Thermosphere and disk UV observations: R~250 across 100-400 nm, 
consistent with MAVEN/IUVS level of detail 
○ Ozone: R~250–500 across 200–300 nm to resolve the Hartley and 
Huggins absorption bands; higher resolution (~1000) desirable near 250 
nm to separate ozone from dust opacity and to track seasonal column 
variations. 
○ H2O/HDO: R~20,000–50,000 near 1.4 μm (or equivalent sensitivity in the 
3.7 μm band) to spectrally resolve the HDO and H2O absorption features 
and measure isotopologue ratios; minimum R~5,000 for detection of the 
combined water vapor column. 
 
7. Relevance to NASA Strategic Goals Mars exploration remains a key strategic goal for 
NASA over the next few decades, with a variety of planned and proposed SMD 
missions, as well as NASA’s Moon to Mars architecture, which aims to increase effort to 
crewed space exploration, using the Moon as a short term goal in planning for crewed 
exploration of Mars. Leveraging HWO as a key part of this support network after several 
important observatories’ mission lifetime has expired (Hubble, MAVEN, etc.) would be 
highly desirable for future human and robotic exploration.  
 
Mars science also directly aligns with key themes in the Origins, Worlds, and Life: The 
Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey 2023-2032 (see Appendix).  
 
Impact on HWO Mission Requirements 
Capability or Requirement Necessary  Desired  Justification Comments 
UV observations  
 
Yes, (100-
400 nm) 
Yes, (80-
700 nm) 
Observing 
exospheric H, 
C, O; Ozone, 
dust, and cloud 
tracking  
Enables escape 
rate estimation, 
aurora detection 
and 
magnetosphere 
characterization, 
and climate 
modeling 
Long wavelength 
observations (> 1.5 microns) 
Yes Yes Detecting water 
vapor, HDO, 
and related 
NIR complements 
UV tracing of the 
hydrological cycle 

7 
molecular 
emissions 
Timing of observations  Yes Freq. and 
duration 
will vary 
by 
campaign 
Tracking cloud 
motion, auroral, 
and 
atmospheric 
changes 
Requires both 
snapshot and 
long-baseline 
revisit cadence 
High spatial resolution Yes, can 
be 
achieved 
with 
mosaics 
Ideally 
more 
pixels 
across the 
disk 
Essential for 
resolving 
spatial 
variability from 
L2 
>1000 pixels 
across Mars’ disk, 
ideally better if we 
want to resolve 
the corona and 
wind tracking 
High spectral resolution Yes   Necessary to 
resolve 
molecular and 
isotopic lines 
Should match or 
exceed exoplanet 
spectral resolution 
Large field of view Moderate  Yes Capture full 
disk and 
exosphere 
during 
opposition 
Disk + Corona 
span ~ 50 arcsec 
Rapid response Yes  Reacting to 
transient 
phenomena 
(dust storms, 
solar flares, 
etc) 
Requires 
coordination with 
solar monitoring 
observatories and 
triggering 
 
Appendix A. 
Table A1. Themes consistent with investigations relevant to Mars exploration in Origins, Worlds, 
and Life: The Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey 2023-2032 (OWL). Bold 
questions are particularly relevant in observing Mars. 
 
Q # OWL Theme with Mars Relevance 
1.1 What Were the Initial Conditions in the Solar System? 
1.2 How Did Distinct Reservoirs of Gas and Solids Form and Evolve in the 
Protoplanetary Disk? 
1.3 What Processes Led to the Production of Planetary Building Blocks? 

8 
3.1 How and When Did Asteroids and Inner Solar System Protoplanets Form? 
3.4 What Processes Yielded Mars, Venus, and Mercury and Their Varied Initial 
States? 
3.6 What Established the Primordial Inventories of Volatile Elements and Compounds in 
the Inner Solar System? 
4.2 How Did Impact Bombardment Vary with Time and Location in the Solar 
System? 
4.4 How Do the Physics and Mechanics of Impacts Produce Disruption of and 
Cratering on Planetary Bodies? 
5.1 How Diverse Are the Compositions and Internal Structures Within and Among 
Solid Bodies? 
5.2 How Have the Interiors of Solid Bodies Evolved? 
5.3 How Have Surface/Near-Surface Characteristics and Compositions of Solid 
Bodies Been Modified by, and Recorded, Interior Processes? 
5.4 How Have Surface Characteristics and Compositions of Solid Bodies Been 
Modified by, and Recorded, Surface Processes and Atmospheric 
Interactions? 
5.6 What Drives Active Processes Occurring in the Interiors and on the Surfaces 
of Solid Bodies? 
6.1 How Do Solid-Body Atmospheres Form and What Was Their State During and 
Shortly after Accretion? 
6.2 What Processes Govern the Evolution of Planetary Atmospheres and Climates 
Over Geologic Timescales? 
6.3 What Processes Drive the Dynamics and Energetics of Atmospheres on 
Solid Bodies? 
6.4 How Do Planetary Surfaces and Interiors Influence and Interact with 
Their Host Atmospheres? 
6.5 What Processes Govern Atmospheric Loss to Space? 
6.6 What Chemical and Microphysical Processes Govern the Clouds, Hazes, 
Chemistry and Trace Gas Composition of Solid Body Atmospheres? 
10.1 What Is “Habitability”? 

9 
10.3 Water Availability: What Controls the Amount of Available Water on a 
Body Over Time? 
10.5 What Is the Availability of Nutrients and Other Inorganic Ingredients to 
Support Life? 
11.3 Life Detection: Is or Was There Life Elsewhere in the Solar System? 
11.4 Life Characterization: What Is the Nature of Life Elsewhere, If It Exists? 
12.1 Evolution of the Protoplanetary Disk 
12.3 Origin of Earth and Inner Solar System Bodies 
12.5 Solid Body Interior and Surfaces 
12.6 Atmosphere and Climate Evolution on Solid Bodies 
12.10 Dynamic Habitability 
12.11 Search for Life Elsewhere 
 
References: 
 
Jain, S.K., Stewart, A.I.F., Schneider, N.M., Deighan, J., Stiepen, A., Evans, J.S., Stevens, 
M.H., Chaffin, M.S., Crismani, M., Mcclintock, W.E. and Clarke, J.T., 2015. The structure and 
variability of Mars upper atmosphere as seen in MAVEN/IUVS dayglow observations. 
Geophysical Research Letters, 42(21), pp.9023-9030. 