Title: The Sensitivity of Substructure Lensing to SIDM Core-collapse Model Variation
Authors: Charlie Mace, Birendra Dhanasingham, Zhichao Carton Zeng, Francis-Yan Cyr-Racine, Xiaolong Du, Annika H. G. Peter, Andrew Benson
Published: 2026-05-22
Categories: astro-ph.CO, astro-ph.GA

The Sensitivity of Substructure Lensing to SIDM Core-collapse Model Variation
Charlie Mace,1,2,∗ Birendra Dhanasingham,3 Zhichao Carton Zeng,4 Francis-Yan
Cyr-Racine,5 Xiaolong Du,6 Annika H. G. Peter,1,2,7,8 and Andrew Benson9
1Department of Physics, The Ohio State University, 191 W. Woodruff Ave., Columbus OH 43210, USA
2Center for Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics, The Ohio State University, 191 W. Woodruff Ave., Columbus OH 43210, USA
3Minnesota Institute for Astrophysics, University of Minnesota, 116 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
4Department of Physics and Astronomy, Mitchell Institute for Fundamental Physics and Astronomy,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA
5Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Mexico, 210 Yale Blvd NE, Albuquerque, NM 87106, USA
6Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA
7Department of Astronomy, The Ohio State University, 140 W. 18th Ave., Columbus OH 43210, USA
8School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study, 1 Einstein Drive, Princeton, NJ 08540
9Carnegie Science, Observatories, 813 Santa Barbara Street, California 91101, USA
(Dated: May 26, 2026)
Strong gravitational lensing has emerged as a powerful probe of dark matter substructure, and shows particu-
larlystrongpromiseasatestof self-interactingdarkmatter(SIDM).ThecompacthalosproducedbySIDMcan
leave distinct imprints on lensing observations, but the core-collapse timeline for subhalos is difficult to model
accurately. This difficulty is an obstacle to accurate substructure lensing predictions, where small variations in
core-collapsing subhalos can lead to significant differences in the lensing power. To quantify this problem and
inform future lensing analyses, we test various methods of modeling core-collapsing halos and show the effect
ofeachvariationonthetwo-pointcorrelationfunctionoftheeffectivedeflectionfield’sdivergenceandcurl. Our
tests include smoothly evolving density profiles versus instantaneously collapsing halos, probabilistic collapse
versusindividualhaloevolution,andvariationoftheinitialandfinaldensityprofileparameters. Wefindthatthe
two-pointcorrelationfunctionissensitivetomostofthesevariationsatsmalllengthscales,butthedetectability
of these differences will depend on the observational probe.
I. INTRODUCTION
Self-interacting dark matter (SIDM) is a set of particle
physics models that include interactions between particles
other than the gravitational force, in contrast to commonly in-
vokedcolddarkmatter(CDM)models,wherethereisnosuch
interaction. In SIDM models with elastic collisions, which
are the focus of this study, the heat transfer facilitated by dark
matter interactions will cause the characteristics of dark mat-
ter halos to evolve over time, starting with the formation of
isothermal, constant-density cores. This core formation stage
ispredictedtobefollowedbyaprocesscalledthegravothermal
catastrophe, or core-collapse, which produces a small dense
core in the center of the halo [1, 2]. The dynamic evolution
predictedbySIDMmodelsmayresolveseveralcontradictions
between cold dark matter (CDM) models and observational
data, such as the diversity problem (CDM; [3–11], SIDM;
[12–22]) and the cuspy halo problem (CDM; [23–28], SIDM;
[29, 30]).
OnepotentialprobeofSIDMissubstructurelensing,where
we observe strong gravitational lenses and infer properties of
thesubstructureinsidethelensandalongtheline-of-sight[31–
44]. Thesetestsarehighlysensitivetothecore-collapseddark
matter halos predicted by many SIDM models, which would
strongly perturb the lensing potential of their host [42, 45,
46]. Observations of strong gravitational lenses have found
evidence for subhalo perturbers, through detection of isolated
line-of-sight structure [33, 34, 47–52] and also measurements
∗ E-mail: mace.103@osu.edu
of flux ratio anomalies of multiple-image lensed quasars [38,
44, 53–57].
Inferring the properties of dark substructure from gravita-
tional lenses requires accurate modeling of both the lens sub-
structure and the line-of-sight structure for a given model of
dark matter. Recent work has demonstrated that line-of-sight
structure imparts a unique signature on the lensing potential.
Thissignaturecanbeunderstoodthrough“effectivemultiplane
gravitationallensing,”amethodinwhichwedefineaneffective
gravitationallensingpotentialwhichincorporatesthecumula-
tive effects of line-of-sight structure on the lensing deflection
map [40, 41, 58]. The statistic of interest in this analysis
is the effective lensing potential’s two-point correlation func-
tion, which is projected against Chebyshev polynomials and
quantified by the relative strength of each multipole moment.
Whiletheseobservationalprobesarepromisingtestsofdark
matterstructure,theconstraintstheyproviderelyontherobust-
nessofoursubstructureandline-of-sightstructuremodels. For
SIDM in particular, accurate modeling of the rapid and dras-
tic gravothermal catastrophe is crucial to accurate predictions
for lensing observables. Current approaches to core-collapse
models involve a number of choices and simplifying assump-
tions regarding the collapsing halo profile, such as assuming
the core-collapsing halo instantaneously transitions from its
initial density profile to the final core-collapsed state. As
an additional challenge, the timescale on which a given halo
collapses is often dominated by uncertainty. Some of this un-
certainty is from a lack of numerical precision [59, 60], and
some stems from the complex evolution of the systems we
are trying to model [21, 46, 61]. It is not immediately clear
what the best modeling choices are, and what effect various
arXiv:2605.24174v1  [astro-ph.CO]  22 May 2026

2
simplifying assumptions have on the complicated pipeline of
substructure lensing inference. This uncertainty is a discon-
nect between existing inference and the underlying physical
models they aim to test. Without a solid understanding of this
problem and guidance for clear modeling choices, the ability
oflensingobservationstoilluminatethenatureofdarkmatter
will be limited.
Toquantifythismodelingchallenge,wetestvariousmodifi-
cationsoftheSIDMcore-collapsinghalodensityprofileinthe
contextofsubstructurelensing. Thesemodificationsrepresent
modelingchoicesthatcanbemadewhengeneratingasubhalo
and line-of-sight halo population for a substructure lensing
inference study. Our modifications include variation of both
theinitialhalo(uncollapsed)andfinal(core-collapsed)density
profiles, and comparisons between instantaneously collapsing
and time-evolving halo profiles. Our baseline core-collapse
model is a gravothermal fluid solution calibrated to𝑁-body
simulationsofisolatedSIDMhalos,andmodeltidalevolution
based on SIDM substructure simulations. We implement our
modelvariationsintorandomrealizationsofmainlenssubha-
los and line-of-sight structure generated with the open source
packagepyHalo[53], assuming a Planck 2018 cosmology
[62]. We vary the density profiles of perturbing substruc-
ture, testing their impact on effective multiplane gravitational
lensing predictions.
Thispaperisstructuredasfollow. InSectionIIwedetailhow
wegeneraterealizationsforlensedsystems,implementvarious
SIDMmodels,andperformgravitationallensingcalculations.
Next we present our calibration to𝑁-body substructure simu-
lations(SectionIIIA),andshowresultsforourdensityprofile
variations (Sections IIIB and IIIC). We summarize our find-
ings in Section IV.
II. METHODS
In this section we describe how we generate realizations
of galaxy-scale lens systems with subhalos and line-of-sight
halos, model core-collapse in these realizations, and produce
lensingstatisticsfromthesemodels. First,weincludedetailsof
the𝑁-body simulations we use to model tidal effects (Section
IIA), and how we generate the CDM subhalos and line-of-
sight halos for our lensing realizations (Section IIB). Next,
we replace the CDM halos with SIDM halos by modifying
the density profiles. We discuss our various SIDM profiles,
startingwithourcontinuouslycollapsingmodel(SectionIIC)
and variations to the collapse threshold (Section IIC4), and
movingontomodelswithbinarycore-collapse(SectionIID).
We end the section with an overview of effective multi-plane
gravitational lensing, which we use to calculate the two-point
correlationfunctionofthelensingconvergence(SectionIIE).
A. N-body Simulations
To validate our core-collapse model (described in detail in
Section IIC), we use𝑁-body simulation data first generated
as part of Ref. [20]. These data were generated with the𝑁-
bodycodeArepo[63],usingapreviouslytestedSIDMmodule
[64–66].
The simulations feature an analytic host profile and four
different random realizations of substructure generated with
Galacticus1, a semi-analytic model of galaxy formation
[67]. The analytic host is modeled as an NFW profile with
mass𝑀 200𝑐 =10 13 𝑀⊙ and concentration𝑐 200 =6.7at a
redshift of𝑧 lens =0.5, and the merger trees include subha-
los and sub-subhalos with infall masses above108 𝑀⊙. We
define the virial mass𝑀200𝑐 as the mass of a spherical over-
densitydefinedsuchthatthehalodensityisequalto200times
the critical density of the Universe. To accurately model low
mass subhalos that may be insufficiently resolved for accurate
core-collapse behavior, these simulations employ a hierarchi-
calsimulationframework. Inthisapproachwegroupsubhalos
by halo mass and simulate them in batches of differing mass
resolution,ensuringthatsubhalosaresimilarlyresolvedonall
scales. More details on the simulation methods are available
in Ref. [20].
Each set of initial conditions is run inArepowith a variety
of SIDM models. In this work, we are using simulations with
SIDM scattering cross-sections given by:
𝜎/𝑚= 𝜎0

1+𝑣 2
rel/𝜔2
2 (1)
where𝑣 relistherelativevelocitybetweentwodarkmatterparti-
cles,andthecharacteristiccross-section𝜎 0andcutoffvelocity
𝜔are free model parameters [39, 68–72]. This study uses the
simulations for only two sets of cross-section model parame-
ters: {𝜎0 =200 cm 2/g,𝜔=50 km/s} and {𝜎 0 =200 cm 2/g,
𝜔=200 km/s}. We use these simulations to calibrate an
approximate treatment of tidal effects in gravothermal core-
collapse, which is discussed in more detail in Section IIC.
B. Gravitational Lens Realizations
We generate realizations of gravitational lens subhalos and
line-of-sight halos using version 1.4.1 of the Python package
pyHalo2, an open-source toolkit for generating dark matter
halo populations for gravitational lensing calculations [53].
Our realizations are generated with the preset CDM model
inpyHalo, which allows for custom settings adjusting the
lens system, source system, and population parameters for
subhalos and line-of-sight halos. Each of our realizations
is for a lens system at redshift𝑧lens =0.5. The lens host
halo has a mass of𝑀200𝑐 =10 13 𝑀⊙ and concentration of
𝑐200 =6.7, matching the host halo in the𝑁-body simulations
(see Section IIA). The main deflector is modeled as a power-
lawellipsoidwithEinsteinradius𝜃 E =1.0 arcsec,eccentricity
1 https://github.com/galacticusorg/galacticus
2 https://github.com/dangilman/pyHalo

3
components(𝑒 1 =0.05, 𝑒 2 =0.08), and logarithmic slope
2.0[73]. External gravitational shear components are set to
(𝛾1 =0.01, 𝛾 2 =−0.01). Thesourceisplacedat𝑧 source =1.0,
whichisatypicalsourceredshiftforgalaxy-scalestronglenses
[74,75]andcomparabletodataincludedinrecentJamesWebb
Space Telescope (JWST) strong lens analysis [44].
Subhalos of the main deflector in our𝑁-body simulation
comparison (Section IIIA) are rendered in the mass range
108 −10 10 𝑀⊙ to match the range of substructure mass in the
𝑁-bodysimulations. Fortherestofthestudy(SectionIIIBand
onward) we extend to lower masses, and render subhalos and
line-of-sighthalosintherange10 6 −1010 𝑀⊙. Structurebelow
106 𝑀⊙ has relatively little impact on lensing measurements
[44], and structure more massive than10 10 𝑀⊙ can often
be modeled individually due to visible baryons or significant
lensing effects (see Ref. [76]). We sample subhalos from a
power-law mass function:
d2𝑁sub
d𝑚d𝐴 = Σsub
𝑚0
 𝑚
𝑚0
 𝛼
F (𝑀 host, 𝑧)(2)
with logarithmic slope𝛼=−1.90and pivot mass𝑚 0 =
108 𝑀⊙ based on𝑁-body simulations [77, 78]. We set the
subhalo mass function normalization toΣsub =0.0033 kpc −2,
which produces subhalo projected densities similar to the
Galacticusmerger trees used in our𝑁-body comparison
(see Section IIIA). This value is about a factor of 30 lower
than predictions by𝑁-body simulations [79] and early grav-
itational lensing inference fromJWST[44], but we do not
expect rescaling of the mass function to affect our primary re-
sults regarding the relative impact of density profile features.
The final term in Equation (2) captures scaling with the host
halo mass and redshift:
log10 (F )=𝑘 1log10
 𝑀host
1013 𝑀⊙

+𝑘 2log10 (𝑧 lens +0.5)(3)
with𝑘 1 =0.88and𝑘 2 =1.7based on calibration to
Galacticus[54].
Following the same procedure as Ref. [40], we render line-
of-sight halos in a double-sided cone with a 6 arcsec opening
angle except when otherwise specified. Halo populations at
each redshift are sampled from a rescaled Sheth-Tormen (ST)
mass function [38, 80]:
d2𝑁LOS
d𝑚d𝑉 =𝛿 LOS(1+𝜉 2halo)

d2𝑁
d𝑚d𝑉

ST
,(4)
where,𝛿 LOS is a normalization factor which we fix at 1.0
and𝜉 2halo is the two-halo term of the three-dimensional two-
pointcorrelationfunction. Thistwo-halocorrectiondescribes
the correlation of structure near the main deflector which is
not already captured in the host halo’s bound structure. The
final term in Equation (4) is the standard Sheth-Tormen mass
function.
We generate formation redshifts for subhalos and line-of-
sight halos using the method described in Appendix C of
Ref. [81], which models the mass accretion and potential
well growth histories of dark matter halos. Infall redshifts for
subhalosaresampledfromthedistributionintheGalacticus
mergertreesusedinour𝑁-bodysimulations. Thisisamassin-
dependentdistributionofredshifts,calculatednumericallyand
implemented intopyHalo. The mass added by substructure
and line-of-sight structure is offset by sheets of negative lens-
ing convergence at various redshifts, added bypyHalo. We
consideronlysubhaloswithinfalltimesgreaterthan4 Gyr,to
matchthepopulationusedinRef. [20]aspreciselyaspossible.
IntheCDMhalorealization,subhaloandline-of-sighthalo
density profiles are modeled as a truncated Navarro-Frenk-
White (NFW) profile [82]:
𝜌TNFW (𝑟)= 𝜌s
𝑟/𝑟 s(1+𝑟/𝑟 s)2
𝑟2
t
𝑟2 +𝑟 2
t
(5)
where𝜌 s and𝑟 s are the NFW scale density and radius respec-
tively[83]. Thetruncationradius𝑟 tforsubhalosisdetermined
bythetidaltrackpredictionsinRef. [84],whicharematchedto
Galacticuspredictions(usingtheTruncationGalacticus
class inpyHalo). Line-of-sighthalos are truncated at𝑟t =𝑟 50
(where the enclosed density is 50 times the critical density of
the Universe at the halo’s redshift), which is comparable to
the splashback radius [85] (using theTruncationRNclass in
pyHalo).
C. Continuous Core-collapse
1. Density Profile
We implement smoothly evolving SIDM halo density pro-
files using the empirical model presented in Ref. [71], with
the addition of a truncation radius𝑟t (see Appendix A for
more detail on the truncated profile). This density evolution
is piecewise in time, depending on whether the halo is in the
early stages of evolution (core-formation) or late stages (core-
collapse):
ˆ𝜌early(ˆ𝑟, 𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)= tanh(ˆ𝑟/𝑟c)
ˆ𝑟(1+ˆ𝑟)2
ˆ𝑟2
t
ˆ𝑟2 +ˆ𝑟2
t
ˆ𝜌late(ˆ𝑟, 𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)= 𝜌c
1+ (ˆ𝑟/𝑟c)2.19 (1+ˆ𝑟/𝑟out)0.81
ˆ𝑟2
t
ˆ𝑟2 +ˆ𝑟2
t
.(6)
In this paper, hatted variables (such asˆ𝜌andˆ𝑟) are dimen-
sionless and are calculated by rescaling by the initial NFW
profile parameters. Whether we are usingˆ𝜌early orˆ𝜌late de-
pends on how far the halo is into its core-collapse evolution,
parametrized by the product𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡. We calculate this timescale
fromthedimensionlessscatteringcross-sectionˆ𝜎=𝑟 s 𝜌s𝜎/𝑚
(a rescaling of the SIDM interaction cross-section𝜎/𝑚), the
dimensionless time parameter ˆ𝑡=𝑡
√︁
4𝜋𝐺 𝜌s (where𝑡is the
age of the halo), and the heat transfer calibration parameter𝛽
(a dimensionless parameter calibrated to𝑁-body simulations
[86]). The parameters𝜌 c,𝑟 c, and𝑟 out are all dimensionless
functions of the rescaled evolution time𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡, with full ex-
pressions given in the appendix of Ref. [71]. In this work

4
we neglect the effect of the substructure density profile on the
truncation,andchoosethetruncationradiusˆ𝑟 t =𝑟 t/𝑟stomatch
the truncation radius used in the CDM realization generated
bypyHalo, described in Section IIB.
The profile evolution switches from early to late evolution
atthetimewhenthecoreisatitslargest,log 10 (𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)=1.341.
Theevolutionterminatesdeepintothecore-collapseregimeat
log10 (𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)=2.237, after which we freeze the density profile
in time. This time corresponds to the final snapshot from
our gravothermal fluid code solution, but does not necessarily
correspond to the true final state of a core-collapsed halo. We
experiment with shifting this ending time in Section IIC4.
2. Deflection Angle Profile
Tomakegravitationallensingpredictionswemustcompute
the deflection angle profile, which is calculated from the en-
closedprojectedmasswithinadistance𝑟fromthehalocenter
[39]:
𝛼(𝑟) ∝ 1
𝑟
∫ 𝑟
0
d𝑟2D 𝑟2D
∫ ∞
−∞
d𝑧 𝜌
√︃
𝑟2
2D +𝑧 2

.(7)
We have not found a closed-form solution to this integral for
our density profile, so we proceed numerically.
Tocalculatethedeflectionangleasafunctionofradius,𝛽ˆ𝜎 ˆ𝑡,
and truncation radius, we create a look-up table for Equation
(6). We use 150 uniformly distributed points overlog10 (ˆ𝑟) ∈
[−2,3], 271 points overlog 10 (𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡) ∈ [−5.6,2.237] 3, and
150 uniformly distributed points overlog10 (ˆ𝑟t) ∈ [−2,3], and
linearly interpolate between points on this three-dimensional
grid. We numerically integrate to produce Equation (7) over
this grid, creating a look-up table for the deflection angle as a
function ofˆ𝑟,𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡, andˆ𝑟t.
3. Time evolution
To retrieve the deflection angle profile for a particular sub-
haloorline-of-sighthalo,wefirstdetermine𝛽ˆ𝜎 ˆ𝑡bycalculating
theageandhaloparametersforthatindividualhalo,placingit
attheappropriatepositionalongitsuniquecore-collapsetime-
line. It is straightforward to calculateˆ𝑡for each halo, using
the formation redshift and the redshift of observation, which
isgeneratedindividuallyforeachline-of-sighthaloandis𝑧 lens
for all subhalos.
Tocalculateˆ𝜎,webypassthecomplexvelocitydependence
in the cross-section (Equation (1)) by constructing a charac-
teristic velocity that is representative of typical interparticle
3 Stepsinlog 10 (𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)arenotevenlyspaced,butareinsteadbasedonthevari-
ationinthedensityprofileparameterslog 10 (𝜌c ),log 10 (𝑟c ),andlog 10 (𝑟out ).
Anewstepintimeisaddedtothelook-uptableonlyifoneoftheseparam-
eters would change by at least 0.5% of their total range over the full halo
evolution.
1 2 3 4
tc,iso/tc,sub
10□1
100
101
102
No. of subhalos
σ0 = 50 cm2/g, ω = 100 km/s
σ0 = 100 cm2/g, ω = 50 km/s
σ0 = 200 cm2/g, ω = 50 km/s
σ0 = 200 cm2/g, ω = 200 km/s
FIG. 1: The distribution of core-collapse acceleration factors
from N-body simulations, generated using data from Ref.
[20]. In this work we study only the {𝜎0 =200 cm 2/g,
𝜔=50 km/s} and {𝜎0 =200 cm 2/g,𝜔=200 km/s}
models, which have relatively fast core-collapse and a large
number of collapsed halos to sample the collapse
distribution. The lines are Gaussian fits, with best fit mean
and standard deviation values given in Table I.
relative velocities in a given subhalo. We then computeˆ𝜎
for that one velocity, as an approximation to the subhalo’s
evolution with a velocity-dependent cross-section. This is a
reasonable approximation for a single halo, where the inter-
particle velocities will be distributed around such a charac-
teristic velocity. The characteristic velocity is calculated as
⟨𝑣 rel⟩=3.8𝜎 𝑣, where𝜎𝑣 is the one dimensional velocity dis-
persion of the initial NFW halo at𝑟=𝑟s. Integrating over the
Boltzmanndistributionwouldsuggestacharacteristicvelocity
of2.26𝜎 𝑣,but𝑁-bodysimulations[20]andgravothermalfluid
modeling [70, 71] have shown that a factor of3.8better mod-
els the effective heat capacity of the dark matter halo. Once
⟨𝑣 rel⟩is calculated for a given halo, the characteristic𝜎/𝑚is
foundusingEquation(1). With𝜎/𝑚wecanplacethesubhalo
on the evolutionary track in Equation (6), and determine the
appropriate density profile.
The empirical model in this subsection is valid for isolated
dark matter halos, and does not include environmental effects
that could accelerate or delay the gravothermal evolution. We
hypothesize that the effect of a subhalo’s environment on the
core-collapseratecanbeapproximatedwithanumericalfactor
altering the dimensionless time parameter in the empirical
model, and that this factor can be measured from𝑁-body
simulations of subhalo evolution.
To account for tidal effects, we break the time evolution
of each subhalo into two phases: one before infall and one
after. Beforeinfall,eachhaloevolvesaccordingtoourisolated
model. Thepost-infallevolutionwillrequirecalibrationtothe
𝑁-body simulations discussed in Section IIA.

5
𝜎0 (cm2/g) 𝜔(km/s) Mean Standard Deviation
50 100 2.39 0.359
100 50 2.58 0.439
200 50 1.77 0.302
200 200 1.06 0.185
TABLE I: Means and standard deviations for the Gaussian
fits to the𝑡c,iso/𝑡c,sub distributions shown in Figure 1.
We use the𝑁-body simulations from Ref. [20] to sample
collapse acceleration (or deceleration) factors for each halo,
defined as the ratio between the the isolated halo’s collapse
time (𝑡c,iso) and the collapse time of that same halo evolved in
a host potential (𝑡c,sub). We expect these measurements to be
somewhat biased towards halos that collapse faster, since we
exclude any halos which do not collapse in isolation. Figure
1 shows those distributions for four velocity-dependent SIDM
models, including the two we select for this study. We find
that the acceleration factors for both selected models are well
modeled by Gaussian distributions, with fit parameters listed
in Table I. For each subhalo in ourpyHalorealizations, we
sample an acceleration factor from the Gaussian distribution
and apply it to the post-infall phase of the SIDM evolution.
In addition to the influence of the tidal field, we expect this
acceleration factor to include the effects of highly energetic
collisions between subhalo and host particles, which can lead
to evaporation [20, 21, 87]. While we take a probabilistic
approachhereanddonottrackindividualorbits,orbitalhistory
plays a major role in the tidal evolution of subhalos. A more
precise calculation of tidal acceleration would consider the
orbital parameters of each subhalo. This more sophisticated
approachisbeyondthescopeofthisstudy,butmaybepossible
with a better understanding of SIDM tidal tracks [21].
4. Collapse Threshold Variation
Whileourgravothermalsolutionendswithacentraldensity
that diverges as the collapse time is approached, the true final
stateofacore-collapsedhaloremainsunknown. Core-collapse
may be halted at some point as the gravothermal evolution is
interrupted by other physical processes, such as black hole
formation [2, 88–90]. To test how the lensing signal responds
to different core-collapse end states, we pick a range of final
points to consider. Table II lists our eight different choices of
ending times, along with their values of𝜌c and𝑟 c (Equation
(6)), which are displayed in Figure 2.
For each termination point, we can model collapsed halos
intwoways. Thefirstapproachistofreezethedensityprofiles
once they reach the final time, using the density profile at the
termination time as the fully collapsed profile. When varying
thecollapsetimeinthisway,wearetestingtheeffectsofhalting
core-collapse earlier. We expect this approach to reduce the
lensing power, since we are lowering the central density of all
collapsed halos. The second approach is toboostthe core-
collapsed profile up to the fully collapsedlog(𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)=2.237
profileoncetheypasstheterminationtime. Thismethodkeeps
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
log10( t)
101
102
103
c/ s
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
log10( t)
10 1
rc/rs
FIG. 2: Our selection of core-collapse thresholds as
discussed in Section IID. The top panel shows the halo
central density (𝜌c) evolution, the bottom shows the core
radius (𝑟c), andlog(𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)is the dimensionless evolution time
(see Equation (6)). The circles indicate the points in time at
which we sample the density profile for binary collapse. The
empty circle is at the maximal core time, and the filled circles
are our eight choices for collapse times in Table II.
the final density profile the same regardless of our choice for
thecollapsetimethreshold,butallowsnearlycollapsedhalosto
betreatedascollapsedinsteadofsuppressingthembackdown
to the initial profile. Unlike the freezing approach, where we
suppress lensing power, this approach would enhance it.
D. Binary Core-collapse
A common model of SIDM core-collapse in substructure
lensing is to treat the core-collapse process as instantaneous,
and model each halo as one of two profiles: one for col-
lapsed halos, and another for un-collapsed halos [39, 44, 91].
If the two density profiles have analytically solvable deflec-
tion angle integrals (Equation (7)) this treatment can reduce
computational costs. Binary collapse models assume the core
formationstageofSIDMevolutiondoesnotsignificantlyalter

6
log10 (𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡) 𝜌c/𝜌s 𝑟c/𝑟s log(𝜌 c)/log(𝜌 f) 𝑡c/𝑡f
1.939 4.114 0.3350 20% 50.4%
2.047 5.858 0.2805 25% 64.5%
2.110 8.343 0.2351 30% 74.7%
2.151 11.88 0.1974 35% 82.0%
2.178 16.92 0.1659 40% 87.3%
2.223 69.61 0.08364 60% 96.8%
2.234 286.3 0.04277 80% 99.3%
2.237 1178 0.0222 100% 100%
TABLE II: Final density profile choices for collapse
threshold variation. The model parameters for each choice
are listed on the left side of the table, and the values of the
central density (𝜌c) and time (𝑡c) compared to the full
evolution model (𝜌f and𝑡 f) are on the right.
lensing measurements on a population level. To test this as-
sumption and gauge the sensitivity of gravitational lensing to
theintermediatestagesofSIDMhaloevolution,weimplement
several models of binary core-collapse and compare them to
our continuously evolving model (Section IIC).
Tomodelbinarycollapseinourgravitationallenses,wese-
lecttheinitialandfinalprofilesfromourcontinuouslyevolving
gravothermal profile (Section IIC). With the most basic im-
plementation of this method, any halo withlog(𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)<2.237
is modeled with the initial TNFW profile, while halos with
log(𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡) ≥2.237areconsideredcollapsed,andmodeledwith
Equation (6) atlog(𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)=2.237.
In some of our binary collapse tests, we randomly select
whichhaloscore-collapse,insteadoftrackingeachhalo’sevo-
lution individually. This probabilistic approach has been used
with binary collapse models in the literature [39, 91]. To de-
termine the collapse probabilities, we bin subhalos by infall
mass and calculate the collapse fraction in each bin using the
individually evolved halo sample. We then randomly select
halos in each mass bin for core-collapse, using the desired
collapse fractions as the collapse probability. Collapse proba-
bilities for line-of-sight halos are calculated similarly, but are
binnedseparatelyfromsubhalosduetotheexpectedinfluence
of the host halo on subhalo collapse rates [15, 16, 20, 92].
For both subhalos and line-of-sight halos, we use the mass
bins[10 6 −10 7 𝑀⊙],[10 7 −10 8 𝑀⊙],[10 8 −10 9 𝑀⊙], and
[109 −10 10 𝑀⊙]. Unlikethemostrecentprobabilisticcollapse
models in the literature [91], this method of random collapse
does not account for any individual halo properties, such as
concentration and halo formation time. By using this simple
modelforcore-collapseweintendtosetanupperboundonin-
accuraciescausedbycollapserandomization,whichweexpect
more sophisticated collapse choices would improve upon.
Wealsoexperimentwithdifferentinitialprofiles. Thestan-
dard approach is to set an un-collapsed dark matter halo to
the TNFW initial condition, but for some cross-sections and
halopopulationstheremaybemanyhalosthatreachthecored
phase without core-collapsing. To test the best initial profile
for binary collapse, we use the profile of maximum core size
(log10 (𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)=1.341) for un-collapsed halos in some of our
tests. The𝜌 c and𝑟 c of the cored initial profile are shown as
empty circles in Figure 2.
E. Gravitational Lensing
1. Effective Multi-plane Lensing
To quantify the collective contributions of line-of-sight
structure to the lensing deflection, we use the effective multi-
plane lensing framework detailed in [40]. This approach in-
cludes the influence of line-of-sight structure through an ef-
fective deflection fieldαeff:
αeff(x)=∇𝜙 eff(x) + ∇ ×A eff(x).(8)
Unlike in a single-plane lens, which is fully characterized by
thescalarpotential𝜙 eff,thenon-linearcouplingbetweenlens-
ing planes has given rise to a vector potentialAeff. The ob-
served image can be computed fromαeff with the lens equa-
tion:
u(x)=x−α eff(x)(9)
whereuandxare positions on the source and image plane
respectively.
When studying single-plane lensing, it is common to cal-
culate the lensing convergence from the deflection angleαas
𝜅≡ 1
2 ∇ ·α. For a single lens plane, the mapping between
𝜅and the deflection angle is straightforwardly linked to the
gravitational potential [93], andαis explicitly curl-free. In
a multi-plane lens the deflection angle now can be sourced
by a vector fieldAeff instead of just the gradient of a scalar
field, allowing us to define a new convergence based on the
curloftheeffectivedeflectionfield. Ourtwoconvergencesare
calculated as:
𝜅div = 1
2 ∇ ·α eff −𝜅 0 (10)
𝜅curl = 1
2 ∇ ×α eff · ˆz,(11)
where𝜅 0 istheconvergenceofthelenssystem’shosthalo,and
ˆzistheline-of-sight direction[38,40,94,95]. Bysubtracting
𝜅0 we remove the dominant contribution of the main lens,
but preserve the non-linear coupling between the main lens
and line-of-sight structure, which leads to the anisotropies
that we aim to study. Unlike the single-plane case, neither
of these terms are equivalent to the projected mass density.
By studying both the divergence and curl convergences, we
preserve important information about the non-linear multi-
plane coupling [40, 41].
In this study, we compute𝜅div and𝜅 curl forpyHalorealiza-
tions (Section IIB) with version 1.12.0 of the Python gravita-
tional lensing packagelenstronomy[96, 97]. We compute
theconvergenceofour𝑁-bodysimulations(SectionIIA)with
the C++ libraryGLAMER[98, 99].

7
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
div
FLOS
SUB
BLOS
CDM
FLOS
SUB
BLOS
SIDM: Full Evolution
FLOS
SUB
BLOS
SIDM: Random Collapse
0.004
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
curl
FLOS
SUB
BLOS
FLOS
SUB
BLOS
FLOS
SUB
BLOS
FIG. 3:𝜅 div (top) and𝜅curl (bottom) maps for a singlepyHalorendering, with CDM (left) and two SIDM models (center, right).
To isolate the effect of substructure and line-of-sight structure, the convergence of the main lens halo is subtracted out. The
SIDM models use a velocity dependent cross-section (Equation 1) with {𝜎0 =200 cm 2/g,𝜔=200 km/s}. Each square of the
overlaid grid is0.5×0.5 arcsecin angular size, and shaded regions are excluded by our annular mask when calculating the
two-point correlation function. The critical lensing curve is shown in black. Examples of a subhalo (SUB), a background
line-of-sight halo (BLOS), and a foreground line-of-sight halo (FLOS) are circled.
2. The Two-point Correlation Function
The two-point correlation function is a powerful summary
statisticthatencodesinformationaboutthedistributionofsub-
structure, as well as their inner deflection angle profiles (and
hence their density profiles) [34, 40, 41, 94, 100–105]. In this
section we will compute the correlation function for an ef-
fective multiplane lens, and use it to disentangle line-of-sight
effectsfromtheinfluenceofthemainlensingplane. Asshown
in[41],theline-of-sighthaloscreatestructuresinthe𝜅 div field
that exhibit even parity under the transformation𝜃→ −𝜃, but
the corresponding structures in𝜅 curl exhibit odd parity. To
measure these signals we will compute the two-point corre-
lation functions of𝜅 div and𝜅 curl, and decompose them onto
orthonormal bases. With the parity of line-of-sight signatures
in mind, we will decompose𝜅div onto an even basis and𝜅curl
onto an odd basis.
Foraconvergencemap𝜅,thetwo-pointcorrelationfunction
asafunctionofavectorrlinkingtwopointsintheimageplane
is:
𝜉(r)= 1
𝑆
∫
𝑆
d2r1 [𝜅(r 1) − ⟨𝜅(r 1)⟩] [𝜅(r 2) − ⟨𝜅(r 2)⟩](12)
wherer 2 =r 1 +rand𝑆istheareaoverwhichwearecalculat-
ing the correlation function. For our density profile modeling
tests,wecompute𝜉(r)overanannularmaskwithaninnerra-
dius of0.5 arcsecand outer radius1.5 arcsec, chosen to focus
on structure near the lensing critical curve. In this study we
are primarily interested in the how the shape of the two-point
correlation function changes under variations in perturbing
halodensityprofiles,butthemasssheettransformwouldonly
rescale the amplitude by a constant factor. We are thus ignor-
ing the mass sheet degeneracy, as in Ref. [41].
Wedecompose𝜉 div(𝑟, 𝜃)ontoanorthonormalbasisofeven

8
7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10.0
log10 (Mbound/M )
0
2
4
6
8Nsubhalos
N-body Ntot = 62.2
pyHalo Ntot = 44.5
FIG.4: Theabundanceofsubhaloswithinthe1-10arcsecond
annular mask for our𝑁-body simulations andpyHalo
realizations. The averages are computed over 4 realizations
for our𝑁-body simulations (blue), and 200 realizations for
ourpyHalodata (yellow). The average number⟨𝑁tot⟩of
subhalos in the mask for each dataset is given in the legend.
functionscos(ℓ𝜃)as:
𝜉div (𝑟, 𝜃)=
∞∑︁
ℓ=0
𝜉div,ℓ (𝑟)cos(ℓ𝜃),(13)
with the correlation multipoles given by:
𝜉div,ℓ (𝑟)= 2−𝛿 ℓ0
𝜋
∫ 𝜋
0
d𝜃 𝜉 div (𝑟, 𝜃)cos(ℓ𝜃),(14)
and𝛿 𝑖 𝑗 denoting the Kronecker delta.
Due to the odd parity of the line-of-sight structure in𝜅curl,
we will decompose𝜉curl(𝑟, 𝜃)onto an orthogonal basis of odd
functions𝐵 𝜃 sin(ℓ𝜃)with:
𝐵 𝜃 =
(
+1 0≤𝜃 < 𝜋/2
−1𝜋/2≤𝜃 < 𝜋. (15)
This decomposition gives:
𝜉curl(𝑟, 𝜃)=
∞∑︁
ℓ=1
𝜉curl,ℓ (𝑟)𝐵 𝜃 sin(ℓ𝜃),(16)
with the correlation multipoles given by:
𝜉curl,ℓ (𝑟)= 2
𝜋
∫ 𝜋
0
d𝜃 𝜉 curl(𝑟, 𝜃)𝐵 𝜃 sin(ℓ𝜃).(17)
We will use the correlation multipoles in Equations (14) and
(17) as our primary comparison of lensing statistics between
realizations. In this study we will be concerned with the
monopoleandquadrupolemomentsofthe𝜅 div map(𝜉 div,0 and
𝜉div,2), and the quadrupole moment of the𝜅curl map (𝜉curl,2).
Figure 3 shows an example of the𝜅div and𝜅 curl maps for
three different models: CDM, SIDM with full halo evolution
(Section IIC), and SIDM with randomly selected binary col-
lapse (Section IID). We indicate a main deflector subhalo, a
foreground line-of-sight halo (between the observer and the
maindeflector),andabackgroundline-of-sighthalo(between
the source and the main deflector) on the convergence maps
as examples of the distinct structure contributed by each. In
this figure we can see the quadrupolar structures in the𝜅div
field from line-of-sight halos, which are intensified for core-
collapsed halos. This quadrupole contribution is captured in
the𝜉 div,2 measurement, which we will show in the next sec-
tion. Additionally,thesignalfromline-of-sighthalosareoften
stretchedintoarcsduetothenon-linearcouplingbetweenlens
planes.
WhencomparingtheCDMconvergencemaps(leftcolumn)
in Figure 3 to the SIDM full evolution (center panels), we
can see the signals of many halos changing. Some halos
core-collapse, such as our example foreground line-of-sight
halo, producing high-density peaks in the convergence maps
that induce relatively strong lensing effects. Some, like the
indicated subhalo and background line-of-sight halo, happen
to be in the cored phase of SIDM evolution and have weaker
signaturescomparedtothecuspyCDMprofiles. Intherandom
binary collapse case (right column) the collapse state of each
halo is randomized, with some producing similar signals as
in the full evolution, some becoming collapsed, and some
becoming cored.
III. RESULTS
A. Comparison to N-body Simulations
To validate our core-collapse acceleration model we gener-
ate200pyHalorealizationswiththesamesubhaloinfallmass
range as the𝑁-body simulations (log10 (𝑀/𝑀 ⊙) ∈ [8,10]),
and compare the subhalo population and monopole moment
of the convergence map to that of the𝑁-body simulations.
We do not include line-of-sight structure in these simulations,
since the𝑁-body simulations produce halos only in the main
lens plane. We compute maps of the effective lensing conver-
gence for thepyHaloand𝑁-body lenses withlenstronomy
andGLAMERrespectively,over800×800pixel,20×20 arcsec
grids. We then usepyHaloto compute compute correla-
tionmultipolesfromtheeffectiveconvergencemaps,usingan
annular aperture with inner radius1 arcsecand outer radius
10 arcsec. Thisapertureissignificantlylargerthantheonewe
willuseinthenextsection,becausethe𝑁-bodysimulationsin-
cludeonlysubhaloswithinfallmassesabove10 8 M⊙. Usinga
larger aperture provides enough subhalos to make meaningful
measurements of the lensing statistics.
By varying the subhalo mass function normalizationΣsub
(see Section IIB for the definition), we can match thepyHalo
lens realizations to the subhalo population at the end of the
CDM N-body simulation. With the choice ofΣsub =0.0033
ourpyHalolenses broadly reproduce the subhalo population
of our𝑁-body simulations, as shown in Figure 4. We are un-
abletoproducethepopulationofverylowmasssubhalosseen
in the𝑁-body simulations however, with our realizations pro-
ducing relatively few𝑀bound <10 7.5 𝑀⊙ subhalos and about
18fewersubhalosintheannularregiononaverage. Thesevery

9
0.1 10.3 3
r (arcsec)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5div, 0(r)×106
pyHalo (CDM)
pyHalo (SIDM)
N-body (CDM)
N-body (SIDM)
(a)𝜎 0 =200 cm 2/g,𝜔=50 km/s
0.1 10.3 3
r (arcsec)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5div, 0(r)×106
pyHalo (CDM)
pyHalo (SIDM)
N-body (CDM)
N-body (SIDM) (b)𝜎 0 =200 cm 2/g,𝜔=200 km/s
FIG. 5: Comparison of the monopole moment betweenpyHaloand𝑁-body realizations. For thepyHalorealizations, we
render 200 random realizations of lens substructure, and show the mean (thick lines) and standard deviation (shaded regions) of
𝜉div,0 (𝑟). For the𝑁-body simulations we plot the four individual simulations as thin lines, each averaged over 64 random angles
of projection. CDM and SIDM results are distinguished by color and line style, for both thepyHalorenderings and the𝑁-body
results.
lowmasssubhalosarelikelythemostseverelytidallystripped
subhalos, suggesting the treatment of tidal effects inpyHalo
differs from the CDM simulation results.
Figure5showsthemonopolemomentresultsfortwodiffer-
entSIDMmodels. Sinceweonlyhavefoursamplesof𝑁-body
lenses, we consider whether or not they could reasonably be
considered as samples from the set ofpyHalorenderings as
a test of our tidal acceleration approach. The𝑁-body simu-
lation monopole moments are consistent with thepyHalore-
sultsinallcases,withthe𝑁-bodymomentsfallingwithinone
standard deviation of thepyHalomean moments. We note,
however, that the SIDM results with the {𝜎0 =200 cm 2/g,
𝜔=50 km/s} model are not distinguishable from the CDM
results in bothpyHaloand the𝑁-body simulations. This is
consistentwiththeresultsofRef. [20],whichfoundthatcore-
collapse in this model is uncommon at halo masses above
109 𝑀⊙. For the rest of our analysis we will focus on the
{𝜎0 =200 cm 2/g𝜔=200 km/s} model, which produces
more significant deviations from CDM to test as we modify
the core-collapse evolution.
While the𝑁-body simulations are consistent withpyHalo
realizations, this does not confirm that our approximate treat-
ment of tidal effects is sufficient for all applications. The
𝑁-body simulations represent only four samples of the full
distribution of possible subhalo populations. Based on Figure
5, we find that our tidal acceleration treatment is a reasonable
firstapproximationtothetruetidalbehaviorofcore-collapsing
subhalos, and we can reasonably proceed with it in this study.
In Section IV we discuss how our tidal acceleration model
affects the results of this study, and how subhalos could be
modeled more accurately.
B. Collapse Time Variation
Now that we have checked our core-collapse implementa-
tion against the𝑁-body data, we test many variations of the
SIDM density profile. In this and all following subsections,
we calculate lensing statistics over an annular aperture with
innerradius0.5 arcsecandouterradius1.5 arcsec,andreduce
our lowest rendered halo mass from108 𝑀⊙ to10 6 𝑀⊙. All
ofthesetestsareconductedoverthesame200randomrealiza-
tions of subhalos and line-of-sight halo populations rendered
withpyHalo,withconvergencemapscomputedover300×300
pixel2(3.2×3.2 arcsec 2)grids. Furtherdetailsofoursubstruc-
ture and line-of-sight realizations are in Section IIB.
In our first test, we vary the collapse time of the continu-
ously evolving density profile. We test two different methods:
in one, we freeze the profile at the collapse time, and in the
other, we instead boost the profile up to the default final pro-
file (log(𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)=2.237). See Section IIC for details of the
continuous profile and these two modifications.
Figure 6 shows all three multipole moments for a subset
of collapse times in Table II. In all three subplots we see
that for the 60% collapse threshold, the lensing prediction
is significantly different from CDM only in the frozen case,
where we halt the density profile evolution once it reaches
the threshold density. With the 20% collapse threshold, both
boostingandfreezingalterthepredictions. Freezingtheprofile
always suppresses the SIDM enhancement, reducing the gap
between CDM and SIDM predictions. The boosted density
profile, when it has an effect, enhances all three moments. In
Figure 7 we show how the monopole moment changes with
collapse time, this time plotting every collapse time model.
These results follow the general trend found in Figure 6.
Fromtheprofilefreezingresults,weseethatalteringthecen-
tral density of core-collapsed halos affects the lensing signal
atsmallscales,forthresholdsof60% log 10 (𝜌 f)andlower. For

10
1.00.3 3
r (kpc)
0.10.03 0.3
r (arcsec)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60div, 0(r)×106
CDM
SIDM (Full Evolution)
0.6log10( f) (Boost)
0.2log10( f) (Boost)
0.6log10( f) (Freeze)
0.2log10( f) (Freeze)
1.00.3 3
r (kpc)
0.10.03 0.3
r (arcsec)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
div, 2(r)×106
1.00.3 3
r (kpc)
0.10.03 0.3
r (arcsec)
0
1
2
3
4
5curl, 2(r)×106
FIG. 6: Multipole moments for CDM, SIDM full evolution, and SIDM early collapse models with two collapse thresholds from
Table II. The SIDM models use a velocity dependent cross-section (Equation 1) with {𝜎0 =200 cm 2/g,𝜔=200 km/s}. Lines
are the mean multipole moments as a function of distance, and shaded regions are the uncertainty of the mean derived from 200
realizations. Note that the distance axis is in angular units on the bottom of the figure, and in physical units on the top.
0.10.03 0.3
r (arcsec)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
early
div, 0(r) full
div, 0(r)
Full Evolution
Boost
Freeze
0.2log10( f)
0.25log10( f)
0.3log10( f)
0.35log10( f)
0.4log10( f)
0.6log10( f)
0.8log10( f)
FIG. 7: Relative difference between the average monopole
moment of full SIDM evolution (𝜉full
div,0) and early collapse
(𝜉early
div,0). The lines are the mean values of the monopole
moments, with dashed lines boosting the density profile and
dotted lines freezing it. The shaded region is the uncertainty
in the mean of𝜉full
div,0 with 200 realizations.
lowercore-collapseddensities,thechangebecomessignificant
at smaller scales. The moment𝜉div,2 (𝑟)remains sensitive to
densitychangesatlargerscalesthanthemoments𝜉 div,0 (𝑟)and
𝜉curl,2 (𝑟)do, with distinguishable offsets from full evolution
persisting above0.1 arcsec.
In contrast, the boosting results show that the collapse time
hasverylittleeffectonthelensingstatistics. Sincetheboosted
profile does not affect the monopole moment until our most
extreme case (20% log10 (𝜌 f)), it appears that the final density
hasamuchstrongereffectonlensingpopulationstatisticsthan
the collapse time.
C. Binary Core-collapse
Inournextsetoftests,wecomparethefullytime-dependent
densityprofile(SectionIIC)againstmodelswithbinarycore-
collapse (Section IID). These tests are designed to probe the
importanceofindividualhalomodelingwhencomputinglens-
ing population statistics. We compute lensing statistics for
CDM, continuous core-collapse, and four variations of bi-
nary core-collapse. In the four binary collapse models we
vary the un-collapsed density profile (cored versus NFW) and
the method of assigning core-collapse (individual evolution
times versus randomly assigned collapse). When modeling
un-collapsed profiles as cored, we use the maximal cored
profile of our gravothermal model (Equation 6 evaluated at
log(𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)=1.341).
Figure 8 shows the three multipole moments for the CDM,
SIDM, and various binary collapse cases. In the𝜉div,0 panel
we can see that the small-scale power is suppressed in binary
collapsecomparedtothefulltime-evolutioninallcases. This
is not a surprising result, as this binary approach models all
halos with the un-collapsed profile iflog(𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)<2.237, even
iftheyarepartiallycollapsed. Wecanalsoseeinthispanelthat

11
1.00.3 3
r (kpc)
0.10.03 0.3
r (arcsec)
0
10
20
30
40div, 0(r)×106
CDM
SIDM (Full Evolution)
Binary (Core, individual collapse)
Binary (TNFW, individual collapse)
Binary (Core, random collapse)
Binary (TNFW, random collapse)
1.00.3 3
r (kpc)
0.10.03 0.3
r (arcsec)
5
4
3
2
1
0
div, 2(r)×106
1.00.3 3
r (kpc)
0.10.03 0.3
r (arcsec)
0
1
2
3curl, 2(r)×106
FIG. 8: Multipole moments for CDM, SIDM full evolution, and SIDM binary collapse with variations on the collapse method
and un-collapsed profile. Among the binary collapse cases, different un-collapsed profiles (cored versus TNFW) are
distinguished with line style, and different collapse methods (individual evolution versus random) are distinguished with color.
The SIDM models use a velocity dependent cross-section (Equation 1) with {𝜎0 =200 cm 2/g,𝜔=200 km/s}. Lines are the
mean multipole moments as a function of distance, and shaded regions are the uncertainty of the mean derived from 200
realizations. Note that the distance axis is in angular units on the bottom of the figure, and in physical units on the top.
themomentisfurthersuppressedwhenusingcoredinitialcon-
ditions, and when randomly determining halo core-collapse.
Since the total fraction of collapsed halos does not change
when randomizing core-collapse, this suggests that substruc-
ture with a more pronounced lensing effect tends to collapse
faster. Sincewedonotcalculateindividualtidaltracksforsub-
halos,thispreferentialcollapsemustbeduetohaloparameters
(mass and concentration) rather than position in the lens.
ThecenterandrightpanelsofFigure8showsthesamecom-
parison for the quadrupole moments𝜉div,2 and𝜉 curl,2 respec-
tively,whichprobetheline-of-sightstructure. Thequadrupole
moments also show that binary collapse suppresses power on
smallscales,andthiseffectismoresevereforrandomcollapse
and cored initial profiles. Similar to the collapse time tests in
Section IIIB, we see that model differences are distinguish-
able in𝜉div,2 (𝑟)at larger scales than they are for the other two
moments.
All of our binary core-collapse approaches in Figure 8 sup-
press the lensing signal on small scales, shifting the multi-
pole moments away from the SIDM full evolution and to-
wards results for CDM. The most accurate binary collapse
model, where halo core-collapse is tracked accurately and un-
collapsed halos are modeled with a TNFW profile, cannot be
clearly distinguished from the full evolution with our sample
of 200 strong lenses. The actual detectability of these offsets
willdependonthescalesbeingprobedinagivenanalysis,and
the magnitude of observational uncertainties.
IV. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
In this study, we investigate how the two-point correla-
tion function of the effective lensing convergence field is af-
fected by variations in SIDM core-collapse models. To do
this, we have implemented a time-evolving halo density pro-
file fit to gravothermal fluid simulations into thepyHaloand
lenstronomygravitationallensingcodes. Tomodelsubhalos
with this profile, derived originally for isolated halos, we ap-
ply a numerical factor to each halo’s core-collapse time based
on𝑁-body simulations of SIDM subhalos. This factor ac-
counts for the difference in expected collapse time between
field halos and substructure, due to tidal effects and evpaora-
tion [16, 21]. We have varied the final profile central density
andcore-collapsetimeofthiscontinuousmodel,andmodeled
the resulting changes to the two-point correlation function.
We have also compared the continuous collapse profile to bi-
nary collapse models, where each halo is modeled with one
of two profiles, depending on whether the halo is considered
collapsed or uncollapsed. Our results can be summarized as
follows:
•The multipole moments of the two-point correlation
function are much more sensitive to the density profile
ofcollapsedhalosthantheyaretothecollapsetimescale
(Figure 7). This suggests modest systematic uncertain-
ties in the SIDM halo core-collapse time (whether the
uncertaintyisinthedefinitionofthecollapsetimeorin
the actual evolution of the density profile) may not sig-
nificantly affect lensing predictions, as long as the fully
collapseddensityprofileisaccurate. Withoursampleof
200simulatedstronglenses, wefindthatcollapsetimes
upto20%shorterthanthefullevolutiondonotproduce
significantlydifferentvaluesof𝜉 div,0 onallscaleslarger
than2×10 −2 arcsec.
•Employing binary core-collapse models suppresses the
small-scaleenhancementtoallmultipolemomentspro-

12
vided by SIDM core-collapse, but the effect may not
be significant at larger scales depending on the num-
ber of strong lenses included in the calculation (Figure
8). If binary core-collapse models are used, they are
mostaccuratecomparedtofullhaloevolutionwhenun-
collapsed halos are modeled with TNFW profiles, as
opposedtocoredprofileswhichsuppressalltestedmul-
tipole moments.
•Inthisstudy,randomassignmentofcore-collapsedpro-
filessuppressestheSIDMenhancementofthemultipole
momentscomparedtousingaccuratecollapsestatesfor
individual halos (Figure 8). This suppression suggests
a correlation between a halo’s influence on the lens-
ing convergence and its core-collapse speed, even if
the core-collapse process is ignored. Since we do not
model the effect of subhalo position on core-collapse
speed, this correlation must be based on the mass and
concentration of perturbing halos.
The interpretation of our final point requires additional dis-
cussion. The collapse acceleration factor we use to approx-
imate tidal effects is randomly determined for each subhalo,
andthisislikelyinfluencingtheresultsoftherandomcollapse
test. Sincethesubhalosaresomewhatrandomizedineventhe
fullevolutionmodel,wewouldexpectthatadditionalshuffling
of collapse states would have a limited effect on the lensing
statistics. It is possible that for a fully deterministic model of
tidal effects, which considers the orbital parameters of indi-
vidualhalos,randomcollapsewouldshowamorepronounced
difference from the full evolution. This hypothesis could be
checked by using more precise SIDM tidal evolution tracks.
The full evolution core-collapse method we present in this
manuscript would benefit from further comparisons against
common methods in the literature. In Appendix B, we show
that our model is significantly different than the cored and
truncated NFW profile, but there are other efficient approxi-
mations of core-collapse (such as the cored power-law profile
[39, 41, 91] and parametric core-collapse model [106]) which
could be checked for accuracy against the model in this work,
oragainstotherphysicallymotivatedfull-evolutionmodels. It
would also be useful to implement our full evolution model
into predictions of flux-ratio anomalies in multiply imaged
stronglenses,whichcanbeusedtoprobesubstructuredensity
profiles [39, 44]. These comparisons can be made in future
work, using the framework developed in this study.
Our results show that the two-point correlation function is
sensitive to some common simplifications of and uncertain-
ties in the SIDM core-collapse process, with the strongest
effects on the smallest distance scales. Any lensing survey
that uses this statistic must make intentional and physically
motivated choices for substructure and line-of-sight structure
halos. Itisnotyetclearwhateffect,ifany,thesesubtlechanges
would have on other measurements such as flux-ratio anoma-
lies which often use a cored and truncated NFW profile (see
Appendix B for additional discussion). To produce confident
testsofSIDM,werecommendthattheseworksincludeanalo-
goustestingoftheircore-collapseprofilechoices,andcompare
the resulting deflection angle profiles against physically mo-
tivated core-collapse models. Models of SIDM core-collapse
in realistic environments must also be refined, as testable pre-
dictions of SIDM may have a strong dependence on the final
state of core-collapsed halos.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Daniel Gilman and Tansu Daylan for useful dis-
cussions. B. D. and F.-Y. C.-R. acknowledge the support
of program HST-AR-17061.001-A whose support was pro-
vided by the National Aeronautical and Space Administration
(NASA) through a grant from the Space Telescope Science
Institute, which is operated by the Association of Universities
for Research in Astronomy, Incorporated, under NASA con-
tract NAS5-26555. F.-Y. C.-R. also acknowledges the support
of National Science Foundation award OIA-2327192.
C. M. is partially supported by the Presidential Fellowship
oftheOhioStateUniversityGraduateSchool. Thisworkben-
efited from theDark Matter Theory, Simulation, and Analysis
workshop in the Era of Large Surveysworkshop at the Kavli
Institute for Theoretical Physics (NSF PHY-2309135).
Appendix A: Gravothermal Profile Truncation
ThegravothermalmodelfitgiveninRef. [71]startsfroman
NFW profile, and does not include truncation at any time. To
model realistic halos with converged total mass, we introduce
a truncation to the density profile. We do this by including a
commontruncationfactorusedinTNFWprofiles𝑟 2
t /(𝑟 2 +𝑟 2
t ),
with the truncation radius𝑟t as the only additional parameter.
We do not explore how this truncation factor may directly
affect core-collapse evolution, but account for the effect of
tidal interactions on the collapse time by calibrating to𝑁-
body simulations of subhalo populations (see Section IIC for
details). Figure 9 shows the truncated density profile for three
𝑟t valuesandthreedifferentstagesofcore-collapse. Foractual
halos in this study, the truncation radius and core-collapse
stage are selected as described in Section IIC.
Appendix B: Density Profile Comparisons
Anotherchoiceforbinarycore-collapseprofilesisanNFW-
likedensityprofilewithtruncationandaconstantdensitycore
(TNFWC)4:
𝜌TNFWC(𝑟)= 𝜌′
s𝑟 ′
s
3

𝑟2 +𝑟 ′c
2
1/2 
𝑟 ′s
2 +𝑟 2

 
𝑟 ′
t
2
𝑟2 +𝑟 ′
t
2
!
(B1)
4 Thismethodisimplementedinversion1.4.1ofpyHalo,usingtheTNFWC
profile inlenstronomy.

13
10 2
 10 1
 100 101 102
r/rs
10 5
10 2
101
/ s
NFW
log( t) = -5.6
NFW
SIDM (no truncation)
SIDM (rt = 0.1 × rs)
SIDM (rt = rs)
SIDM (rt = 10 × rs)
10 2
 10 1
 100 101 102
r/rs
10 5
10 2
101
/ s
Cored
log( t) = 1.341
10 2
 10 1
 100 101 102
r/rs
10 5
10 2
101
/ s
Core-collapsed
log( t) = 2.237
FIG. 9: Our truncation method for SIDM core-collapsing halos at three stages of evolution: the initial CDM profile (left), the
maximally cored profile (center), and deeply core-collapsed (right). In each panel we compare the gravothermal model density
profile without any truncation (orange, Equation 6) to profiles with three example truncations (blue, truncation differentiated by
line style). The initial NFW profile (black) is shown in each panel for reference.
where𝜌 ′
s 𝑟 ′
s,𝑟 ′
c, and𝑟 ′
t are the scale density, scale radius, core
radius, and truncation radius, respectively. We use primed
variablestodistinguishfromtheprofileparametersoftheorig-
inalNFWorTNFWprofilebeforecorecollapse,andfromthe
parameters of a core-collapsed halo with our gravothermal
profile.
Both this model and our gravothermal profile (Equation
6) include a constant density core, but they differ in their
outer profiles. The gravothermal profile includes a two-phase
outer profile that transitions at the outer radius𝑟out, while the
TNFWC profile does not. This creates a modeling challenge,
as it is not clear if there are TNFWC parameter choices that
produce similar deflection angles profiles as the gravothermal
model. As an exercise, we attempt to match the TNFWC and
gravothermaldeflectionangleprofileswithseveralprocedures
for selecting TNFWC profile parameters. Our goal is to find
TNFWC parameter choices that produce a deflection angle
profile similar to a core-collapsed halo with the gravothermal
model. Wecomparethedeflectionprofileinsteadofthedensity
profilebecausethedeflectionangleistherelevantquantityfor
calculatingtheconvergencemap,andincludestheeffectsof2D
projectionwhicharenotimmediatelyapparentina3Dprofile.
Forthistestwewillusethemostcollapsedprofileinourlookup
table(log 10 (𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)=2.237),andsetthetruncationradiustobe
much larger than the NFW scale radius (𝑟t =𝑟 ′
t =100×𝑟 s).
The TNFWC profile has four parameters for us to select
valuesfor:𝜌 ′
s 𝑟 ′
s,𝑟 ′
c,and𝑟 ′
t. Thescaledensity𝜌 ′
s willbesetby
massconservation,whereweassumethecore-collapseprocess
doesnotalterthetotalmassenclosedwithinsomelargeradius.
As we do with our gravothermal profile, we will use60×𝑟s
for this mass conservation radius. We will use a similarly
straightforwardassumptiontosetthetruncationradius𝑟 ′
t,and
calculate the truncation radius in the same manner as we do
for CDM halos (see Section IIC). Both of these choices are
implemented inpyHalo.
Thefinaltwoparametersarelessstraightforward. Whilethe
un-collapsedTNFWprofileandthecollapsedTNFWCprofile
both have a scale radius parameter (𝑟s and𝑟 ′
s, respectively),
thereisnoapriorireasonthecollapsedhalowillhavethesame
scale length as the un-collapsed profile. One TNFWC core-
collapse implementation inpyHalosets the TNFWC scale
radius equal to the core radius (𝑟′
s =𝑟 ′
c) when the core size
is smaller than the truncation radius, and sets it equal to the
truncationradiusotherwise(𝑟 ′
s =𝑟 ′
t). Thisconventionreduces
the number of free parameters to one, only the core radius𝑟′
c,
which can then be chosen to represent the desired stage of
core-collapse.
Inourfirsttest(leftpanelofFigure10),weadoptpyHalo’s
convention and set the scale radius equal to the core size
(𝑟′
s =𝑟 ′
c). We then vary the TNFWC core size relative to
the gravothermal core size. We see that no choice of𝑟′
c pro-
ducesdeflectionprofilessimilartothegravothermalmodel;to
produce a peak deflection magnitude as low as the gravother-
mal profile we must use a much larger core, which shifts the
peak deflection position to larger radii.
Next, we adopt a new convention and set the TNFWC scale
radius equal to the scale length of the original TNFW profile
(𝑟′
s =𝑟 s). We vary𝑟′
c as before, and again find no satisfactory
choice of parameters (center panel of Figure 10). In this case
the core radius has little impact on the deflection profile, with
the TNFWC model producing a peak deflection at a much
larger radius than the gravothermal model in all cases.
For our final test, we instead fix the core size for the TN-
FWC profile equal to the gravothermal core size (𝑟′
c =𝑟 c),
and instead allow the TNFWC scale radius to vary. This ap-
proach comes closest to match the gravothermal profile, with
thesuggestionthatsomevalue𝑟 ′
s ∈ [0.1×𝑟 s, 𝑟 s]mayprovidea
somewhat closeapproximation of thegravothermal deflection
profile.
Our tests are not exhaustive; we only attempt to match the
TNFWC profile to one possible halo, a fully-collapsed halo
with a large truncation radius, and more detailed fitting is
neededtofullyexplorethetwo-dimensional(𝑟 ′
s, 𝑟′
c)parameter
space. Our findings show that the fitting process is complex,
and there is not an immediately clear solution for matching
these two profiles. Additionally, we find that using the same
TNFWCmodelassumptionsasisdoneinpyHaloleadstosig-
nificantly enhanced deflection compared to the gravothermal

14
model’score-collapsedprofile. Theseresultsdonotimplythat
one profile is more accurate to the core-collapse process than
the other, just that the two profiles are not interchangeable.
Caution should be exercised when comparing results that do
not make the same density profile assumptions.
[1] C. S. Kochanek and M. J. White, A Quantitative study of
interactingdarkmatterinhalos,Astrophys.J.543,514(2000),
arXiv:astro-ph/0003483.
[2] S. Balberg and S. L. Shapiro, Gravothermal collapse of self-
interacting dark matter halos and the origin of massive black
holes, Phys. Rev. Lett.88, 101301 (2002).
[3] R.K.deNarayandS.S.McGaugh,Theinnerdynamicalmass
across galaxy morphology: A weak scaling with total stellar
mass, The Astrophysical Journal Letters782, L12 (2014).
[4] K. A. Oman, J. F. Navarro, A. Fattahi, C. S. Frenk, T. Sawala,
S.D.M.White,R.Bower,R.A.Crain,M.Furlong,M.Schaller,
J. Schaye, and T. Theuns, The unexpected diversity of dwarf
galaxy rotation curves, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society452, 3650 (2015).
[5] R. Errani, J. Peñarrubia, and M. G. Walker, Systematics in
virialmassestimatorsforpressure-supportedsystems,Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society481, 5073 (2018).
[6] J. I. Read, M. G. Walker, and P. Steger, Dark matter heats up
indwarfgalaxies,MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomical
Society484, 1401 (2019).
[7] N. C. Relatores, A. B. Newman, J. D. Simon, R. S. Ellis,
P. Truong, L. Blitz, A. Bolatto, C. Martin, M. Matuszewski,
P. Morrissey, and J. D. Neill, The dark matter distributions
in low-mass disk galaxies. ii. the inner density profiles, The
Astrophysical Journal887, 94 (2019).
[8] I.M.E.Santos-Santos,J.F.Navarro,A.Robertson,A.Benítez-
Llambay,K.A.Oman,M.R.Lovell,C.S.Frenk,A.D.Ludlow,
A.Fattahi,andA.Ritz,Baryoniccluestothepuzzlingdiversity
of dwarf galaxy rotation curves, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society495, 58 (2020).
[9] K.Hayashi,M.Chiba,andT.Ishiyama,Diversityofdarkmatter
density profiles in the galactic dwarf spheroidal satellites, The
Astrophysical Journal904, 45 (2020).
[10] P. Li, F. Lelli, S. McGaugh, and J. Schombert, A comprehen-
sivecatalogofdarkmatterhalomodelsforsparcgalaxies,The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series247, 31 (2020).
[11] A. Cruz, A. Brooks, M. Lisanti, A. H. G. Peter, R. Geda,
T. Quinn, M. Tremmel, F. Munshi, B. Keller, and
J. Wadsley, Dwarf diversity in𝜆cdm with baryons (2025),
arXiv:2510.11800 [astro-ph.GA].
[12] M. Kaplinghat, S. Tulin, and H.-B. Yu, Dark matter halos
as particle colliders: Unified solution to small-scale structure
puzzles from dwarfs to clusters, Phys. Rev. Lett.116, 041302
(2016).
[13] A. Kamada, M. Kaplinghat, A. B. Pace, and H.-B. Yu, Self-
interacting dark matter can explain diverse galactic rotation
curves, Phys. Rev. Lett.119, 111102 (2017).
[14] O. Sameie, H.-B. Yu, L. V. Sales, M. Vogelsberger, and
J. Zavala, Self-interacting dark matter subhalos in the Milky
Way’s tides, Phys. Rev. Lett.124, 141102 (2020).
[15] C.A.Correa,Constrainingvelocity-dependentself-interacting
dark matter with the Milky Way’s dwarf spheroidal galaxies,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society503, 920
(2021).
[16] Z.C.Zeng,A.H.G.Peter,X.Du,A.Benson,S.Kim,F.Jiang,
F.-Y. Cyr-Racine, and M. Vogelsberger, Core-collapse, evapo-
ration,andtidaleffects: thelifestoryofaself-interactingdark
matter subhalo, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society513, 4845 (2022).
[17] C. A. Correa, M. Schaller, S. Ploeckinger, N. Anau Montel,
C. Weniger, and S. Ando, TangoSIDM: tantalizing models of
self-interactingdarkmatter,MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAs-
tronomical Society517, 3045 (2022).
[18] E. O. Nadler, D. Yang, and H.-B. Yu, A self-interacting dark
mattersolutiontotheextremediversityoflow-masshaloprop-
erties, The Astrophysical Journal Letters958, L39 (2023).
[19] D. Yang, E. O. Nadler, and H.-B. Yu, Strong dark matter self-
interactionsdiversifyhalopopulationswithinandsurrounding
the Milky Way, The Astrophysical Journal949, 67 (2023).
[20] Z. C. Zeng, A. H. G. Peter, X. Du, S. Yang, A. Benson, F.-Y.
Cyr-Racine, F. Jiang, C. Mace, and R. B. Metcalf, Evolution
and properties of self-interacting dark matter subhalos until
core collapse, Phys. Rev. D111, 063001 (2025).
[21] Z. C. Zeng, A. H. G. Peter, X. Du, A. Benson, J. Li,
C. Mace, and S. Yang, Diversity and universality: evolution
of dwarf galaxies with self-interacting dark matter, (2024),
arXiv:2412.14621 [astro-ph.GA].
[22] M. G. Roberts, M. Kaplinghat, M. Valli, and H.-B. Yu,
Gravothermal collapse and the diversity of galactic rotation
curves, (2024), arXiv:2407.15005 [astro-ph.GA].
[23] R. A. Flores and J. R. Primack, Observational and Theoretical
Constraints on Singular Dark Matter Halos,427, L1 (1994),
arXiv:astro-ph/9402004 [astro-ph].
[24] B. Moore, Evidence against dissipation-less dark matter from
observations of galaxy haloes,370, 629 (1994).
[25] J. F. Navarro, C. S. Frenk, and S. D. M. White, A Universal
DensityProfilefromHierarchicalClustering,490,493(1997),
arXiv:astro-ph/9611107 [astro-ph].
[26] B. Moore, T. Quinn, F. Governato, J. Stadel, and G. Lake,
Coldcollapseandthecorecatastrophe,MonthlyNoticesofthe
Royal Astronomical Society310, 1147 (1999).
[27] D. H. Weinberg, J. S. Bullock, F. Governato, R. K. de Naray,
and A. H. G. Peter, Cold dark matter: Controversies on small
scales,ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences112,
12249 (2015).
[28] G. Gentile, P. Salucci, U. Klein, D. Vergani, and P. Kalberla,
The cored distribution of dark matter in spiral galax-
ies, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety351, 903 (2004), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/351/3/903/3595222/351-3-903.pdf.
[29] M. Kaplinghat, T. Ren, and H.-B. Yu, Dark matter cores and
cuspsinspiralgalaxiesandtheirexplanations,JournalofCos-
mology and Astroparticle Physics2020(06), 027.
[30] J. Bhattacharyya, S. Adhikari, A. Banerjee, S. More, A. Ku-
mar, E. O. Nadler, and S. Chatterjee, The signatures of self-
interacting dark matter and subhalo disruption on cluster sub-
structure, The Astrophysical Journal932, 30 (2022).
[31] S. Mao and P. Schneider, Evidence for substructure in lens
galaxies?, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety295, 587 (1998), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/295/3/587/18408388/295-3-587.pdf.
[32] N. Dalal and C. S. Kochanek, Direct detection of cold dark

15
10 2
 10 1
 100 101 102
r/rs
100
101
102
103
(r)/ (60 × rs)
pyHalo Method (r′
s = r′
c)
TNFWC: r′
c = rc
TNFWC: r′
c = 0.1 × rc
TNFWC: r′
c = 10 × rc
Gravothermal Solution
10 2
 10 1
 100 101 102
r/rs
100
101
(r)/ (60 × rs)
NFW Normalization (r′
s = rs)
TNFWC: r′
c = rc
TNFWC: r′
c = 0.1 × rc
TNFWC: r′
c = 10 × rc
Gravothermal Solution
10 2
 10 1
 100 101 102
r/rs
10 2
10 1
100
101
(r)/ (60 × rs)
Fixed Core (r′
c = rc)
TNFWC: r′
s = rs
TNFWC: r′
s = 0.1 × rs
TNFWC: r′
s = 10 × rs
Gravothermal Solution
FIG. 10: Comparison of deflection angle profiles calculated from the gravothermal solution (Equation 6) and the TNFWC
density profile (Equation B1). All deflection profiles are normalized to be equal at𝑟=60×𝑟s, which is equivalent to setting the
enclosed mass enclosed within that radius equal for each halo. The gravothermal deflection profile (bold orange) is for a halo
withlog 10 (𝛽ˆ𝜎ˆ𝑡)=2.237, and each panel shows different parameter choices for the TNFWC profile.Left:The TNFWC scale
radius is set equal to the gravothermal core size, as is done inpyHalofor halos with large truncation radii. The blue lines show
the TNFWC deflection profile with three different choices for core size.Center:Similar to the left panel, except the TNFWC
scale radius is set equal to the NFW scale radius.Right:Here we have fixed the TNFWC core radius to the gravothermal core
radius, and instead varied the TNFWC scale radius over several values.
mattersubstructure,TheAstrophysicalJournal572,25(2002).
[33] A. M. Nierenberg, T. Treu, S. A. Wright, C. D. Fassnacht,
and M. W. Auger, Detection of substructure with adaptive
optics integral field spectroscopy of the gravitational lens
B1422+231,MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSoci-
ety442,2434(2014),https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/442/3/2434/3544969/stu862.pdf.
[34] Y. D. Hezaveh, N. Dalal, D. P. Marrone, Y.-Y. Mao, W. Morn-
ingstar, D. Wen, R. D. Blandford, J. E. Carlstrom, C. D. Fass-
nacht, G. P. Holder, A. Kemball, P. J. Marshall, N. Murray,
L. P. Levasseur, J. D. Vieira, and R. H. Wechsler, Detection
of lensing substructure using alma observations of the dusty
galaxy SDP.81, The Astrophysical Journal823, 37 (2016).
[35] Y. Hezaveh, N. Dalal, G. Holder, T. Kisner, M. Kuhlen, and
L. P. Levasseur, Measuring the power spectrum of dark mat-
ter substructure using strong gravitational lensing, Journal of
Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics2016(11), 048.
[36] A. M. Nierenberg, T. Treu, G. Brammer, A. H. G. Peter, C. D.
Fassnacht, C. R. Keeton, C. S. Kochanek, K. B. Schmidt,
D. Sluse, and S. A. Wright, Probing dark matter substruc-
ture in the gravitational lens HE 0435-1223 with the WFC3
grism, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety471,2224(2017),https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/471/2/2224/19491043/stx1400.pdf.
[37] T. Daylan, F.-Y. Cyr-Racine, A. Diaz Rivero, C. Dvorkin, and
D.P.Finkbeiner,ProbingtheSmall-scaleStructureinStrongly
Lensed Systems via Transdimensional Inference,854, 141
(2018), arXiv:1706.06111 [astro-ph.CO].
[38] D. Gilman, S. Birrer, T. Treu, A. Nierenberg, and A. Ben-
son, Probing dark matter structure down to 107 solar masses:
flux ratio statistics in gravitational lenses with line-of-sight
haloes, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety487,5721(2019),https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/487/4/5721/28901702/stz1593.pdf.
[39] D. Gilman, J. Bovy, T. Treu, A. Nierenberg, S. Birrer,
A. Benson, and O. Sameie, Strong lensing signatures of self-
interactingdarkmatterinlow-masshaloes,507,2432(2021),
arXiv:2105.05259 [astro-ph.CO].
[40] B. Dhanasingham, F.-Y. Cyr-Racine, A. H. G. Peter, A. Ben-
son, and D. Gilman, Interlopers speak out: studying
the dark universe using small-scale lensing anisotropies,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
518, 5843 (2022), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/518/4/5843/47852558/stac2993.pdf.
[41] B. Dhanasingham, F.-Y. Cyr-Racine, C. Mace, A. H. G.
Peter, and A. Benson, Anisotropic strong lensing
as a probe of dark matter self-interactions, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society526,
5455 (2023), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/526/4/5455/53175654/stad3099.pdf.
[42] S. Vegetti, S. Birrer, G. Despali, C. D. Fassnacht, D. Gilman,
Y.Hezaveh,L.P.Levasseur,J.P.McKean,D.M.Powell,C.M.
O’Riordan,andG.Vernardos,Stronggravitationallensingasa
probeofdarkmatter(2023),arXiv:2306.11781[astro-ph.CO].
[43] S. Wagner-Carena, J. Aalbers, S. Birrer, E. O. Nadler,
E. Darragh-Ford, P. J. Marshall, and R. H. Wechsler, From
images to dark matter: End-to-end inference of substructure
from hundreds of strong gravitational lenses, The Astrophysi-
cal Journal942, 75 (2023).
[44] D. Gilman, A. M. Nierenberg, T. Treu, C. Gannon, X. Du,
H. Paugnat, S. Birrer, A. J. Benson, P. Mozumdar, K. C.
Wong,D.Williams,R.E.Keeley,K.N.Abazajian,T.Anguita,
V. N. Bennert, S. G. Djorgovski, S. H. Hoenig, A. Kusenko,
M.Malkan,T.Morishita,V.Motta,L.A.Moustakas,W.Sheu,
D. Sluse, D. Stern, and M. Stiavelli, JWST lensed quasar dark
mattersurveyIV:Stringentwarmdarkmatterconstraintsfrom
thejointreconstructionofextendedlensedarcsandquasarflux
ratios (2025), arXiv:2511.07513 [astro-ph.CO].
[45] D.Kong,E.O.Nadler,andH.-B.Yu,Stronglensingperturbers
from the SIDM Concerto suite (2025), arXiv:2510.01491
[astro-ph.CO].
[46] C. Gannon, A. Nierenberg, A. Benson, R. Keeley, X. Du, and
D. Gilman, Dark matter substructure: A lensing perspective
(2025), arXiv:2501.17362 [astro-ph.GA].
[47] S. Vegetti, O. Czoske, and L. V. E. Koopmans, Quan-
tifying dwarf satellites through gravitational imaging:

16
the case of SDSS J120602.09+514229.5, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society407,
225 (2010), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/407/1/225/3073188/mnras0407-0225.pdf.
[48] S. Vegetti, L. V. E. Koopmans, A. Bolton, T. Treu,
and R. Gavazzi, Detection of a dark substruc-
ture through gravitational imaging, Monthly No-
tices of the Royal Astronomical Society408,
1969 (2010), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/408/4/1969/4219080/mnras0408-1969.pdf.
[49] S. Vegetti, D. J. Lagattuta, J. P. McKean, M. W. Auger, C. D.
Fassnacht,andL.V.E.Koopmans,Gravitationaldetectionofa
low-mass dark satellite galaxy at cosmological distance,481,
341 (2012), arXiv:1201.3643 [astro-ph.CO].
[50] S.Vegetti,L.V.E.Koopmans,M.W.Auger,T.Treu,andA.S.
Bolton, Inference of the cold dark matter substructure mass
functionatz=0.2usingstronggravitationallenses,442,2017
(2014), arXiv:1405.3666 [astro-ph.GA].
[51] S. Li, R. Li, K. Wang, Z. Jia, X. Cao, C. S. Frenk, F. Jiang,
A.Amvrosiadis,S.Cole,Q.He,S.C.Lange,R.Massey,J.W.
Nightingale,A.Robertson,M.vonWietersheim-Kramsta,and
X.Ma,The“littledarkdot”: Evidenceforself-interactingdark
matter in the strong lens SDSS J0946+1006?, The Astrophys-
ical Journal994, 201 (2025).
[52] S.Vegetti,S.D.M.White,J.P.McKean,D.M.Powell,C.Sp-
ingola, D. Massari, G. Despali, and C. D. Fassnacht, A possi-
ble challenge for cold and warm dark matter, Nature Astron-
omy10.1038/s41550-025-02746-w(2026),arXiv:2601.02466
[astro-ph.CO].
[53] D. Gilman, S. Birrer, A. Nierenberg, T. Treu, X. Du, and
A. Benson, Warm dark matter chills out: constraints on the
halomassfunctionandthefree-streaminglengthofdarkmatter
with eight quadruple-image strong gravitational lenses,491,
6077 (2020), arXiv:1908.06983 [astro-ph.CO].
[54] D. Gilman, X. Du, A. Benson, S. Birrer, A. Nierenberg, and
T. Treu, Constraints on the mass–concentration relation of
cold dark matter haloes with 11 strong gravitational lenses,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters
492, L12 (2019), https://academic.oup.com/mnrasl/article-
pdf/492/1/L12/56978865/mnrasl_492_1_l12.pdf.
[55] J.-W.Hsueh,W.Enzi,S.Vegetti,M.W.Auger,C.D.Fassnacht,
G. Despali, L. V. E. Koopmans, and J. P. McKean, SHARP –
VII. new constraints on the dark matter free-streaming prop-
erties and substructure abundance from gravitationally lensed
quasars, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety492,3047(2020),https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/492/2/3047/43927118/stz3177.pdf.
[56] E. O. Nadler, S. Birrer, D. Gilman, R. H. Wechsler, X. Du,
A. Benson, A. M. Nierenberg, and T. Treu, Dark matter con-
straints from a unified analysis of strong gravitational lenses
and Milky Way satellite galaxies, The Astrophysical Journal
917, 7 (2021).
[57] D. Gilman, A. Benson, J. Bovy, S. Birrer, T. Treu,
and A. Nierenberg, The primordial matter power
spectrum on sub-galactic scales, Monthly No-
tices of the Royal Astronomical Society512,
3163 (2022), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/512/3/3163/43221312/stac670.pdf.
[58] B. Dhanasingham, F.-Y. Cyr-Racine, and D. Gilman, Neu-
ral posterior estimation of the line-of-sight and subhalo
populations in galaxy-scale strong lensing systems (2025),
arXiv:2511.17732 [astro-ph.CO].
[59] C.Mace,Z.C.Zeng,A.H.G.Peter,X.Du,S.Yang,A.Benson,
andM.Vogelsberger,Convergencetestsofself-interactingdark
matter simulations, Phys. Rev. D110, 123024 (2024).
[60] I. Palubski, O. Slone, M. Kaplinghat, M. Lisanti, and F. Jiang,
Numerical challenges in modeling gravothermal collapse in
self-interacting dark matter halos, Journal of Cosmology and
Astroparticle Physics2024(09), 074.
[61] M. Kamionkowski, K. Sigurdson, and O. Slone, Numerical
evolutionofself-gravitatinghalosofself-interactingdarkmat-
ter (2025), arXiv:2506.04334 [astro-ph.CO].
[62] Planck Collaboration, Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y., Ashdown,
M.,Aumont,J.,Baccigalupi,C.,Ballardini,M.,Banday,A.J.,
Barreiro, R. B., Bartolo, N., Basak, S., Battye, R., Benabed,
K., Bernard, J.-P., Bersanelli, M., Bielewicz, P., Bock, J. J.,
Bond, J. R., Borrill, J., Bouchet, F. R., Boulanger, F., Bucher,
M., Burigana, C., Butler, R. C., Calabrese, E., Cardoso, J.-F.,
Carron, J., Challinor, A., Chiang, H. C., Chluba, J., Colombo,
L. P. L., Combet, C., Contreras, D., Crill, B. P., Cuttaia, F., de
Bernardis, P., de Zotti, G., Delabrouille, J., Delouis, J.-M., Di
Valentino, E., Diego, J. M., Doré, O., Douspis, M., Ducout,
A., Dupac, X., Dusini, S., Efstathiou, G., Elsner, F., Enßlin,
T. A., Eriksen, H. K., Fantaye, Y., Farhang, M., Fergusson,
J., Fernandez-Cobos, R., Finelli, F., Forastieri, F., Frailis, M.,
Fraisse, A. A., Franceschi, E., Frolov, A., Galeotta, S., Galli,
S., Ganga, K., Génova-Santos, R. T., Gerbino, M., Ghosh, T.,
González-Nuevo,J.,Górski,K.M.,Gratton,S.,Gruppuso,A.,
Gudmundsson, J. E., Hamann, J., Handley, W., Hansen, F. K.,
Herranz, D., Hildebrandt, S. R., Hivon, E., Huang, Z., Jaffe,
A. H., Jones, W. C., Karakci, A., Keihänen, E., Keskitalo, R.,
Kiiveri, K., Kim, J., Kisner, T. S., Knox, L., Krachmalnicoff,
N., Kunz, M., Kurki-Suonio, H., Lagache, G., Lamarre, J.-M.,
Lasenby, A., Lattanzi, M., Lawrence, C. R., Le Jeune, M.,
Lemos, P., Lesgourgues, J., Levrier, F., Lewis, A., Liguori,
M., Lilje, P. B., Lilley, M., Lindholm, V., López-Caniego,
M., Lubin, P. M., Ma, Y.-Z., Macías-Pérez, J. F., Maggio, G.,
Maino,D.,Mandolesi,N.,Mangilli,A.,Marcos-Caballero,A.,
Maris, M., Martin, P. G., Martinelli, M., Martínez-González,
E., Matarrese, S., Mauri, N., McEwen, J. D., Meinhold, P. R.,
Melchiorri, A., Mennella, A., Migliaccio, M., Millea, M., Mi-
tra, S., Miville-Deschênes, M.-A., Molinari, D., Montier, L.,
Morgante, G., Moss, A., Natoli, P., Nørgaard-Nielsen, H. U.,
Pagano, L., Paoletti, D., Partridge, B., Patanchon, G., Peiris,
H. V., Perrotta, F., Pettorino, V., Piacentini, F., Polastri, L.,
Polenta, G., Puget, J.-L., Rachen, J. P., Reinecke, M., Re-
mazeilles, M., Renzi, A., Rocha, G., Rosset, C., Roudier, G.,
Rubiño-Martín, J. A., Ruiz-Granados, B., Salvati, L., Sandri,
M., Savelainen, M., Scott, D., Shellard, E. P. S., Sirignano,
C., Sirri, G., Spencer, L. D., Sunyaev, R., Suur-Uski, A.-S.,
Tauber,J.A.,Tavagnacco,D.,Tenti,M.,Toffolatti,L.,Tomasi,
M., Trombetti, T., Valenziano, L., Valiviita, J., Van Tent, B.,
Vibert, L., Vielva, P., Villa, F., Vittorio, N., Wandelt, B. D.,
Wehus, I. K., White, M., White, S. D. M., Zacchei, A., and
Zonca,A.,Planck2018results-VI.cosmologicalparameters,
A&A641, A6 (2020).
[63] V. Springel, E pur si muove: Galilean-invariant cosmologi-
cal hydrodynamical simulations on a moving mesh, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society401, 791 (2010).
[64] M. Vogelsberger, J. Zavala, and A. Loeb, Subhaloes in self-
interactinggalacticdarkmatterhaloes,MonthlyNoticesofthe
Royal Astronomical Society423, 3740 (2012).
[65] M. Vogelsberger and J. Zavala, Direct detection of self-
interacting dark matter, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society430, 1722 (2013).
[66] M.Vogelsberger,J.Zavala,C.Simpson,andA.Jenkins,Dwarf
galaxies in CDM and SIDM with baryons: observational
probes of the nature of dark matter, Monthly Notices of the

17
Royal Astronomical Society444, 3684 (2014).
[67] A. J. Benson, Galacticus: A semi-analytic model of galaxy
formation, New Astronomy17, 175 (2012).
[68] D. Yang, E. O. Nadler, and H.-B. Yu, Strong dark matter self-
interactionsdiversifyhalopopulationswithinandsurrounding
the Milky Way, The Astrophysical Journal949, 67 (2023).
[69] O. Slone, F. Jiang, M. Lisanti, and M. Kaplinghat, Orbital
evolution of satellite galaxies in self-interacting dark matter
models, Phys. Rev. D107, 043014 (2023).
[70] N.J.Outmezguine,K.K.Boddy,S.Gad-Nasr,M.Kaplinghat,
and L. Sagunski, Universal gravothermal evolution of isolated
self-interactingdarkmatterhalosforvelocity-dependentcross-
sections, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety523,4786(2023),https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/523/3/4786/50681276/stad1705.pdf.
[71] S.Yang,X.Du,Z.C.Zeng,A.Benson,F.Jiang,E.O.Nadler,
and A. H. G. Peter, Gravothermal solutions of SIDM halos:
Mapping from constant to velocity-dependent cross section,
The Astrophysical Journal946, 47 (2023).
[72] Y.-M. Zhong, D. Yang, and H.-B. Yu, The impact
of baryonic potentials on the gravothermal evolu-
tion of self-interacting dark matter haloes, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society526,
758 (2023), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/526/1/758/51771239/stad2765.pdf.
[73] M. W. Auger, T. Treu, A. S. Bolton, R. Gavazzi, L. V. E.
Koopmans,P.J.Marshall,L.A.Moustakas,andS.Burles,The
Sloan Lens ACS survey. X. stellar, dynamical, and total mass
correlations ofmassive early-type galaxies,The Astrophysical
Journal724, 511 (2010).
[74] Q. Wu and Y. Shen, A Catalog of Quasar Properties from
Sloan Digital Sky Survey Data Release 16,263, 42 (2022),
arXiv:2209.03987 [astro-ph.GA].
[75] B. Lyu, X.-B. Wu, J.-J. Jin, Y. Fu, Y. Pang, H. Wang, R. Zhu,
S.Yao,Y.-L.Ai,Y.xiaZhang,H.longYuan,andZ.yingHuo,
The large sky area multi-object fiber spectroscopic telescope
(LAMOST)quasarsurvey: Quasarpropertiesfromdatarelease
10 to 12 (2025), arXiv:2512.02836 [astro-ph.GA].
[76] S. Birrer, T. Treu, C. E. Rusu, V. Bonvin, C. D. Fassnacht,
J. H. H. Chan, A. Agnello, A. J. Shajib, G. C.-F. Chen,
M. Auger, F. Courbin, S. Hilbert, D. Sluse, S. H. Suyu,
K. C. Wong, P. Marshall, B. C. Lemaux, and G. Meylan,
H0LiCOW – IX. cosmographic analysis of the doubly imaged
quasar SDSS 1206+4332 and a new measurement of the hub-
bleconstant,MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSoci-
ety484,4726(2019),https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/484/4/4726/27781920/stz200.pdf.
[77] V.Springel,J.Wang,M.Vogelsberger,A.Ludlow,A.Jenkins,
A. Helmi, J. F. Navarro, C. S. Frenk, and S. D. M. White, The
Aquarius Project: the subhaloes of galactic haloes,391, 1685
(2008), arXiv:0809.0898 [astro-ph].
[78] A. J. Benson, The normalization and slope of the dark matter
(sub-)halo mass function on sub-galactic scales,493, 1268
(2020), arXiv:1911.04579 [astro-ph.GA].
[79] E. O. Nadler, P. Mansfield, Y. Wang, X. Du, S. Ad-
hikari, A. Banerjee, A. Benson, E. Darragh-Ford, Y.-Y. Mao,
S. Wagner-Carena, R. H. Wechsler, and H.-Y. Wu, Symphony:
Cosmological zoom-in simulation suites over four decades of
host halo mass, The Astrophysical Journal945, 159 (2023).
[80] R. K. Sheth, H. J. Mo, and G. Tormen, Ellip-
soidal collapse and an improved model for the num-
ber and spatial distribution of dark matter haloes,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety323, 1 (2001), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/323/1/1/3204200/323-1-1.pdf.
[81] F. C. v. d. Bosch, F. Jiang, A. Hearin, D. Campbell, D. Wat-
son, and N. Padmanabhan, Coming of age in the dark sec-
tor: how dark matter haloes grow their gravitational poten-
tial wells, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety445,1713(2014),https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/445/2/1713/18198187/stu1872.pdf.
[82] E. A. Baltz, P. Marshall, and M. Oguri, Analytic models of
plausible gravitational lens potentials, Journal of Cosmology
and Astroparticle Physics2009(01), 015.
[83] J. F. Navarro, C. S. Frenk, and S. D. M. White, The Structure
of Cold Dark Matter Halos,462, 563 (1996), arXiv:astro-
ph/9508025 [astro-ph].
[84] X. Du, D. Gilman, T. Treu, A. Benson, and C. Gannon, Em-
pirical model for the tidal evolution of dark matter substruc-
ture around strong gravitational lenses,112, 023009 (2025),
arXiv:2503.07728 [astro-ph.CO].
[85] S. More, B. Diemer, and A. V. Kravtsov, The Splashback Ra-
dius as a Physical Halo Boundary and the Growth of Halo
Mass,810, 36 (2015), arXiv:1504.05591 [astro-ph.CO].
[86] C. Mace, S. Yang, Z. C. Zeng, A. H. G. Peter, X. Du,
and A. Benson, Calibrating the self-interacting dark matter
gravothermalcatastrophewith𝑁-bodysimulations,Phys.Rev.
D113, 103011 (2026).
[87] E. O. Nadler, A. Banerjee, S. Adhikari, Y.-Y. Mao, and R. H.
Wechsler, Signatures of velocity-dependent dark matter self-
interactionsinMilkyWay-masshalos,TheAstrophysicalJour-
nal896, 112 (2020).
[88] W.-X.Feng,H.-B.Yu,andY.-M.Zhong,Dynamicalinstability
of collapsed dark matter halos, Journal of Cosmology and
Astroparticle Physics2022(05), 036.
[89] M. Grant Roberts, L. Braff, A. Garg, S. Profumo, T. Jeltema,
andJ.O’Donnell,Earlyformationofsupermassiveblackholes
from the collapse of strongly self-interacting dark matter,
2025, 060 (2025), arXiv:2410.17480 [astro-ph.GA].
[90] F. Jiang, Z. Jia, H. Zheng, L. C. Ho, K. Inayoshi, X. Shen,
M. Vogelsberger, and W.-X. Feng, Formation of the little red
dots from the core collapse of self-interacting dark matter ha-
los, The Astrophysical Journal Letters996, L19 (2025).
[91] D. Gilman, Y.-M. Zhong, and J. Bovy, Constraining resonant
dark matter self-interactions with strong gravitational lenses,
107, 103008 (2023), arXiv:2207.13111 [astro-ph.CO].
[92] H. Nishikawa, K. K. Boddy, and M. Kaplinghat, Accelerated
core collapse in tidally stripped self-interacting dark matter
halos, Phys. Rev. D101, 063009 (2020).
[93] G. Meylan, P. Jetzer, P. North, P. Schneider, C. S. Kochanek,
and J. Wambsganss, eds.,Saas-Fee Advanced Course 33:
Gravitational Lensing: Strong, Weak and Micro(2006)
arXiv:astro-ph/0407232 [astro-ph].
[94] A. Çagan. Sengül, A. Tsang, A. Diaz Rivero, C. Dvorkin,
H.-M. Zhu, and U. Seljak, Quantifying the line-of-sight halo
contribution to the dark matter convergence power spectrum
from strong gravitational lenses, Phys. Rev. D102, 063502
(2020).
[95] A. Çagan. Sengül, C. Dvorkin, B. Ostdiek, and
A. Tsang, Substructure detection reanalysed: dark
perturber shown to be a line-of-sight halo, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society515,
4391 (2022), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/515/3/4391/45315483/stac1967.pdf.
[96] S. Birrer and A. Amara, Lenstronomy: multi-purpose
gravitational lens modelling software package (2018),
arXiv:1803.09746 [astro-ph.CO].
[97] S. Birrer, A. J. Shajib, D. Gilman, A. Galan, J. Aalbers,

18
M. Millon, R. Morgan, G. Pagano, J. W. Park, L. Teodori,
N. Tessore, M. Ueland, L. Van de Vyvere, S. Wagner-Carena,
E.Wempe,L.Yang,X.Ding,T.Schmidt,D.Sluse,M.Zhang,
andA.Amara,lenstronomyII:Agravitationallensingsoftware
ecosystem, Journal of Open Source Software6, 3283 (2021).
[98] R. B. Metcalf and M. Petkova, glamer – I. a code for
gravitational lensing simulations with adaptive mesh refine-
ment, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety445,1942(2014),https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/445/2/1942/18198053/stu1859.pdf.
[99] M. Petkova, R. B. Metcalf, and C. Giocoli, glamer
– II. multiple-plane gravitational lensing, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society445,
1954 (2014), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/445/2/1954/18198064/stu1860.pdf.
[100] D. Bayer, S. Chatterjee, L. V. E. Koopmans, S. Vegetti, J. P.
McKean, T. Treu, C. D. Fassnacht, and K. Glazebrook, Prob-
ing sub-galactic mass structure with the power spectrum of
surface-brightness anomalies in high-resolution observations
of galaxy-galaxy strong gravitational lenses. II. Observational
constraints on the subgalactic matter power spectrum,523,
1310 (2023), arXiv:1803.05952 [astro-ph.GA].
[101] S. Chatterjee and L. V. E. Koopmans, The in-
ner mass power spectrum of galaxies using strong
gravitational lensing: beyond linear approximation,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
474, 1762 (2017), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/474/2/1762/22636474/stx2674.pdf.
[102] A.DiazRivero,F.-Y.Cyr-Racine,andC.Dvorkin,Powerspec-
trumofdarkmattersubstructureinstronggravitationallenses,
Phys. Rev. D97, 023001 (2018).
[103] A. Díaz Rivero, C. Dvorkin, F.-Y. Cyr-Racine, J. Zavala, and
M.Vogelsberger,Gravitationallensingandthepowerspectrum
ofdarkmattersubstructure: InsightsfromtheETHOS𝑁-body
simulations, Phys. Rev. D98, 103517 (2018).
[104] S. Brennan, A. J. Benson, F.-Y. Cyr-Racine, C. R. Kee-
ton, L. A. Moustakas, and A. R. Pullen, Quantifying the
power spectrum of small-scale structure in semi-analytic
galaxies, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety488,5085(2019),https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/488/4/5085/29173130/stz1607.pdf.
[105] F.-Y. Cyr-Racine, C. R. Keeton, and L. A. Moustakas, Beyond
subhalos: Probingthecollectiveeffectoftheuniverse’ssmall-
scale structure with gravitational lensing, Phys. Rev. D100,
023013 (2019).
[106] D. Yang, E. O. Nadler, H.-B. Yu, and Y.-M. Zhong, A para-
metric model for self-interacting dark matter halos, Journal of
Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics2024(02), 032.