Title: Inverse energy transfer in decaying MHD turbulence: A shell-to-shell analysis
Authors: Lenard Kasselmann, Philipp Grete, Pranjal Trivedi, Marcus Brüggen, Robi Banerjee
Published: 2026-05-26
Categories: physics.plasm-ph, astro-ph.CO, astro-ph.HE, astro-ph.SR, physics.flu-dyn

Inverse energy transfer in decaying MHD turbulence: A shell-to-shell analysis
Lenard Kasselmann, Philipp Grete, Pranjal Trivedi, Marcus Br¨ uggen, and Robi Banerjee
Hamburger Sternwarte, University of Hamburg, Gojenbergsweg 112, 21029 Hamburg, Germany ∗
Context.In decaying magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence, energy can be transported from
small to large scales, known as inverse transfer. Historically, this was understood as a consequence
of the conservation of magnetic helicity, a measure of the topology of magnetic field lines. However,
using numerical simulations, inverse transfer was even found in systems where helicity is vanishing
on average.
Methods.We explore the mechanism behind inverse transfer by measuring shell-to-shell energy
and helicity transfer functions from numerical simulations of non-helical and maximally helical
decaying MHD turbulence.
Results.Independent of magnetic net-helicity, large magnetic scales receive energy directly
from the integral scale in both the magnetic and kinetic reservoirs, leading to increasingly non-
local transfer for larger receiving scales. The resulting rate of energy increase in each receiving
scale is proportional to its energy, resulting in self-similar, multiplicative growth. Even though
the system is magnetically dominated, contributions from kinetic-magnetic and magnetic-magnetic
energy-exchange are similar in magnitude. In the case of vanishing net-helicity, transfer functions
between the positively and negatively helical parts of the field are computed. We find that inverse
transfer only occurs within each helical sector, not across them.
Conclusions.Our findings are broadly consistent with the theory underlying the conservation
of the Hosking integral, which explains inverse transfer as merging of local magnetic islands with
equal-signed helicity.
I. INTRODUCTION
Decaying magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence
has received considerable attention in recent years due
to its crucial applications in cosmology and astrophysics
[1]. In cosmology, it is relevant for the evolution of pri-
mordial magnetic fields (PMF) [2–4]. In astrophysics, it
is used to describe the dynamics of the solar wind [5].
In three-dimensional hydrodynamic turbulence, as
originally formalized by Kolmogorov [6], energy is typi-
cally transported from large to small scales through scale-
local interactions, a process known as a direct cascade. In
MHD turbulence, however, additional conserved quanti-
ties can influence the dynamics. One of these ismagnetic
helicity, which measures the topology (i.e. linkage and
self-twist) of magnetic field lines and is calculated as
H=
Z
V
A(x)·B(x)dV,(1)
whereBis the magnetic field andAis its vector po-
tential. This quantity is conserved in ideal MHD, i.e.
for vanishing magnetic resistivity [7], but still approx-
imately conserved if the magnetic Reynolds number is
large enough. It is well known that strong magnetic he-
licity, i.e.H∼E·LwhereEis the total magnetic energy
andLis the typical scale of magnetic eddies, can cause
inverse energy transfer, i.e. transfer of energy from small
to large scales, in a decaying magnetic field [8–10]. This is
explained in terms of a selective decay argument: If helic-
ity is better conserved than energy, thenH∼E·Limplies
∗ lenard.kasselmann@uni-hamburg.de
that, asEdecays,Lwill grow. An alternative (some-
what more heuristic way) to understand inverse transfer
in the case of maximally helical fields, is to imagine the
magnetic field as a sea of localized magnetic structures
or islands that merge into larger structures via reconnec-
tion.
For the sake of completeness, we note that inverse
transfer can also occur in driven systems, e.g. M¨ uller
et al.[11].
More recently, it was found using numerical simula-
tions that inverse transfer is possible even if helicity is
absent on average, albeit weaker than in the fully helical
case for a Batchelor spectrum (i.e. a magnetic energy
power spectrum with a subinertial range that increases
with wave number ask 4) [12]. Since helicity is a signed
quantity, a system with globally vanishing helicity can
still contain patches of locally non-zero helicity density,
see lower-right panel in Fig. 1. Hosking and Schekochi-
hin [13] (hereafter referenced to as HS) used this fact to
explain inverse transfer in systems where helicity is van-
ishing on average: Locally helical structures are stable,
while locally non-helical structures are unstable. If two
structures of equally-signed helicity merge, they form a
larger structure, resulting in inverse transfer of energy
and helicity. If two structures of oppositely-signed helic-
ity merge, their helicities cancel out, resulting in a non-
helical structures which decays away quickly. In other
words, structures of opposite helicity annihilate.
In this scenario, the selective-decay argument still ap-
plies, except the invariant that is driving the inverse
transfer is now theHosking integral, a measure of large-
scale helicity fluctuations.
The theory makes predictions about the scaling of cer-
tain global quantities, such as the integral scale and mag-
arXiv:2606.02617v1  [physics.plasm-ph]  26 May 2026

2
netic energy as a function of time, as well as the evolution
of the energy-spectra, which have been tested [14] [15].
A more detailed picture of the underlying turbulent dy-
namics can be obtained by analyzing the nonlinear terms
in the MHD equations in terms of triad interactions in
Fourier space, where energy or helicity at one scale is
transferred to another via interactions mediated by a
third scale. In incompressible MHD, there are two en-
ergy reservoirs, kinetic and magnetic, that can exchange
energy. Furthermore, decomposing the magnetic field
into positively and negatively helical sectors [16] allows
one to directly track interactions between equally- and
oppositely-signed helical structures.
Transfer functions in the helical mode decomposition
have been studied by Linkmannet al.[17] in a purely
analytical way, but have so far not been measured and
analyzed directly for a decaying turbulence simulation.
In this paper, we address this research gap by apply-
ing the shell-to-shell transfer formalism [18–21] to high-
resolution simulations of decaying helical and non-helical
MHD turbulence. This approach allows us to study in
detail how energy is exchanged across scales in the ki-
netic and magnetic reservoirs and between the positively
and negatively helical sectors of the magnetic field in the
case of vanishing net helicity. In addition, we compute
shell-to-shell transfer functions for magnetic helicity in
order to investigate the relation between helicity transfer
and energy transfer. These diagnostics allow us to as-
sess the role of different scale interactions in mediating
inverse transfer and directly test the dynamical picture
of interacting helical structures underlying HS theory.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: in section
II, we define the relevant quantities, such as magnetic he-
licity and the Hosking integral. In section III, we present
the details of our simulations and the initial conditions.
In section IV, we review the shell-to-shell energy trans-
fer formalism. In section V, we present the results from
our simulations and their analysis. In section VI, we dis-
cuss our results and end with a conclusion in section VII.
Additional information is given in the Appendix.
II. DEFINITIONS
In this section, we define the quantities which are
relevant in the context of decaying MHD turbulence.
Throughout the paper, bold symbols denote vector quan-
tities. Fields written asF(x) refer to real space, while
F(k) denotes their Fourier transform. Different measure-
ments of helicity are summarized in Tab. I.
A. Power spectra
We define themagnetic energy power-spectrumas
EM(k) = 1
2
D
|B(k)|2
E
,(2)
whereB(k) is the magnetic field in Fourier-space and⟨.⟩
denotes angle-averaging in Fourier-space. The magnetic
energy power-spectrum is related to the total magnetic
energy as
EM =
Z
dk EM(k) (3)
and therefore has units of energy×length. Similarly, the
kinetic energy spectrum is defined as,
EK(k) = 1
2
D
|U(k)|2
E
,(4)
whereUis the velocity field. The magnetic helicity
power-spectrum is given by
H(k) =⟨A(k)·B ∗(k)⟩,(5)
such that it can be related to the total magnetic helicity
as
H=
Z
dkH(k).(6)
From these definitions follows the realizability condition
|H(k)| ≤ 2EM(k)
k ,(7)
which implies that thefractional helicity spectrum
h(k) = kH(k)
2EM(k) (8)
can have values−1≤h(k)≤1. In this paper, we will
study the edge-casesh(k) = 0 andh(k) = 1 for allk,
which we will call ”non-helical” and ”helical”, respec-
tively. Note that in an isotropic system the sign of the
total helicity does not matter andh= +1 andh=−1
will give rise to the same dynamics.
B. Helical mode decomposition
Any three-dimensional field in Fourier spaceF(k) can
be expressed as
F(k) =f(k) + e+(k) +f(k) − e−(k) +f ∥(k)e ∥(k),(9)
wheree ∥(k) is a unit vector parallel tok, ande ±(k) are
unit eigenvectors of the curl operator:
ik×e(k) ± =±ke(k) ± (10)
Since the magnetic field is solenoidal, its longitudinal
component vanishes,
B(k) =b(k) + e+(k) +b(k) − e−(k).(11)
We will subsequently use the shorthand notation
B(k) =B +(k) +B −(k) (12)

3
withB(k) ± =b ±(k)e ±(k).
In this basis, the energy and helicity of an individual
helical Fourier mode are respectively given by,
E±
M(k) = 1
2
B±(k)
2
(13)
H±(k) =± 1
2k
B±(k)
2
.(14)
Energy and helicity of an individual helical mode are thus
directly related:
H±(k) =± 1
k E±(k) (15)
Consequently, the corresponding spectral quantities sat-
isfy
H±(k) =± 1
k E±(k).(16)
C. Hosking Integral
Even if the total helicity of the system as defined in
equation 1 is vanishing, theHelicity-densityH(x) =
A(x)·B(x) can still be non-zero locally. In this case,
one expects that patches of positive and negative helicity-
density are equally abundant, such that they average to
zero. The typical size of such a patch should at any given
time be roughly equal to the integral scale of the mag-
netic field. HS proposed that these patches can merge
via reconnection in such a way that the large-scale mean-
square of the helicity
IH = lim
V→∞
1
V
Z
dVH(x)
2
,(17)
now known as theHosking integral, is approximately con-
served.
D. Gauge freedom and helicity
While total helicity, its spectral density, and the he-
licity transfer functions are gauge-independent in a pe-
riodic domain, gauge terms appearing only as vanishing
surface terms, the helicity density in real space is gauge-
dependent. The gauge-independence of the Hosking in-
tegral is therefore more subtle, as discussed in Hewet al.
[22]. Following Subramanian and Brandenburg [23], we
work in the Coulomb gauge throughout, in which helic-
ity density is directly related to the topological linking
number of field lines, making the interpretation in terms
of locally helical structures physically meaningful.
III. NUMERICAL METHODS
For our simulations, we use the open source, finite-
volume MHD codeAthenaPK[24], which is built on top
of the performance-portable adaptive-mesh refinement
frameworkParthenon[25] to solve the equations of com-
pressible MHD:
∂ρ
∂t +∇ ·(ρU) = 0,(18)
∂U
∂t + (U· ∇)u=− 1
ρ ∇Ptot + 1
ρ(B· ∇)B,(19)
∂etot
∂t +∇ ·[U(e tot +P tot)−(U·B)B] = 0,(20)
∂B
∂t =∇ ×(U×B),(21)
whereρis the density,Uis the velocity field,P tot =
Pgas + 1
2 |B|2 is the total pressure,Bis the magnetic
field ande tot =e gas + 1
2 ρU2 + 1
2 B2 is the total en-
ergy. The gas pressure is related to its internal energy
viaP gas = (1−γ)e gas, whereγis the adiabatic index.
To achieve a de-facto isothermal equation of state, we
setγ= 1.0001. We use a formally second-order ac-
curate method consisting of Van-Leer type predictor-
corrector integration scheme, the Harten-Lax-van Leer-
Discontinuities (HLLD) Riemann solver [26], as well as
a piecewise-parabolic reconstruction method and mixed
hyperbolic-parabolic divergence cleaning [27]. Note that
in the absence of explicit dissipative terms, our simu-
lations rely on numerical dissipation. Thus, they are
implicit large eddy simulations whose energy transfers
match direct numerical simulations [28].
A. Initial conditions
We added an interface to theheFFTelibrary [29] in
Parthenonto initialize the magnetic field as a Gaussian
random field with a double power-law spectrum:
EM(k)∝k n1 ·

1 +
 k
kI
α−(n1+n2)/α
(22)
such thatE M(k)∝k n1 fork < k I andE k ∝k −n2 for
k > k I.α= 10 controls the sharpness of the transi-
tion. Following Brandenburg, A.et al.[30], we focus on
a Batchelor spectrum, i.e.,n 1 = 4 with a sub inertial
range ofn 2 = 2. The initial peak of the spectrum is
kI,0 = 30. Together with a box size of 2048 3, this value
gives us a large enough inertial range, but also sufficient
scale separation between the integral scale and the box
size that the inverse transfer has space to develop.
Following Reppin and Banerjee [31], we set the initial
root-mean-square magnetic field strength to 0.3 and the
initial fluid pressure to 1, both in internal code units.
These values place the simulations in the nearly incom-
pressible regime, where density fluctuations remain at the

4
Type Mathematical Definition Description
Total Magnetic HelicityH=
R
V A·BdVMeasures the global linkage, twist, and writhe of
magnetic field lines within a volume. Conserved in ideal MHD.
Helicity DensityH(x) =A(x)·B(x) Local measure of magnetic helicity at each point in space.
Helicity Power SpectrumH(k) =⟨A(k)·B ∗(k)⟩Describes how helicity is distributed across spatial scales.
Fractional Helicity Spectrumh(k) = kH(k)
2EM(k) Dimensionless measure of helicity relative to magnetic
energy at scalek. Bounded by−1≤h(k)≤1.
Signed Helicity Power SpectrumH ±(k) =± 1
k ⟨|B±(k)|2⟩Helicity spectrum for the positively and negatively
helical parts in the helical-mode decomposition.
TABLE I. Different measurements of magnetic helicity.
level of∼1%. For the subsequent analysis, we therefore
assume a solenoidal velocity field, i.e.∇ ·u= 0.
The simulations are performed in a periodic box with
side length 2π. To ensure solenoidality and control the
helicity, we set up the magnetic field from the vector po-
tential in the helical mode decomposition and then take
the curl to obtain the magnetic field. The velocity field is
initially set to zero. We compare non-helical and helical
simulations, i.e.h= 0 andh= 1 as defined in equation
8. Important parameters are summarized in table II.
IV. SHELL-TO-SHELL TRANSFER
FORMALISM
To calculate the transfers, we use an open source en-
ergy transfer analysis framework [32]. In the incompress-
ible limit, i.e., with homogeneous pressure and density
ρ= 1, the shell-to-shell energy transfer functions are
[18–20],
TBB(Q, K) =−
Z
BK(U· ∇)B Q dV
TUU(Q, K) =−
Z
UK(U· ∇)U Q dV
TUBT(Q, K) =
Z
BK(B· ∇)U Q dV
TBUT(Q, K) =
Z
UK(B· ∇)B Q dV.
(23)
These are derived from the MHD equations by decompos-
ing the Fourier space into shell-binsK i ={k:k i <|k|<
ki+1}and then defining the shell-decomposed real-space
fieldsF Ki(x) as the inverse Fourier transform of
FKi(k) =
(
F(k),ifk∈K i
0,otherwise (24)
The type of binning that is chosen is important as it af-
fects the structure of the transfer functions and the subse-
quent interpretation. Thin linear binning filters out spa-
tially extended wave-like structures in real-space while
logarithmic binning filters out structures that are local-
ized in spectral and real space, i.e. eddies of different sizes
[33]. Since we are interested in probing the interactions
of spatially localized patches of helicity, we choose loga-
rithmic (quarter-octave) binning with 33 shells in total.
With binning understood, we drop the indices in subse-
quent notation.
The transfer functions can be interpreted as follows:
TUU(Q, K) is the energy-transfer rate from velocity-
shellQto velocity-shellK. The mechanism behind
this transport is advection and is therefore mediated
by the velocity-field. Similarly,T BB(Q, K) is the trans-
fer of magnetic energy from shellQtoKvia ad-
vection.T UBT(Q, K) is the energy-transfer rate from
velocity-shellQto magnetic shellKvia the magnetic
tension force, thereby mediated by the magnetic field.
TBUT(Q, K) is the inverse direction of this process. By
definition, intra-reservoir transfer functions are anti-
symmetric,T(Q, K) =−T(K, Q), while cross-reservoir
transfer functions do not have this constraint. In the in-
compressible limit, this set of transfer functions is com-
plete, i.e. the energy-change in each shellKcan be writ-
ten as
dEM(K)
dt =
X
Q
TBB(Q, K) +T UBT(Q, K) +ξ M(K)
dEK(K)
dt =
X
Q
TUU(Q, K) +T BUT(Q, K) +ξ K(K),
(25)
whereξindicates energy-loss due to dissipation. In
a similar fashion, we can define a transfer function for
magnetic helicity[34–36]:
TH(Q, K) = 2
Z
BK (U×B Q)dV(26)
Since there is no cross-reservoir helicity-transport, this
transfer function is complete on its own,
dH(K)
dt =
X
Q
TH(Q, K) +ξ H(K),(27)

5
Grid resolution 2048 3
Box size (2π) 3
Initial velocity field 0
Initial RMS magnetic fieldB rms 0.3
Initial fluid pressurep1
Magnetic power spectrum Batchelor (k 4 subinertial range)
Fractional helicityh(k) = 0 (non-helical) andh(k) = 1 (helical)∀k
TABLE II. Summery of the simulation setup.
whereH(K) is the total helicity in shellKandξ H is the
dissipation rate of magnetic helicity.
V. RESULTS
In this section, we present the results from our simu-
lations. Their setup is summarized in table II. Through-
out the analysis, we use the Coulomb gauge to recover
the vector potential from the magnetic field and calculate
magnetic helicity. Inspired by the dynamical picture pre-
sented in HS, we plot slices of the helicity-densityH(x)
for the helical and non-helical simulations at earlier and
later times in Fig. 1. As expected, the helical field only
consists of positively helical patches, while for the non-
helical field, positively and negatively helical patches are
equally abundant. They are localized in space and their
typical correlation length grows with time due to inverse
transfer. In the supplemental material, we include an an-
imated version of this plot, which has been created using
a box size of 1024 3 cells and an initial integral scale of
kI = 20.
In the rest of this section, we first analyze the spec-
tral evolution of magnetic and kinetic energy and mag-
netic helicity, followed by a discussion of the corre-
sponding energy-transfer functions. From these trans-
fers we measure characteristic timescales for inverse en-
ergy transfer mediated by magnetic–magnetic (BB) and
kinetic–magnetic (UBT) interactions. Finally, we assess
the couplings of different scales in the positively and neg-
atively helical parts of the field by evaluating energy and
helicity transfers in the helical-mode decomposition.
Throughout the paper, time is expressed in units of
initial Alfven times,t 0 = (v A,0 ·k I,0)−1, wherev A,0 is
the initial Alfven velocity andk I,0 is the initial integral
(energy-containing) wavenumber. We definek I as the
wavenumber whereE M(kI) is largest. The integral scale
is the inverse of this,L= 1/k I.
A. Spectra
In the upper panels of 2, we show the evolution of the
magnetic energy spectra for the helical and non-helical
runs. Inverse energy transfer is clearly evident in both
cases since the peak is moving to the left. However, as
expected, it is much more pronounced in the fully heli-
cal case. Crucially, both spectra evolve approximately
self-similarly in the sense that their shape stays approxi-
mately the same. In particular, the growth of thek < k I
modes, which we will call the infrared (IR) range, is mul-
tiplicative, i.e.
1
EM(k)
dEM(k)
dt := 1
τ(t) ,(28)
with a timescale,τ(t), that does not depend onk. The
evolution of the spectral peak as a function of the in-
tegral scale is set by the relevant conserved quantity,
which follows from dimensional arguments: For helicity
(H∼E M L), one expectsE M,peak(t)∼E M(t)L(t)∝
kI(t)0, while the Hosking integral (I H ∼E 2
M L5) implies
EM,peak(t)∝k I(t)3/2 [37]. We see that our simula-
tions follow these expected trends after an initial ”set-
tling phase” oft≈18t 0. To ensure that we are probing
the fully developed turbulent regime, we calculate our
energy and helicity transfer functions at this time. They
are discussed in the following section.
In the lower panels of figure 2, we also compare the
magnetic energy spectra with the kinetic ones. We see
that the system is magnetically dominated at all times.
Additionally, for the helical case, we plot the quantity
H(k)·k/2, which, according to equation 7 indicates the
degree of helicity-saturation. We find that the system,
even though it started out fully saturated, looses some
saturation at small and large scales, but remains satu-
rated close to the integral scale.
B. Energy transfer
Having established that the inverse transfer scales ac-
cording to the conservation in the maximally helical case
and the Hosking integral in the non-helical case, we now
investigate how this transfer is realized in terms of shell-
to-shell interactions. To this end, the energy-transfer
functions (equation 23) are computed from the simula-
tions att= 18t 0.
In Fig. 3, we plot the transfer functions that cor-
respond to transfer into the magnetic reservoir, i.e.
TBB(Q, K) andT UBT(Q, K). [38].

6
FIG. 1. Slices of the helicity-densityH(x) (calculated in Coulomb gauge) are shown for the helical (left column) and non-helical
(right column) simulations att= 18t 0 (upper row) andt= 171t 0 (lower row). Colors indicate the value ofH(x) (blue =
negative, red = positive) and a linear color-scale is used. For each subplot, the field is normalized to its maximum individually.
We will start by discussing the qualitative features in
the transfer maps, which are similar between helical and
non-helical cases, and, due to the self-similar evolution
of the system, also independent of time after turbulence
has fully developed.
For shells above the integral-wave-number,T BB(Q, K)
shows a direct cascade: Energy is transferred locally from
the integral scale towards smaller scales. Constant val-
ues close to the diagonal fork > k I indicate a constant
energy-flux across the inertial range, as is typical for a
Kolmogorov-type direct cascade.
Positive values above the diagonal inT BB(Q, K) in-
dicate inverse energy transfer, which is strongest for
Q, K∼k I and gradually gets weaker for smallerKand
largerQ.
TheT UBT transfer-functions show that atK, Q > k I,

7
10 2
10 1
100
EM(k)
k0
Helical
k3/2
Non-helical
101 102
k
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
E(k)
magnetic
kinetic
HM(k) k/2
101 102
k
0.00
18.00
36.00
54.00
72.00
90.00
108.00
126.00
144.00
162.00
t/t0
FIG. 2. Top row: The evolution of the magnetic energy spectra is shown for the fully helical (left panel) and non-helical (right
panel) runs. Time is given in units of initial Alfven timest 0 = (vA,0 ·k I,0)−1, wherev A,0 is the initial Alfven velocity andk I,0
is the initial integral wave-number. Dashed lines indicate the expected evolution of the peak for the conservation of magnetic
helicity in the helical case and the Hosking integral in the non-helical case. Bottom row: The magnetic (solid) and kinetic
(dashed) power spectra are shown for early (t/t 0 = 18) and late (t/t 0 = 171) times. For helical (left panel) and non-helical
(right panel) initial conditions. Additionally, for the fully-helical case, the quantityH(k)·k/2 is plotted (dotted line), which,
according to equation 7 indicates the degree of helicity-saturation.
the magnetic field looses energy to kinetic shells identi-
cal (negative transfer on the diagonal) or slightly smaller
than itself but gains energy from larger kinetic shells.
The inertial-range kinetic and magnetic modes thus un-
dergo acoupled direct cascade, in which energy is trans-
ferred from large to small scales not just within one reser-
voir, but also across reservoirs [39].
From the inset in the helical case and the resulting
rates in the top row of the figure, it is evident that kinetic-
magnetic inverse transfer is also present which is similar
(albeit slightly weaker) in magnitude to the magnetic-
magnetic transfer.
Negative values ofT UBT(Q, K) forQ, K∼k I imply
magnetic-to-kinetic energy transfer close to the integral
scale.
The negative region below the diagonal in the UBT
map implies energy transfer from the integral-scale mag-
netic field to large-scale velocity shells. This indicates
that the growth of magnetic and velocity-structures is
tightly coupled, which is expected for a magnetically
dominated system.
To make it more apparent which scale-interactions
dominate, we plot the dominant donating shells for each
receiving shell in the magnetic reservoir for the Helical
simulation in figure 4. It is apparent that, regardless of
the channel, all IR-shells get their energy directly from
the integral scale. Consequently, inverse transfer is in-
creasingly non-local for IR-shells with lowerk.
We thus identify two main channels for energy trans-
fer into the magnetic IR, as sketched in figure 5. Inverse
transfer via the BB-channel corresponds to energy being
transported from the magnetic integral scale directly to

8
magnetic IR-modes. In the UBT channel, transfer pro-
ceeds from the magnetic integral scale to the kinetic in-
tegral scale and then to the magnetic IR shells. For both
channels, inverse transfer leads to a constant growth rate
EM(K) (dEM(K)/dt) −1 forK < k I, as evident from the
top panels in Fig. 3. This multiplicative growth is a di-
rect consequence of the self-similar spectral shift seen in
Fig. 2.
The underlying triadic Fourier-mode interactions giv-
ing rise to energy transfer into the IR are therefore given
byk IR =p+q I, wherepis the mediating mode. Since
|kIR | ≪ |q I |, this implies|p| ≈ |q I |, i.e. both the
donating and mediating modes responsible for energy-
transfer into the IR are integral-scale sized. We have
also tested this directly by decomposing the mediating
fields inT BB(Q, K) andT UBT(Q, K).
C. Total energy transfer timescales
Since the instantaneous growth rates
τ −1
X (K) =
X
Q
TX(Q, K)/EM(K) forX∈ {BB,UBT}
(29)
are constant across the magnetic IR, as shown in the top
row of Fig. 3, they define a scale-independent inverse-
transfer timescaleτ X(t) for each channel. Since BB and
UBT form a complete set of transfer functions, i.e. equa-
tion 25 is satisfied and dissipation is negligible for IR-
shells, the total inverse-transfer timescale is given by
τI = (τ −1
BB+τ −1
UBT)−1. In practice, we averageτ BB(K) and
τUBT(K) over the IR by taking the mean between shells
withk∈(3.36,5.66). In Figure 6, we plot the timescales
obtained in this way for the helical and non-helical cases
as a function of simulation-timet. We find a simple linear
relation, which is expected if each IR mode grows as a
power-law with time. By measuring the slope ofτ(t), we
obtain the power-law index for the inverse-transfer. Com-
paring the relative contributions of the different chan-
nels, we findτ BB/τUBT ≈0.52 in the helical case and
τBB/τUBT ≈0.72 in the non-helical case. The relative
contribution of the UBT-channel is thus smaller in the
helical case, but still significant. Furthermore, we com-
pare the total inverse-transfer timescales in the helical
and non-helical case and findτ helical/τnon-helical ≈0.26.
In Sec. V E, this ratio is interpreted in terms of different
helical mode couplings.
We can also express these timescales relative to the
Alfven timeτ A(t) = [v A(t)·k I(t)]−1, which also scales
linearly as a function of system time. We obtain an av-
erage ofτ I /τA ≈4.53 for the helical case, and 14.29 for
the non-helical one.
D. Helicity transfer in the fully helical case
Since helicity plays a major role in inverse energy
transfer, it is a natural next step to investigate the shell-
to-shell transfer function for magnetic helicity (Eq. 26)
and its relation to energy transfer. In Fig. 7, we plot it
for the fully-helical case. We find strong inverse transfer,
qualitatively similar to the BB transfer function, but al-
most no direct transfer. This is expected from the realiz-
ability condition|H(k)| ≤2E M(k)/k, introduced in Sec.
II, which states that the amount of helicity per unit en-
ergy that can be stored at a scalekdecreases with larger
k. If helicity is already (close to) saturated at largek, as
it is in the fully-helical case, then direct helicity transfer
is strongly constrained. [40]
E. Helicity-decomposed transfer functions in the
non-helical case
In the non-helical case, the energy of the magnetic field
is distributed evenly between the positively and nega-
tively helical parts of the field, as defined in equation 12.
Since we expect transfer of positive and negative helicity
to cancel out on average, calculating the helicity transfer
function for the non-helical field in the same way as we
did for the fully helical one would be meaningless. We
therefore analyze them in the helical mode decomposi-
tion, isolating inverse transfer in the positively and nega-
tively helical parts of the field. For the transfer function
of magnetic helicity (equation 26) we get four separate
contributions,
T σ1σ2
H (q, k) = 2
Z
Bσ2
p ·
 
U×B σ1
q

dV,(30)
whereσ 1, σ2 ∈ {+,−}are the signs of the donating and
receiving parts of the field respectively. We plot these for
the non-helical run in Fig. 8.
T ++
H measures the helicity-transfer between shells in
the positively-helical part of the field. Contrary to the
fully-helical case, this transfer map shows a pronounced
local direct helicity cascade for shells above the inte-
gral scale in addition to the inverse transfer. Since the
helicity-content in both helical sectors averages to zero
at each scale,H(k)≈0, the realizability condition (Eq.
7) does not constrain the direct transfer in each sector.
We furthermore findT −−
H =−T ++
H , since in the case of
vanishing total helicity, negatively and positively helical
structures should be equally abundant, as can also be
seen in figure 1, and their dynamics will be the same.
Mergers of negatively helical structures lead to inverse
transfer of negatively signed helicity.
T +−
H andT H −+ correspond to cross-sector helicity
transfer.T −+
H is negative around the integral scale in
bothKandQ, whileT +−
H is positive. They do not in-
tegrate to zero and thus correspond to a net loss/gain of
helicity in the respective sectors, as can also be seen in

9
10 1
10 2
10 3
0
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
101
Q
T(Q, K) / EM(K) [t 1
0 ]
Helical
BB
UBT
Non-helical
BB
UBT
101
102
103
Magnetic shell Q (giving)
BB BB
101 102 103
Magnetic shell K (receiving)
101
102
103
Kinetic shell Q (giving)
UBT
101 102 103
Magnetic shell K (receiving)
UBT
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Energy transfer rate (normalized)
FIG. 3. The energy transfer terms for transfer into the magnetic reservoir (T BB andT UBT in Eq. 23) are plotted as heatmaps
for the helical (left column) and non-helical (right column) cases att= 18t 0. The bottom row shows heatmaps for the energy-
transfer from the velocity reservoir into the magnetic reservoir via magnetic tension (T U BT) and the middle row shows the
energy transfer within the magnetic reservoir via advection (T BB). Receiving shells are plotted on the horizontal axis and
donating ones on the vertical axis. The heatmaps are normalized by the maximum over both the BB and UBT channels for
each column individually. The main heatmaps are plotted in a linear color-scale, as indicated by the colorbar. The insets show
the region around the integral scale using a symmetric logarithmic color-scale with a linear threshold at 1% of the maximum
value. The contour-lines trace the regions where the transfer rate is 1% of the maximum. The horizontal/vertical gray lines
indicate the integral scale. For each transfer channelX∈ {BB,UBT}, the resulting instantaneous growth rates of each shell
τ −1
X (K) = P
Q TX(Q, K)/EM(K) are plotted in the top row.

10
101
102
Dominant magnetic shell Q (giving)
BB
101 102
Magnetic shell K (receiving)
101
102
Dominant kinetic shell Q (giving)
UBT
10 1
10 2
10 3
0
10 3
10 2
10 1
Energy transfer rate [t 1
0 ]
FIG. 4. For each receiving magnetic shellKin the helical sim-
ulation, the dominant donating shellQis plotted for theT BB
(upper panel) andT UBT (lower panel panel) transfer func-
tions. The color indicates the corresponding transfer rate,
T(Q dom, K)/EK, whereE K is the energy in the receiving
shell, in units of initial Alfven times,t 0. The diagonal line
indicates transfer between identical scales. The light-gray ver-
tical and horizontal lines indicate the integral scale.
the Q-integrated transfer functions in the upper panels
of Fig. 8.
We interpret this as signed helicity being lost due to
mutual annihilation of structures with opposite-signed
helicity, as explained below.
Assume a merger of two structures with equal and op-
posite helicity, resulting in a structure of zero helicity,
which, according to HS is assumed to decay quickly. To
understand the transfer functions, one needs to track the
changes of helicity in the positively helical (B+) and neg-
atively helical (B−) sectors separately. After the merger,
B+ has lost helicity, whileB − has gained helicity, since
it is now less negative. Thus,T +−
H will be positive, while
T −+
H will be negative.
Annihilation events therefore decrease the absolute he-
licity in each sector. According to equation 16, the ab-
solute helicity and magnetic energy in each sector are
directly related. Consequently, loss of absolute helicity
Magnetic EnergyKinetic Energy
IR
integral scale
Wavenumber
UBT/BUT
BB
FIG. 5. Schematic of the energy flow for both helical and
non-helical cases: Arrow thickness indicates relative trans-
fer rate (not to scale). Within the magnetic reservoir (teal
arrows), there is both local direct transfer, as indicated by
arrows going from the integral scale to the right, as well as
local and non-local inverse transfer, as indicated by arrows
going to the left. Inverse transfer is always coming from the
integral scale and thus gets progressively more non-local, and
also weaker, for larger receiving scales. Purple arrows in-
dicate cross-reservoir transfer (UBT/BUT channel). Energy
flows from the magnetic to the kinetic integral-scale and is
then, as in the BB channel, distributed into the magnetic IR
at a rate that is proportional to the energy in the magnetic
IR-shells. For simplicity, transfer that leads to changes in the
kinetic reservoir is not shown.
50 100 150
System time [t0]
0
2
4
6
8
10Transfer timescale [t0]
Helical
BB: slope = 0.025
UBT: slope = 0.047
50 100 150
System time [t0]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Non-helical
BB: slope = 0.12
UBT: slope = 0.16
FIG. 6. The inverse-transfer timescales as defined in equation
29 are averaged over IR-shells and plotted as a function of
system time. The dotted lines show a linear fit to the data
with the slope given in the legend.

11
3
2
1
0
1
2
Q
TH (Q, K) (normalized)
101 102 103
K Shell (receiving)
101
102
103
Q Shell (giving)
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Helicity transfer rate (normalized)
FIG. 7. The helicity-transfer function as defined in Equation
26 is shown for the fully-helical run att= 18τ 0, normalized
to its maximum. The upper panel shows the total helicity-
change in each receiving modek, i.e. the sum over all donating
modes.
in a given sector implies loss of magnetic energy. The
consequence of this is that annihilation acts as a sink
for magnetic energy, converting it into kinetic energy or
heat.
Since not all merging structures will be of the same
size, helicity is not only removed from the integral-scale
but also from neighboring scales. The transfer functions
from equal and opposite sign helicity mergers thus par-
tially cancel, leading to less overall inverse transfer. This
can be seen when comparing the green and dashed black
lines in the upper panels of figure 8.
To assess how these interactions affect the final energy-
transfer, we apply the same decomposition to the energy
transfer function for the magnetic reservoir, resulting in
T σ1σ2
BB (q, k) =−
Z
Bσ2
k (U· ∇)B σ1
q dV(31)
withσ 1, σ2 ∈ {+,−}. We findT ++
BB =T −−
BB andT +−
BB =
T −+
BB , which is expected due to the symmetry between
positive and negative helicity modes in the non-helical
case.
In Figure 9, we therefore only show the combinations
that lead to transfer intoB +.T ++
BB is qualitatively sim-
ilar to the total BB transfer functions, showing inverse
transfer below and a direct cascade above the integral
scale. However, the cross-sector transfer functionT +−
BB
only shows direct transfer, which is much less scale-local
than the direct cascade within each helical sector. This
moves energy to small scales much more quickly, aligning
with the picture of rapid decay of local magnetic energy
after an annihilation event.
As for helicity, energy lost due to opposite-sign inter-
actions partially cancels the inverse transfer from equal-
signed interactions, reducing the net inverse transfer in
each sector, as indicated by the dashed black curve in the
upper panel of Fig. 9.
We can use this fact to interpret the factor 0.26 differ-
ence between the inverse-transfer timescales in the helical
and non-helical cases that we found in section V C: In the
simplified scenario where all islands have the same size
(which would correspond to the case of a very narrow
power-spectrum), we expect a factor 0.5 difference be-
tween the timescales, since same-sign and opposite-sign
mergers are equally likely. If the power-spectrum is more
spread out, more cancellation occurs, reducing this fac-
tor. This implies that non-helical inverse transfer will
be less efficient for power spectra with a shallower IR-
range, a fact which has been confirmed by simulations,
e.g. Reppin and Banerjee [31].
VI. DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the physical mechanism for
inverse transfer that is implied by our diagnostics, and
draw comparisons to previous works, particularly the the-
ory presented in HS. This theory explains inverse transfer
as the merging of spatially localized magnetic islands of
positive or negative helicity-density.
Inverse transfer as island mergers.For simplic-
ity, we start by discussing the fully-helical case, i.e. we
assume that all islands have positive helicity. The typ-
ical size of such an island is given by the integral scale,
implying that the merger with the highest probability
will be between two integral-scale sized islands. In the
idealized scenario, such a merger would remove energy
from the integral scaleLand transport it to a slightly
larger scale. This explains why, at any given time, most
inverse-transfer is roughly localized at the integral scale
(both for the donating and the receiving scales).
However, our diagnostics show that inverse transfer be-
comes increasingly non-local for structures larger than
the integral scale: The dominant donating scale is always
the integral-scale and energy is distributed non-locally to
each IR-shell at a rate proportional to its energy, leading
to self-similar multiplicative growth.
Mergers would require magnetic reconnection to rear-
range the local magnetic field topology. Reconnection
usually results in a sudden transfer of energy from the

12
4
2
0
2
4
Q
TH (Q, K) (normalized)
T+ +
H
T +
H
T+ +
H + T +
H
TH
T+
H
TH + T+
H
101
102
103
Q Shell (giving)
T+ +
H TH
101 102 103
K Shell (receiving)
101
102
103
Q Shell (giving)
T +
H
101 102 103
K Shell (receiving)
T+
H
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Helicity transfer rate (normalized)
FIG. 8. The decomposed helicity-transfer functions as defined in equation 30 are shown for the non-helical run att= 18t 0.
Transfer functions corresponding to changes in the positively and negatively helical part of the field are shown in the left and
right columns respectively. The bottom and middle rows show contributions from mixed and equal interactions respectively.
The top row shows the corresponding net changes, i.e. the sum over all donating shells. Transfer function are normalized their
maximum value across all helicity- and shell-combinations.
magnetic into the kinetic reservoir, which, as has pre-
viously been noted by Bhatet al.[41], would explain
the scale-local magnetic-to-kinetic energy transfer that
we observed. Outflows from reconnection sites may sub-
sequently stretch the magnetic field lines to larger scales,
performing work against magnetic tension in addition to
advecting them. This would explain the observation that
both magnetic-magnetic and kinetic-magnetic energy-
exchange contributes to large-scale magnetic growth.
Nevertheless, further parameter studies are needed to ex-
plain the relative contributions of these channels and how
they vary with the parameters of the system, such as he-
licity content and diffusion parameters.
Helical-mode decomposition.In the case of van-
ishing net-helicity, we calculated energy and helicity
transfer functions between and within the positively and
negatively helical sectors. Close to the integral scale,
equal- and opposite sign interactions are comparable in
magnitude, aligning with the idea by HS that mergers
of equal-and opposite helicity structures should have the

13
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Q
T(Q, K) (normalized)
T+ +
BB
T +
BB
T+ +
BB + T +
BB
101
102
103
Q Shell (giving)
T+ +
BB
101 102 103
K Shell (receiving)
101
102
103
Q Shell (giving)
T +
BB
100
10 1
10 2
0
10 2
10 1
100
Energy transfer rate (normalized)
FIG. 9. The decomposed energy-transfer function as de-
fined in equation 31 is shown for the non-helical case at
t= 18t 0. Since it is invariant under a simultaneous sign
change ofσ 1 andσ 2, we only show it forσ 1 = +. The bot-
tom panel shows mixed-helicity interactions, while the middle
panel shows equal-helicity interactions. The top panel shows
the resulting net changes in each receiving shell, i.e. the sum
over all donating shells. The transfer function is normalized
to its maximum across all helicity- and shell-combinations.
same probability. While equal-sign interactions lead to
inverse transfer of energy, opposite-sign interactions act
as a sink for magnetic energy. Linkmannet al.[17] car-
ried out a purely analytical linear stability analysis of
these mode-couplings. The idea behind this approach is
that transfer functions which are linearly unstable should
lead to energy transfer away from the receiving mode,
while stable solutions should lead to energy transfer to-
ward it. They concluded that interactions between like-
helicity modes can cause non-local inverse transfer in
magnetically dominated systems, aligning with our re-
sults. Teissier and M¨ uller [36] also measured decom-
posed helicity-transfer functions for a turbulence sim-
ulation with large-scale energy and small-scale helicity
driving. They report inverse transfer of helicity due to
magnetic stretching induced by solenoidal velocity modes
at the integral scale. They also find that inverse he-
licity transfer is associated with magnetic-magnetic and
kinetic-magnetic energy exchanges.
Dependence on IR-scaling.In this work, we fo-
cused on a Batchelor magnetic energy spectrum, i.e. a
spectrum with ak 4 sub inertial range. This scaling
is the natural expectation for causally generated PMF,
while steeper spectra are forbidden by causality con-
straints [42]. For shallowerk 2 spectra, inverse transfer
has not been found in the past [31]. From the Taylor
expansion of the magnetic energy power spectrum (see
HS), one expects that in this case, the Saffman inte-
gralI S =
R
d3r⟨B(x)B(x+r)⟩[14] should replace the
Hosking integral as the dynamically relevant conserved
quantity, which would explain the lack of inverse trans-
fer. However, [14] report evidence of inverse transfer even
in thek 2 case, albeit not conclusively due to resolution
limitations. Since shallowerk 3 spectra might be realized
by magnetogenesis during the electroweak phase transi-
tion [43], it would be interesting to redo diagnostics used
in this paper for the shallower case as well. The conser-
vation of the Hosking integral is tied to the dynamical
picture of merging spatially localized helical patches. A
shallower sub-inertial range would introduce more large-
scale correlation, which might cause this picture to break
down.
Timescales.It should be noted that our diagnos-
tics, while supporting the general dynamical picture pre-
sented in HS, they do not support their claim that en-
ergy should decay at the reconnection timescale. This
is because the reconnection-timescale is derived from the
simple sweet-Parker model of reconnection, which, as has
been noted by Brandenburg, A.et al.[30], might not di-
rectly translate to a turbulent system. In fact, during
our convergence tests (see appendix A), we have found
that increasing the resolution all else equal, thereby in-
creasing the effective Lundquist number, does not change
the decay timescaleτ −1 =dlogE M /dtof the magnetic
field. This suggests that the decay is constrained by the
large-scale structure of the system rather than the micro-
scopic physics and is in line with the results from Bran-
denburg, A.et al.[30] who reported only weak scaling
of the decay timescale with Lundquist number. Reppin
and Banerjee [31] have reported less inverse transfer at
higher Lundquist numbers, while Armuaet al.[44] got
the opposite result. Since the former study usedn= 3
hyper-diffusion while the latter used ordinary Laplacian

14
diffusion, it might be the case that the order of the diffu-
sion operator has a significant impact on this scaling. Re-
solving this will require further parameter studies which
lie outside the scope of this paper.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we analyzed the shell-to-shell energy and
helicity transfer functions for simulations of decaying he-
lical and non-helical MHD turbulence. The main results
of our diagnostics are the following.
•For both helical and non-helical systems:
–Energy is being transferred non-locally from
the integral scale directly into large-scale (IR)
magnetic modes.
–At the integral scale, both, the velocity and
magnetic fields donate comparable amounts
of energy to the IR-magnetic modes via ad-
vection as well as magnetic tension forces.
The relative contribution of these channels de-
pends on the total helicity of the system.
–This energy-transfer leads to a scale-
independent multiplicative growth of the IR
modes 1
Ek
dEk
dt = 1
τ(t) , with a timescaleτ∝t,
consistent with a self-similar shift of the
power-spectrum.
–Upscale transfer of magnetic helicity coincides
with upscale transfer within the magnetic en-
ergy reservoir.
•In the case of vanishing net helicity, energy and
helicity transfer functions can be decomposed into
positively and negatively helical modes. Inverse
transfer is only found within each helical sector,
not across them. This is consistent with the mu-
tual annihilation of local structures with oppositely
signed helicity, as discussed in HS.
We identify energy and helicity shell-to-shell transfer
functions as a promising tool for analyzing MHD turbu-
lence beyond forced steady-state scenarios. In systems
where helicity is dynamically important, helical mode
decomposition provides a natural and useful extension
of this framework. The present study is restricted to
the nearly incompressible regime. Since the shell-to-shell
formalism has been extended to compressible MHD [21],
applying similar diagnostics to compressible turbulence
would be a natural next step. In this case, magnetic and
fluid pressure introduces additional energy-transfer func-
tions that can be dynamically important. We applied
the helical-mode decomposition to the helicity and en-
ergy transfer functions in the magnetic reservoir to test
the picture of helical mergers presented in HS. Helical-
mode decomposition can also be applied to the velocity
field, where, in the compressive case, an additional com-
pressive mode is added. For future work, it would be
interesting to apply a decomposition to all interacting
shells in all transfer channels to find out whether the rel-
ative polarization of the interacting modes between the
magnetic and velocity fields matters for inverse transfer.
Inverse transfer in decaying MHD turbulence has a di-
rect application for the evolution of primordial magnetic
fields (PMFs) in the early universe [2]. Here, the evo-
lution of the magnetic energy-densityEand the corre-
lation lengthLare important, as they are required to
constrain different generation mechanisms with present-
day observables, e.g. the field strength in cosmic voids.
It has been argued that non-helical inverse transfer con-
trolled by the Hosking integral, whose underlying theory
we have tested in this paper, can reconcile void fields
with cosmic magnetogenesis [45].
Another way we might be able to constrain PMF is
via the cosmic microwave background (CMB). This is
because PMFs would source density perturbations in the
primordial plasma, which, if strong enough, would cause
imprints in the CMB via spectral distortions [46, 47]. Un-
derstanding this process will require a detailed analysis of
the interaction between the magnetic and density fields
on different scales, which is what the compressive shell-
to-shell energy-transfer functions are designed to provide.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
LK would like to thank Axel Brandenburg for help-
ful discussions during the NORDITA winter school
on cosmological magnetic fields 2026. PG acknowl-
edges funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) – 555983577. MB acknowledges funding by
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under Ger-
many’s Excellence Strategy – EXC 2121 “Quantum Uni-
verse” – 390833306 and the DFG Research Group ”Rel-
ativistic Jets” FOR5195 – project number 443220636.
This project received access to JUPITER through the
JUPITER Research and Early Access Program (JU-
REAP). JUPITER is funded by the EuroHPC Joint Un-
dertaking, the German Federal Ministry of Research,
Technology and Space, and the Ministry of Culture and
Science of the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia.
AthenaPKandParthenonuse theKokkoslibrary [48].
Analysis and plotting routines made use of the packages
yt[49],NumPy[50],scipy[51] andMatplotlib[52].
Appendix A: Convergence
We tested the convergence of our simulation by run-
ning the non-helical setup with a 1024 3 (1k) box and
otherwise equal parameters. In Fig. 11, we compare
the evolution of the magnetic energy power spectra for
both cases. We find that for 1k, the slope of the spectral
peak is steeper than the∼k 3/2
I expected from the con-

15
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
System time [t0]
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200decay timescale [t0]
1k
2k
FIG. 10. The magnetic energy decay timescaleτ(t) =
[(1/EM)dE M /dt]−1 is compared for the non-helical run pa-
rameters at 1024 3 (1k) and 2048 3 (2k) resolutions.
servation of the Hosking integral, while good agreement
with the expected trend is found with our production-
run box size of 2048 3 (2k). This suggests, that at 1k, the
scale separation between integral and numerical diffusion
scales is not large enough to call the system converged.
We furthermore compare the total magnetic energy decay
timescalesτ(t) = [(1/E M)dE M /dt]−1 in figure 10. They
are close to equal at all times, suggesting that the decay
is independent of the numerical diffusion scale, provided
the scale separation is large enough.
[1] A. A. Schekochihin, Journal of Plasma Physics88,
155880501 (2022), arXiv:2010.00699 [physics.plasm-ph].
[2] R. Banerjee and K. Jedamzik, Phys. Rev. D70, 123003
(2004).
[3] R. Durrer and A. Neronov, Astron. Astrophys. Rev.21,
62 (2013), arXiv:1303.7121 [astro-ph.CO].
[4] K. Subramanian, Reports on Progress in Physics79,
076901 (2016).
[5] C. H. K. Chen, A. Mallet, T. A. Yousef, A. A.
Schekochihin, and T. S. Horbury, Monthly No-
tices of the Royal Astronomical Society415, 3219
(2011), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/415/4/3219/4895690/mnras0415-3219.pdf.
[6] A. Kolmogorov, Akademiia Nauk SSSR Doklady30, 301
(1941).
[7] L. Woltjer, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences44, 489 (1958),
https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.44.6.489.
[8] T. Kahniashvili, A. Brandenburg, A. G. Tevzadze, and
B. Ratra, Phys. Rev. D81, 123002 (2010).
[9] A. Pouquet, U. Frisch, and J. L´ eorat, Journal of Fluid
Mechanics77, 321–354 (1976).
[10] M. Christensson, M. Hindmarsh, and A. Brandenburg,
Phys. Rev. E64, 056405 (2001).
[11] W.-C. M¨ uller, S. K. Malapaka, and A. Busse, Phys. Rev.
E85, 015302 (2012).
[12] A. Brandenburg, T. Kahniashvili, and A. G. Tevzadze,
Phys. Rev. Lett.114, 075001 (2015).
[13] D. N. Hosking and A. A. Schekochihin, Phys. Rev. X11,
041005 (2021).
[14] A. Brandenburg, R. Sharma, and T. Vachaspati,
Journal of Plasma Physics89, 905890606 (2023),
arXiv:2307.04602 [physics.plasm-ph].
[15] For spectra with a shallower subinertial range, the dy-
namics may instead be controlled by other conserved
quantities, such as the Saffman integral in thek 2 case
[14].
[16] F. Waleffe, Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics4, 350
(1992).
10 4
10 3
EM(k)
k3/2
2k
101 2 × 101 3 × 101
k
10 4
10 3
EM(k)
k3/2
1k
0.00
18.00
36.00
54.00
72.00
90.00
108.00
126.00
144.00
162.00
t/t0
FIG. 11. The magnetic energy power spectrum evolution is
compared for the non-helical run parameters at 2048 3 (2k)
and 10243 (1k) resolutions.
[17] M. Linkmann, A. Berera, M. McKay, and J. J¨ ager, Jour-
nal of Fluid Mechanics791, 61–96 (2016).
[18] A. Alexakis, P. D. Mininni, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev.
E72, 046301 (2005).

16
[19] G. Dar, M. K. Verma, and V. Eswaran, Physica D: Non-
linear Phenomena157, 207 (2001).
[20] B. Teaca, D. Carati, and J. Andrzej Domaradzki,
Physics of Plasmas18, 112307 (2011), arXiv:1108.3937
[physics.flu-dyn].
[21] P. Grete, B. W. O’Shea, K. Beckwith, W. Schmidt, and
A. Christlieb, Physics of Plasmas24, 092311 (2017).
[22] J. K. J. Hew, D. N. Hosking, C. Federrath, J. R.
Beattie, and N. Kriel, Journal of Plasma Physics92,
10.1017/s0022377826101275 (2026).
[23] K. Subramanian and A. Brandenburg, The Astrophysical
Journal648, L71 (2006).
[24]AthenaPKis available and maintained at
https://github.com/parthenon-hpc-lab/athenapk and
commit ca99dd4 was used for the simulations.
[25] P. Grete, J. C. Dolence, J. M. Miller, J. Brown, B. Ryan,
A. Gaspar, F. Glines, S. Swaminarayan, J. Lippuner,
C. J. Solomon, G. Shipman, C. Junghans, D. Holladay,
J. M. Stone, and L. F. Roberts, The International Jour-
nal of High Performance Computing Applications37, 465
(2023).
[26] T. Miyoshi and K. Kusano, Journal of Computational
Physics208, 315 (2005).
[27] A. Dedner, F. Kemm, D. Kr¨ oner, C.-D. Munz,
T. Schnitzer, and M. Wesenberg, Journal of Computa-
tional Physics175, 645 (2002).
[28] P. Grete, B. W. O’Shea, and K. Beckwith, The Astro-
physical Journal Letters942, L34 (2023).
[29] A. Ayala, S. Tomov, A. Haidar, and J. Dongarra, in
Computational Science – ICCS 2020, edited by V. V.
Krzhizhanovskaya, G. Z´ avodszky, M. H. Lees, J. J. Don-
garra, P. M. A. Sloot, S. Brissos, and J. Teixeira (Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 2020) pp. 262–275.
[30] Brandenburg, A., Neronov, A., and Vazza, F., A&A687,
A186 (2024).
[31] J. Reppin and R. Banerjee, Physical review. E96 5-1,
053105 (2017).
[32] The framework implements the formalism described in
Greteet al.[21]. It is available athttps://github.com/
pgrete/energy-transfer-analysisand makes use of
thempi4py-fftlibrary [53].
[33] H. Aluie and G. L. Eyink, Physics of Fluids21, 115108
(2009).
[34] A. Alexakis, P. D. Mininni, and A. Pouquet, The Astro-
physical Journal640, 335 (2006).
[35] F. Plunian, R. Stepanov, and M. K. Verma, Journal of
Plasma Physics85, 905850507 (2019).
[36] J.-M. Teissier and W.-C. M¨ uller, Journal of Fluid Me-
chanics921, A7 (2021).
[37] A. Brandenburg and G. Larsson, Atmosphere14,
10.3390/atmos14060932 (2023).
[38] SinceT BB(Q, K) is asymmetric inQandK, the values
at the diagonal are expected to be zero. Non-zero val-
ues across the diagonal are thus due to numerical errors,
which are primarily caused by taking the gradients in
equation 23 in real space on a discrete mesh. They there-
fore only meaningfully affect the high-kmodes.
[39] P. Grete, B. W. O’Shea, and K. Beckwith, The Astro-
physical Journal909, 148 (2021).
[40] Note that even for the initially fully helical setup, helicity
is no longer fully saturated at largekat later times, as
can be seen in Fig. 2, explaining why a very small amount
of direct helicity-transfer is still possible.
[41] P. Bhat, M. Zhou, and N. F. Loureiro, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society501,
3074 (2020), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/501/2/3074/35573300/staa3849.pdf.
[42] R. Durrer and C. Caprini, Journal of Cosmology and As-
troparticle Physics2003(11), 010.
[43] T. Vachaspati, Reports on Progress in Physics84, 074901
(2021).
[44] A. Armua, A. Berera, and J. Calder´ on-Figueroa, Phys.
Rev. E107, 055206 (2023).
[45] D. N. Hosking and A. A. Schekochihin, Nature Commun.
14, 7523 (2023), arXiv:2203.03573 [astro-ph.CO].
[46] F. Uchida, K. Kamada, and H. Tashiro, Physics Letters
B865, 139456 (2025), arXiv:2411.03183 [astro-ph.CO].
[47] J. M. Wagstaff and R. Banerjee, Phys. Rev. D92, 123004
(2015), arXiv:1508.01683 [astro-ph.CO].
[48] C. R. Trott, D. Lebrun-Grandi´ e, D. Arndt, J. Ciesko,
V. Dang, N. Ellingwood, R. Gayatri, E. Harvey, D. S.
Hollman, D. Ibanez, N. Liber, J. Madsen, J. Miles, D. Po-
liakoff, A. Powell, S. Rajamanickam, M. Simberg, D. Sun-
derland, B. Turcksin, and J. Wilke, IEEE Transactions
on Parallel and Distributed Systems33, 805 (2022).
[49] M. J. Turk, B. D. Smith, J. S. Oishi, S. Skory, S. W. Skill-
man, T. Abel, and M. L. Norman, ApJS192, 9 (2011),
arXiv:1011.3514 [astro-ph.IM].
[50] C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, R. Gom-
mers, P. Virtanen, D. Cournapeau, E. Wieser, J. Tay-
lor, S. Berg, N. J. Smith, R. Kern, M. Picus, S. Hoyer,
M. H. van Kerkwijk, M. Brett, A. Haldane, J. F. del R´ ıo,
M. Wiebe, P. Peterson, P. G´ erard-Marchant, K. Shep-
pard, T. Reddy, W. Weckesser, H. Abbasi, C. Gohlke,
and T. E. Oliphant, Nature585, 357 (2020).
[51] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haber-
land, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau, E. Burovski, P. Pe-
terson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt,
M. Brett, J. Wilson, K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J.
Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey, ˙I. Po-
lat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde,
J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. Henriksen, E. A. Quintero,
C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pe-
dregosa, P. van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors,
Nature Methods17, 261 (2020).
[52] J. D. Hunter, Computing in Science & Engineering9, 90
(2007).
[53] L. Dalcin, M. Mortensen, and D. E. Keyes, Journal of
Parallel and Distributed Computing128, 137 (2019).