Title: The Murchison Widefield Array Phase III upgrade: Sensitivity Doubled, Number of Baselines Quadrupled, Flexibility Enhanced, and EoR Observations Optimised
Authors: S. J. Tingay, M. Johnston-Hollitt, R. B. Wayth, T. A. Booler, J. Jones, Y. Wu, J. Gan, G. Sleap, A. McPhail, C. Wintle, A. Williams, C. J. Phillips, L. Verduyn, D. Emrich, P. Giersch, C. J. Riseley, S. Duchesne, C. M. Trott, D. Null, B. W. Myers, C. D. Nunhokee, N. Barry, L. Dressler, J. Ducharme, B. Hazelton, M. Lee, E. Lilleskov, M. Morales, J. Pober, Zhiqiang Shen, Xiang-ping Wu, Xiaoyu Hong, M. D. Filipović, S. E. Tremblay, M. Walker
Published: 2026-06-01
Categories: astro-ph.IM, astro-ph.CO

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia(2021), 1–4
doi:10.1017/pasa.xxxx.xx
Research Paper
The Murchison Widefield Array Phase III upgrade: Sensitivity
Doubled, Number of Baselines Quadrupled, Flexibility
Enhanced, and EoR Observations Optimised
Tingay S.J.1, Johnston-Hollitt M.2, Wayth R.B.1,3,4, Booler T.A.1, Jones J.1, Wu Y .5, Gan J.5 Sleap G.1, McPhail
A.1, Wintle C.1, Williams A.1, Phillips C. J.1, Verduyn L.1, Emrich D.1, Giersch P .1, Riseley C.J.6, Duchesne S.7,
Trott C.M.1,4,7, Null D.8, Myers B.W.8, Nunhokee C.D.1,4, Barry N.9, Dressler L.10, Ducharme J.11, Hazelton B.10,
Lee M.11, Lilleskov E.10, Morales M.10, Pober J.10, Shen Zhiqiang5,12, Wu Xiang-ping.13, Hong Xiaoyu5, Filipovi´c
M.D.14, Tremblay S.E.15 and Walker M.16
1International Centre for Radio Astronomy Research, Curtin University, Bentley, WA 6102, Australia
2Curtin Institute for Data Science, Curtin University, Perth, GPO Box U1987, WA 6845, Australia
3SKA Observatory, SKA-Low Science Operations Centre, 26 Dick Perry Avenue, Kensington WA 6151, Australia
4Centre of Excellence for All Sky Astrophysics in 3 Dimensions (ASTRO 3D), Bentley, Australia
5Shanghai Astronomical Observatory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 80 Nandan Road, Shanghai 200030, People’s Republic of China
6Astronomisches Institut der Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum (AIRUB), Universit¨atsstraße 150, D-44801 Bochum, Germany; Ruhr Astroparticle and Plasma
Physics Center (RAPP Center), D-44780 Bochum, Germany
7Australia Telescope National Facility, CSIRO, Space and Astronomy, Bentley, WA, Australia
8Australian SKA Regional Centre (AusSRC), Curtin University, Bentley, WA 6102, Australia
9School of Physics, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
10Department of Physics, University of Washington, WA, USA
11Brown University, Providence RI, USA
12Key Laboratory of Radio Astronomy and Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, A20 Datun Road Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100101, People’s
Republic of China
13National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 20A Datun Road, Beijing 100012, China
14Western Sydney University, Locked Bag 1797, Penrith South DC, NSW 2751, Australia
15National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Socorro, NM, USA
16Space Science and Technology Centre, Curtin University, Bentley, WA 6102, Australia
Abstract
We describe the latest iteration of upgrades (designated Phase III) to the Murchison Widefield Array (MW A), in the fourth paper in a series
that covers the evolution of the telescope from design concept to initial operational facility, and through two major upgrades. As part of
the Phase III upgrade of the MW A, we report the completion of work to design, build, and deploy a new fleet of digital receivers that
further optimise the MW A for Epoch of Reionisation observations. These receivers complement existing receivers, such that the MW A now
supports the full correlation of all 256 antenna tiles currently in the array. This step releases the MW A from the prior constraint of having
to correlate only 128 of the 256 tiles at any given time, which means that the maximum instantaneous sensitivity of the MW A is doubled
and the maximum number of interferometric baselines is approximately quadrupled. The upgrade is fundamentally enabled by the new
MW AX correlator and various other improvements to the MW A sub-systems. In this paper we describe the new digital receivers and the
other improvements that result in the Phase III system. A range of operational benefits arise from the upgrade and scientific flexibility is
increased. We also comment on the transition from the MW A to the SKA-Low facility near the end of the decade, including a description
of some unique science opportunities utilising joint MW A/SKA-Low data during the Science Verification phase of the SKA-Low Array
Assembly 2 (AA2) period.
Keywords:Radio Interferometry, Instrumentation, , Radio Astronomy
(Received xx xx xxxx; revised xx xx xxxx; accepted xx xx xxxx)
Author for correspondence:S.J.Tingay, Email: s.tingay@curtin.edu.au
Cite this article:
1. Introduction
The Murchison Widefield Array (MW A) is the low frequency
Precursora for the Square Kilometre Array (SKA; Dewdney
et al. (2009)) in Australia, located at the site upon which the
ahttps://www.skao.int/en/explore/precursors-pathfinders© Astronomical Society of Australia ; published by Cambridge University Press
arXiv:2606.01644v1  [astro-ph.IM]  1 Jun 2026

2 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
low frequency component of the SKA Observatory (SKAO),
SKA-Low, is currently being constructed, Inyarrimanha Ilgari
Bundara, the CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation) Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory,
in Western Australia.
The original conceptual design for the MW A, and some com-
mentary on the early phases of the project, are described by
Lonsdale et al. (2009) and Tingay (2025), respectively. The as-
built MW A, described by Tingay et al. (2013), commenced opera-
tions on 20 June 2013. In 2018, the MW A team completed the first
major upgrade of the facility, described by Wayth et al. (2018)
and post-upgrade referred to as Phase II (meaning the original
MW A became known as Phase I). As an adjunct to the technical
descriptions, papers describing the science aspirations and sci-
ence outcomes for MW A Phases I and II have been published by
Bowman et al. (2013) and Beardsley et al. (2019), respectively.
Shortly after the completion of the Phase II upgrade, discussions
commenced in late 2019 regarding a Phase III upgrade. Work
toward Phase III progressed in stages and was completed in 2025.
This paper describes the as-built Phase III MW A system.
Below we provide a brief summary of the progression of the
MW A across Phases I and II, to provide context for the Phase III
description, but we will not dwell on the details of Phases I and
II. The reader is referred to the comprehensive descriptions cited
above. However, before that summary, it is worth describing some
of the high level motivations for the MW A, that have guided the
technical progression across its lifetime.
1.1. High level motivations for the MWA’s development
path
A strong emphasis in the original conceptual design of the
MW A was the experiment to detect redshifted emission from the
hyperfine transition of neutral hydrogen expected to exist in the
early Universe Furlanetto et al. (2006), the so-called Epoch of
Reionisation (EoR). As the realisation of the MW A concept took
shape during the late 2000s and early 2010s, this emphasis was
retained, but the project goals evolved to support a wider range of
science. A somewhat more general purpose instrument emerged,
with the capacity to support future upgrades.
Through Phase II, and now Phase III, the EoR experiment con-
tinued to motivate an evolution of the instrument, but the general
purpose nature of the MW A has also been retained. The flexible
capacity to support upgrades implemented in Phase I has been
very effectively exploited to realise balance across a wide range
of science goals. This, in turn, has led to the high scientific pro-
ductivity and impact of the MW A b and its ability to support a
diverse community. The MW A consortium currently consists of
256 individual members from 39 institutions, in six member coun-
tries: Australia; Canada; China; Japan; Switzerland; and the USA,
and seven countries with Associate Membersc.
In addition to the MW A’s technical and scientific goals, as a
low frequency radio telescope of significant scale on one of the
world’s best sites for radio astronomy, the MW A’s motivations
have also been derived from its status as an SKAO Precursor (an
SKAO technology demonstrator located at an SKAO site). Broadly
speaking, the SKAO Precursors have helped inform the technical
design, prototyping, and testing of the SKAO system, but have
also given the global community an opportunity to make early
bFor the MW A publication library, see https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/public-
libraries/SB5 iHeZTxCZDCj5kUuR6Q
chttps://www.mwatelescope.org/people/
progress in areas of key science for the SKAO, importantly entail-
ing opportunities to grapple with some of the challenges posed by
next generation radio telescopes that will culminate in the SKAO.
Fulfilling these motivations has helped to grow the SKAO science
community and has provided a well-trained new workforce that is
now heavily engaged in SKAO construction, commissioning, and
operations.
The MW A, being a low frequency Precursor on the SKA-Low
site, has been in a unique position to maximally support the path
to SKA-Low, hosting multiple generations of SKA-Low station
prototypes Hall et al. (2013); Sutinjo et al. (2015); Wayth et al.
(2017); Benthem et al. (2021); Wayth et al. (2022); Macario et al.
(2022), that have allowed the design and performance maturation
of many SKA-Low sub-systems.
Other SKAO Precursors are HERA (low frequency in South
Africa Berkhout et al. (2024)), ASKAP (mid frequency in
Australia Johnston et al. (2008)), and MeerKAT (mid frequency
in South Africa, at the SKA-mid site Jonas and MeerKAT Team
(2016)). At low frequencies (significant capabilities well below
approximately 1 GHz), SKAO Pathfinder instruments in the form
of LOFAR van Haarlem et al. (2013), uGMRT Gupta et al. (2017),
NenUFAR Zarka et al. (2015), CHIME Bandura et al. (2014),
21CMA Zheng et al. (2016), Tianlai Chen et al. (2016), and the
LW A Kassim et al. (2010) have all individually and collectively
made similar contributions to the path toward SKA-Low.
1.2. Technical progression of the MWA, Phases I and II
The basic unit of the MW A’s aperture is the ‘tile’, an analog
beamformed aperture array consisting of 16 dual-polarised bowtie
dipole antennas, arranged on a 4×4 grid, approximately 5 m on a
side and attached to a ground plane. The Phase I MW A consisted
of 128 tiles, organised around a dense core distribution and a more
extended distribution, with a maximum baseline of approximately
3 km. The antenna distribution provided a highly filled (u,v) cov-
erage up to the longest baselines Tingay et al. (2013), supporting
general purpose science, and good surface brightness sensitivity at
angular resolutions relevant to EoR science.
Sixteen receiver systems placed in the field each supported
eight tiles, digitising and filtering the critically sampled (Nyquist
sampled for the relevant bandwidth) radio frequency (RF) signals
from the tiles into 24×1.28 MHz ‘coarse’ channels that could
be tuned within the 70 - 300 MHz accessible frequency range
Prabu et al. (2015). The coarse channels were further processed
into ‘fine’ channels (128×10 kHz channels per coarse channel),
before being cross-correlated in a GPU-enabled correlator Ord
et al. (2015). The resulting visibility data were archived and
made available to users for processing. Various other observational
modes, such as the capture of the fine channel voltage data, were
implemented in an early form Tremblay et al. (2015).
An important decision in the final realisation of Phase I was to
build enough infrastucture to eventually support 256 tiles, rather
than 128. The project did not possess enough resources to realise
a full 256 tile array, but could realise the infrastructure to sup-
port a future upgrade. This choice was made, rather than build a
(for example) full∼160 tile array. The reason being that adding
additional infrastructure capacity to the array at a later date was
deemed likely to be highly expensive and complicated. Whereas
the future utilisation of latent infrastructure would be less expen-
sive and could be realised progressively if needed and as resources
were secured.

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 3
The Phase I MW A operated from 2013 to 2018. In 2018,
the Phase II MW A upgrade was completed. In essence, very lit-
tle changed in the signal path described above for Phase I. The
upgrade primarily consisted, as alluded to above, in the doubling
of the number of tiles in the array, from 128 to 256. The additional
tiles formed a re-configured core distribution (again optimised in
pursuit of the EoR signal), but were also distributed to realise
longer baselines, with the maximum baseline increased to approx-
imately 5.3 km. The long baselines were enabled by tiles that were
powered by independent installations of solar panels plus battery
storage.
Importantly, the receiver count did not change and the corre-
lator did not change, which required a fundamental shift in the
MW A’s operational model, switching between a ‘compact’ config-
uration of 128 tiles (maximum baseline of approximately 750 m)
and an ‘extended’ configuration of 128 tiles (maximum baseline of
approximately 5.3 km), requiring the regular physical movement
of receivers in the field to achieve the reconfiguration (generally
∼twice per year). The Phase II MW A operated between 2018 and
2025.
1.3. MWA Phase III, at a high level
Over the course of 2019 to 2025, the Phase III MW A upgrade
was conceived and progressively deployed. A detailed technical
description is the primary point of this paper, but at the high
level the goal was to realise a fully correlated 256 tile array. The
first major element of Phase III to be deployed was a new and
upgraded GPU-accelerated correlator, named MW AX Morrison
et al. (2023), described in §5, capable of correlating the sig-
nals from 256 tiles (plus reserving capacity for some other signal
processing operations). MW AX was deployed in 2022.
The step to a 256 tile correlated array required the develop-
ment and deployment of a new fleet of receivers, to augment
the receivers that had been in place since 2013. Two varieties of
new receivers were developed and deployed, such that 18 new
receivers, plus the original 16 receivers, are now available to ser-
vice the 256 tiles (still eight tiles per receiver). Of the 18 new
receivers, 16 are of one type and two are of a second type,
described in detail in §4.1 and §4.2, respectively. Note that 32
receivers are required for 256 tiles, with two receivers available
for sparing from the pool of 34 receivers.
The new receivers utilise modern electronic components and
are more capable than the original receivers. A very important fea-
ture of the hardware and firmware of the new receivers is that they
support an oversampled filterbank architecture as well as the origi-
nal critically sampled architecture. This means that coarse channel
edge artefacts present due to the critically sampled receivers, that
presented challenges for the EoR experiment, have been removed
in the new receivers. Again, the evolution of the MW A has been
guided by the evolving understanding of how to pursue the EoR
experiment, as well as general purpose improvements. As such,
the new over-sampled receivers have been installed on the core
tiles, which produce the short baselines relevant for the EoR exper-
iment. The new receivers can also operate in a critically sampled
mode, for compatibility with the original receivers.
With all 256 tiles fully populated with receivers, the MW A can
now be flexibly and remotely reconfigured into a range of arrays
with different numbers and distributions of tiles, without any phys-
ical intervention. This represents a fundamental alleviation of the
operational burden of physical reconfigurations. Thus, both sci-
entific and operational benefits of significance have been realised
with MW A Phase III.
1.4. The future of the MWA, at a high level
As the SKA-Low construction phase draws to a close near the end
of this decade, and the early cycles of SKA-Low science opera-
tions are contemplated on the same timescale, the natural end of
the MW A’s mission is mid-2030. Currently, this is the anticipated
end of MW A operations. The Phase III upgrade represents the
culmination of the MW A’s technical capabilities; the operational
objectives until mid-2030 are to maintain this capability and con-
tinue to offer the community incremental improvements related to
the increased flexibility the Phase III upgrade has enabled.
As briefly explored in §9, a scientifically interesting overlap
period between MW A Phase III and SKA-Low Array Assembly 2
exists in the 2027 - 2030 timeframe.
1.5. Structure of this paper
Below we step through the various technical developments that
have contributed to the Phase III upgrade, with design information
and as-built descriptions. In §2, we describe the characteristics of
the full 256 tile array, with a focus on the different array options
that have been initially defined and offered for observations by
users. This gives the interested science audience an upfront feel
for the initial possible (u,v) coverages, and therefore imaging
performances during Phase III. In §3 we provide an overall sys-
tem architecture overview to orientate the interested technical
audience. In §4, we describe in detail the two new receiver sys-
tems. In §5, we describe the MW AX correlator, with an emphasis
on improvements and additions to the correlator made since the
detailed MW AX description paper was published Morrison et al.
(2023). In §6, we describe a modification that supports the over-
all system, the conversion signal chain connections for some tiles
from coaxial cables to fibre. In §7 we briefly discuss operational
benefits, and science implications and opportunities for the Phase
III MW A in §8. We wrap up with discussion, including some com-
ments on the transition from MW A Phase III to SKA-Low in §9.
A full science opportunity paper will appear in due course, to
complement this technical description.
2. Tile distribution, initial array options, and example
(u,v) coverages
The distribution of the 256 tiles in the MW A has not changed
since the Phase II description in Wayth et al. (2018). However, the
Phase III upgrade fully populates these 256 tiles with receivers,
such that no physical reconfiguration of the array is required in
order to select a sub-set of tiles for observations. Such a selection
is now possible in a software-defined manner, without physical
intervention.
The ability to select sub-sets of tiles can have a range of ben-
efits. The sub-sets can be tailored to support particular science
cases and aggregate data rates, for example to select no more than
is required for a particular experiment, thereby minimising the
impact on the MW A archive and the data handling and processing
costs for users.
For initial Phase III operations, five pre-defined array configu-
rations have been made available to users. As Phase III operations

4 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
Figure 1.The “Phase II Compact” array configuration (u,v) coverage.
progress and mature, it is likely that further configurations will
be made available, and ultimately fully user-defined configura-
tions. The initial five configurations are listed below and briefly
described with example snapshot (u,v) coverages. In all cases, the
(u,v) coverages are presented for a single time point, for a zenith
pointing, for a single frequency (at 150 MHz), and with all conju-
gate (u,v) points shown, in order to simplify the presentation for
the reader. The reader needs to keep in mind that realistic (u,v)
coverages will generally take advantage of bandwidth synthesis
and Earth rotation synthesis to achieve even denser and better filled
coverages.
Point spread functions and other parameters (such as data rates,
sensitivities etc) corresponding to these (u,v) coverages are not
provided, as these products will depend on a range of user choices
(for example in weighting schemes for the visibilities) and the
intention of this section is to provide a high level and illustrative
insight rather than exhaustive performance metrics.
2.1. Phase II Compact
This configuration realises a 128 tile compact array utilising
only (new) oversampled receivers, configured to maximise sur-
face brightness sensitivity and take full advantage of the greatly
improved spectral response of the oversampled receivers. This
configuration has been specifically designed to support the EoR
experiment, as well as any other observations requiring a compact
array and/or high surface brightness imaging (for example, pul-
sar observations). The characteristic baseline distribution caused
by the inclusion of the “Hex” tiles established in the Phase II
upgrade is apparent in the (u,v) coverage (Figure 1), evidenced by
the repeated appearance of the hexagonal groupings of (u,v) spac-
ings due to baselines from an individual tile to the sets of “Hex”
tiles.
Figure 2.The “Phase II Extended” array configuration (u,v) coverage.
2.2. Phase II Extended
This configuration realises a 128 tile extended array utilising criti-
cally sampled receivers and configured for angular resolution and
(u,v) coverage, while managing data volume. This configuration
produces a (u,v) coverage with maximum angular resolution and
uniform filling, suited to applications where angular resolution
is prioritised over sensitivity and data volume is a consideration
(Figure 2).
2.3. Phase I plus Solar
This configuration realises a 184 tile extended array utilising criti-
cally sampled receivers and configured for maximum angular res-
olution and (u,v) coverage (Figure 3), while moderately managing
data volume. The configuration adds the Phase II tiles established
using individual solar power plants to the 128 tile Phase I configu-
ration to suit applications that require maximum angular resolution
and require higher sensitivity, while data volume management is
less of a consideration.
2.4. Phase I plus Hexes
This configuration realises a 200 tile array utilising critically sam-
pled receivers and configured for sensitivity at moderate angular
resolutions, with minimal management of data volume. Analogous
to the “Phase I plus Solar”, this configuration adds the core “Hex”
tiles established in Phase II to the 128 tile Phase I configuration
to suit applications that require only moderate angular resolution
but high sensitivity, while data volume management is less of a
consideration. The (u,v) coverage is shown in Figure 4

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 5
Figure 3.The “Phase I plus Solar” array configuration (u,v) coverage.
Figure 4.The “Phase I plus Hexes” array configuration (u,v) coverage.
2.5. Full Array
This configuration realises the full 256 tile array (all available tiles)
utilising critically sampled receivers, for maximum angular resolu-
tion, maximum sensitivity, and maximum (u,v) coverage (Figure
5), at the cost of maximum data volume.
3. System architecture overview
Further details on the architecture components described at a high
level in this Section are described in Sections 4, 5, and 6.
Figure 5.The “Full Array” array configuration (u,v) coverage.
The Phase III array is marked by two significant evolutions,
and a number of enabling changes to supporting sub-systems and
infrastructure. The first significant development is the replace-
ment of the original, Phase I, correlator Ord et al. (2015) with the
MW AX correlator Morrison et al. (2023). Implementation of the
MW AX correlator (following a standard Fourier Transform before
cross-multiply architecture: FX) lays the foundation for the MW A
to correlate more than 128 (dual polarisation antenna tile) inputs.
The second is the addition of 16 new digital receivers, developed
in collaboration between Shanghai Astronomical Observatory
(SHAO) and Curtin University, referred to as SHAO receivers. The
addition of the SHAO receivers means that, for the first time, all
256 antenna tiles can be connected to the operational array at the
same time.
The Phase III array also includes two additional digital
receivers based on National Instruments (NI) FlexRio hardware.
Originally developed as evaluation systems, the NI-based receivers
have been incorporated into the array to release two Phase I
receivers Prabu et al. (2015) from service, to constitute a spares
pool. This was done with a view to prolonging the operational life
of the Phase I receiver fleet.
The Phase III array also sees the conversion of additional MW A
antenna tiles from electrical signal outputs (on coaxial cable) to
optical signal outputs (on fibre optic cable). This change is neces-
sary to overcome practical impediments, including losses in coax-
ial cables, that otherwise constrain the disposition of receivers, and
utilisation of the power and signal infrastructure within the array.
Conversion is achieved by introduction of two new sub-systems,
the tile interface unit (TIU), which transitions the antenna tile
output to radio-frequency on fibre (RFoF) and facilitates tile mon-
itoring and control signals, and the pad power supply unit (PPSU),
which provides power to a group of converted tiles.
These Phase III changes extend the diversity of system archi-
tectures that resulted from the Phase II upgrade Wayth et al.
(2018). Phase III’s heterogeneous system architecture therefore
includes five signal path configurations (C1 – C5), summarised in

6 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
Figure 6. Elements of the architecture that have been introduced
as part of the Phase III upgrade are indicated in green in Figure 6.
Forty eight tiles have a configuration C1 signal path. This was
the signal path configuration for all Phase I tiles. The output of
these tiles (from the analogue beamformer) is carried over a long
coaxial cable and input to six Phase I receivers Tingay et al.
(2013).
The 56 tiles indicated in C2 are all long baseline tiles added to
the array in Phase II. These tiles are accompanied by small solar
photovoltaic (PV) array and battery systems to meet their power
requirements. The C2 signal path includes a BFIF (beamformer
interface) unit. The coaxial cable output of the analogue beam-
former is input to a BFIF positioned immediately adjacent. The
signal is transitioned to RFoF by electrical-to-optical converters
within the BFIF. The BFIF also manages the local PV and battery
power system Wayth et al. (2018). All 56 tiles connect to seven
Phase I receivers.
In Phase III, 8 tiles have been converted to configuration C3 by
the introduction of a TIU. The coaxial cable output of the analogue
beamformer is input to a TIU positioned immediately adjacent.
Like the BFIF, the TIU transitions the signal to RFoF via electrical-
to-optical converters. This sub-set of antenna tiles connects to one
Phase I receiver.
The 16 tiles that feature signal path configuration C4 also fea-
ture the TIU. The path mirrors that of C3 until the receiver. C4
uses two NI-based receivers.
Finally, 128 tiles have a configuration C5 signal path. The out-
put of these tiles is carried over a long coaxial cable and input to
16 SHAO receivers.
The 256 antenna tiles included in the Phase III MW A are thus
supported by 14 original Phase I receivers, two NI-based receivers,
and 16 SHAO receivers. Configurations C1-C5 feature heteroge-
nous analogue signal paths that utilise different combinations of
transmission hardware and cable formats. This diversity of signal
path architecture reflects the confluence of technical, budgetary,
resource, and schedule considerations that have shaped the MW A
project over 13-years of operations, as the technologies have also
evolved.
4. New receivers
The Phase III receiver development comprised a large component
of the overall Phase III upgrade and has resulted in a signifi-
cant improvement in the MW A’s capabilities. In addition, eight
field cabinet enclosures that house these receivers with accom-
panying hardware comprise the majority of the remainder of the
development.
The development of new Phase III receiver hardware was moti-
vated by the need to address the limitations and shortfalls of the
Phase I systems, in addition to creating a small spare pool for the
event of a receiver failure. This activity presented the opportu-
nity to deliver several key improvements to the MW A’s receiver
systems in order to meet the objectives of Phase III.
The most significant feature of the receiver upgrade is the intro-
duction of an Oversampled Polyphase Filter Bank (OPFB) mode,
which was a core requirement for new Phase III receiver designs.
Since the outset of the MW A, Phase I and II data have suffered
from aliasing near the coarse channel boundaries, effectively cor-
rupting approximately 10% of the channel bandwidth. This not
only reduces the amount the usable bandwidth, but also impacts on
EoR science in particular due to the regular spacing of the resulting
spectral artifacts Kolopanis et al. (2023). Ultimately, this issue is
caused by out-of-band signals aliasing back into the coarse chan-
nel passband, an effect inherent to critically sampled PFBs, as their
passband width and sampling rate are equal, leaving no space for
the filter to transition between passband and stopband. The OPFB
resolves this by increasing the sampling-rate by a factor of 32/25,
but leaving the channel spacing and passband width unchanged at
1.28 MHz. This provides redundant regions of padding on each
channel edge that can later be discarded without any loss in data,
but allows the filter to transition between bands, thus eliminating
contamination of the passband by aliased signals. The filter coeffi-
cients that are implemented in all Phase III receivers were designed
to provide a stop-band attenuation of at least 60 dB and a pass-
band ripple of no greater than±1 dB. The remaining passband
ripple is corrected within the MW AX correlator to produce a flat
spectral response Morrison et al. (2023).
The Phase III receivers also feature major improvements to the
dynamic range capability of both the front-end Analog to Digital
Converters (ADCs) and the data stream that is ultimately trans-
mitted to the correlator. The dynamic range describes the range of
input power levels a system can handle without clipping or distort-
ing the data. A sufficiently high dynamic range is important as it
enables the system to be sensitive to weak signals while simultane-
ously being immune or unaffected by higher power signals such as
solar activity or Radio Frequency Interference (RFI). The dynamic
range of the Phase I receivers is low relative to modern hardware
standards, with only 8-bit ADC front ends and 10-bit complex
(5+5i) data streams, increasing the chance of distorted data and
high levels of quantisation noise. The requirement for the Phase
III receivers specifies a minimum 12-bit ADC and must transmit
the channelised data in the form of 16-bit complex numbers (8 +
8i). Once ingested by the MW AX correlator, data streams from all
receiver types are converted to floating point and are represented
by 64-bit complex floats thereafter.
The Phase I receiver’s use of proprietary data transport tech-
nologies such as ’Xilinx RocketIO’ resulted in many constraints
for the correlator ingest architecture, such as having few off-the-
shelf solutions and requiring an additional media conversion stage
prior to the correlator. The Phase III receivers are required to
use standard Ethernet networking to transmit data to the corre-
lator. Both new receiver designs (SHAO and NI) use 10 Gigabit
Ethernet interfaces, simplifying the supporting infrastructure and
allowing the use of off-the-shelf networking equipment. The Phase
III receivers also directly transmit the data in the standard User
Datagram Protocol (UDP) packet structure Morrison et al. (2023)
required for the MW AX correlator to ingest.
Finally, to observe in full 256 tile mode, the new receivers must
operate in conjunction with the legacy Phase I receivers, and there-
fore they must be capable of operating in a compatibility mode
that implements the same sampling rate and PFB of the Phase
I receivers. Additionally, the new receivers must be capable of
switching between oversampling mode and compatibility mode
automatically, quickly, and reliably.
We have two flavours of new receivers that meet the same spec-
ifications, as the result of two hardware development paths. The
NI receivers are off-the-shelf, and expensive. The SHAO receivers
had a longer development time, but are much more cost effec-
tive than the NI receivers. The different solutions lend themselves
to different project resourcing conditions that may prevail at any
given time.

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 7
Figure 6.The five different signal path implementations (C1 – C5) that exist in the Phase III array. Phase III additions are shown in green.
4.1. Shanghai Astronomical Observatory (SHAO)
receivers
The SHAO receivers were designed and developed in collabora-
tion with the Shanghai Astronomical Observatory (SHAO) which
contributed 16 units in total towards the MW A Phase III upgrade.
They were designed to be a standalone unit capable of digitis-
ing 16 RF inputs or the equivalent of 8 dual-polarisation tiles.
Each unit has a 1 Gb Ethernet (RJ45) interface for Monitoring
and Control (M&C), is synchronised by a 10 MHz clock and 1
Pulse Per Second (PPS) reference signals, and transmits the chan-
nelised data over two 10 Gb Ethernet Enhanced Small Form-factor
Pluggable (SFP+) interfaces. Physically, each unit consists of an
aluminium enclosure that is rack mountable in a standard 19-inch
rack with a height of two Rack Units (RU).
Internally, a single SHAO receiver consists of several sub-
modules and is largely split into two parallel sub-receivers with
8 inputs each (see Figure 7). They consist of two Analog
Signal Conditioners (ASCs), two Field-Programmable Gate Array
(FPGA) Modules, a two-way clock (CLK) and PPS distributor, a
three port Ethernet switch, and an integrated 12 V power supply.
Finally, each unit is fitted with two fans that force airflow through
the enclosure.
The ASC modules were specifically designed for the MW A’s
requirements and have two main functions, filtering and gain
adjustment. The first stage provides a bandpass filter that acts as an
anti-aliasing filter for the ADCs. The passband of the filter ranges
between 50 and 300 MHz with no more than 1 dB of ripple, and the
stopband provides at least 60 dB of attenuation. The second stage
provides independently configurable gains for each input between
−40 dB and+20dB, which is essential for the equalisation of
power between tiles that have different cable lengths.
The FPGA modules consist primarily of the HTG-ZRF8 board
from HiTech Global that hosts Xilinx ZYNQ UltraScale+ RFSoC
ZU28DR FPGAs. These RF System on Chip (RFSoC) FPGAs
have eight built-in ADCs accessible from the FPGA fabric in
addition to an embedded ARM Cortex CPU that is used for
M&C. They also have a daughter board that provides additional
SFP+ ports for data transmission. These boards are housed within
a custom made RF shielded enclosure that provides both heat
dissipation and electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) shielding.
The FPGA firmware was custom designed specifically to meet
the needs for the MW A Phase III. Each receiver mode, oversam-
pling mode and compatibility mode, represents a different version

8 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
Figure 7.SHAO receiver schematic (top panel) and as-built hardware (bottom
panel).
of the firmware that is programmed onto the FPGA when transi-
tioning between modes. The management of the FPGA firmware
and configuration is handled by the on-board CPU which runs a
lightweight Linux distribution (PetaLinux) and custom software
that interacts with the MW A M&C system.
4.2. National Instruments (NI) receivers
The National Instruments or “NI” receiver is the second variant of
new receiver also capable of meeting the requirements for Phase
III (Figure 8). The MW A has a total of two NI receivers, each
made up of several sub-components where one receiver comprises
all the equipment required to digitise eight dual polarisation tile
outputs. Unlike the SHAO receivers, the NI receiver variant makes
significant use of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) equipment.
The NI receiver is primarily based on the National Instrument
7935R FlexRIO FPGA controller, and the NI-5772 Analog to
Digital Converter Module. Each FlexRIO module, with its ADC
sub-module, has two RF inputs capable of digitising a single dual
polarisation tile output, and has an assortment of IO options. Of
these, the system utilises the external ADC clock input (655.36
Figure 8.The as-built NI receiver, showing the simple nature of the COTS equip-
ment and the straightforward packaging, in contrast to bespoke systems.
Msps), a trigger input used for 1PPS synchronisation, a 1 Gb
Ethernet port for M&C, and a 10 Gb Ethernet SFP+ port.
A full NI receiver is comprised of eight individual FlexRIO
modules that are physically housed in a 4U rack mountable
enclosure alongside supporting hardware, most of which is con-
cerned with either splitting or aggregating signals eight ways. Each
receiver consists of a 24 V power supply module with eight indi-
vidually switchable outputs that allows for a properly sequenced
power up of the system. It also consists of a timing panel that hosts
an eight-way Mini Circuits power splitter to distribute the external
clock and a BG7TBL square wave distribution module to split the
1 PPS signal eight ways. Finally, each receiver requires both a 1
Gb and a 10 Gb Ethernet aggregation switch for the M&C and data
output interfaces, respectively.
The firmware architecture for the NI receivers is similar to that
for the SHAO receivers, in that they also implement a PFB filter,
Digital Gain, and UDP Packetisation stages alongside additional
telemetry features. The NI receivers are also primarily controlled
by an on board CPU that can manage the configuration of the
FPGA and communicate with the wider MW A M&C system. The
firmware is developed using the National Instruments LABView
FPGA software package.
4.3. Field cabinet enclosure
The field cabinet enclosure was designed to host rack mountable
equipment within an environmentally managed cabinet and have
sufficient EMC shielding such that is can be located in proxim-
ity to tiles (see Section 4.3.2). As part of the upgrade, eight field
cabinet enclosures were fabricated and deployed. With two SHAO
receivers per cabinet, this enabled the additional 16 receivers to
be connected to 128 of the core distribution tiles. A field cabinet
enclosure consists of two parts, an inner RF shielded cabinet and
an outer environmental enclosure to protect the inner cabinet from
the elements.
4.3.1. Environmental enclosure
The environmental enclosure is designed to house and protect the
RF-shielded cabinet, as well as power, fibre, and coaxial cable con-
nections. It comprises a galvanised square tube frame with white
powder coated steel doors and roof structure. One end of the enclo-
sure protects the gland plate and wave guides housed on the inner
shielded cabinet that facilitate cable entries. A large, hinged hood
on the enclosure protects these sensitive connection points. The
other end features a set of large baffles that facilitate airflow to the
air-conditioning plant installed at that end of the enclosure. The

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 9
Figure 9.Design drawing of the environmental enclosure of the field cabinet
enclosure, showing the major elements described in the text. Left panel shows
air baffles. Middle panel shows protected ingress points. Right panel shows the
enclosure empty and open.
powder coating used on the environmental enclosure was specif-
ically selected to improve thermal heat flows to the edges of the
panels where it is dissipated via natural airflow. This feature con-
tributes to a reduced internal heat load, moderating the demand
placed on mechanical cooling. Figure 9 shows the primary features
of the enclosure.
The design of the Phase III environmental enclosure is strongly
informed by lessons learned from Phase I. The Phase III enclosure
stands taller. The position and orientation of the internal equip-
ment racks, and the clearance provided by the large hinged access
panels, ensure that a maintainer has comfortable standing and/or
seated access to all major sub-systems. The hinged access pan-
els have gas struts fitted to ensure that they can’t close rapidly and
cause injury to personnel. With the access panels raised, the enclo-
sure also provides a measure of shade when the sun is high in the
sky. This saves maintenance personnel having to locate and erect
temporary shade as they move around the site.
Finally, the Phase III environmental enclosure is designed to
be tamper evident. The major access panels are designed to be
lockable, with all hinges recessed and fixings hidden. When the
enclosure is properly closed and locked, accessing the sub-systems
it houses results in readily identifiable, physical damage.
4.3.2. RF shielded cabinet
Like the environmental enclosure, the design of the Phase III RF
shielded cabinet was substantially motivated by lessons learned
from the configuration and packaging of the Phase I receiver
system. The sub-systems installed within the equivalent Phase I
cabinet were racked horizontally, and the cabinet was set low
to the ground. This arrangement resulted in poor ergonomics
which made installing and maintaining equipment within the cab-
inet awkward and taxing. The difficult access also increased the
likelihood of poor physical connections at system interfaces.
The internal capacity and configuration of the Phase III cab-
inet are designed to maximise flexibility and utility, rather than
tailored to a particular receiver implementation and specification.
The internal arrangement of the cabinet is based on two standard
22RU equipment racks. The racks are positioned vertically, side-
by-side, in order that equipment can be installed and accessed
easily.
The cabinet features large access doors on both long sides.
These doors provide excellent working access to both ends of
rack mounted equipment. The two equipment racks are positioned
toward one end of the cabinet. The external face of this end
features a gland plate with connectors to receive coaxial cable
Figure 10.RF shielded cabinet. Left panel, cabinet open. Middle panel, cabinet
closed. Right panel, cabinet installed inside environmental enclosure.
Figure 11.A rendering of the RF shielded cabinet inside the environmental enclo-
sure.
inputs, and waveguides for ingress of fibre optic cables. The air-
conditioning plant that maintains the operating temperature within
the cabinet is positioned at the other end. This end features a
hinged door that allows the air-conditioning plant to be installed
and removed. The exterior of this door features honeycomb RF
gaskets that allow air to flow but prevent RF emission from escap-
ing the cabinet. The air-conditioner will operate in outside ambient
air temperatures up to 55 degrees Celsius.
The primary function of the RF shielded cabinet is to ensure
that RF noise generated by the receivers and the various electronic
sub-systems that support them doesn’t escape into the environ-
ment. Radiated RF emission must be supressed to a level that
is at least 20 dB below MILSTD461F (the adopted US Military
Standard that describes how to test equipment for electromag-
netic compatibility: Satav and Sarma (2008)) between 30 MHz
and 3 GHz. This ensures that RF noise doesn’t compromise the
performance of the MW A, or affect other nearby instrumentation.
Protection of the RF environment is mandated in the site license
agreement that governs the MW A’s activities at the site.
The cabinet is constructed from steel. The exterior and inte-
rior surfaces are powder coated, except for some masked areas
that require electrical contact such as door seals and bulkhead con-
nectors. Fully welded seams, RF gaskets integrated into all doors,
and the use of waveguides for optical fibre cable entry ensure the
cabinet provides sufficient levels of RF suppression. The use of
(grounded) bulkhead connectors for coaxial cable inputs prevents
conducted emissions from escaping on cables.
Figure 10 shows the design of the shielded cabinet and Figure
11 shows a render of the RF shielded cabinet inside the environ-
mental enclosure.

10 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
Figure 12.Cabinet control unit.
4.4. Supporting subsystems
A range of subsystems are required to support the primary ele-
ments of the new receivers, including devices to manage, control,
and monitor the receivers, as well as devices to integrate the
receivers into the wider MW A system architecture. In this section,
we briefly describe these supporting subsystems.
4.4.1. Cabinet control unit
Internal environmental monitoring is facilitated by a custom
designed and developed Cabinet Control Unit (CCU) (Figure 12).
The CCU is a 2RU rack mounted network device based on a
Raspberry Pi (RPi5) microprocessor. The RPi5 is supported by a
small printed circuit board (PCB) mounted uninterruptible power
supply (UPS) capable of supplying at least ten minutes of power.
The small UPS enables the RPi5 to safely shutdown and protect
software and firmware in the event of sudden power loss.
Environmental data are collected from an array of sensors and
from other instruments within the cabinet. The data are collated
and presented to telescope operators via a Grafana based GUI.
Internal cabinet cooling is provided by a robust industrial
standard electronics cabinet cooling system. Significant thermal
modelling was undertaken to optimise the overall physical size
of the cabinet and the interaction with the dynamics of cooling
performance. The optimisation focussed on balancing the internal
volume of the cabinet with the capacity of the internal air mass
to absorb thermal heat and moderate the cycling of the cooling
system in order to minimise power consumption.
4.4.2. Timing module for clock distribution
Each SHAO receiver requires 1PPS and 10 MHz clock signals.
The MW A Phase I and Phase II clock architecture reticulated
a 1PPS and a bespoke Phase I receiver clock frequency of
163.84 MHz provided by custom timing equipment supplied by
the Haystack Observatory. The addition of the SHAO receiver
required an upgrade to the MW A clock architecture to facilitate
three clock signals to be communicated across the MW A site.
Lessons learned from the previous years of operations iden-
tified that effective clock and 1PPS monitoring was a missing
component in the management of the MW A. Two important fac-
tors constrained the development of the proposed Phase III clock
system.
The first was the distance between the clock and timing source
and the telescope. The clock and timing source were generated
within the CSIRO Control building, located 5 km from the MW A
core. This significant separation distance necessitated fibre optic
clock and timing distribution. The second constraint was that the
clock and timing architecture must not only support the telescope
but also support other rack mounted equipment and instrumen-
tation within the control building via coaxial cable only. These
two constraints, combined with a preference for a COTS based
solution, shaped equipment purchases and the development of the
Phase III clock and timing architecture.
The built solution established a Grand Master Clock (GMC) at
the apex of the clock and timing signal architecture (Figure 13).
The GMC acts as the primary clock with all other clocks being
subordinate. The GMC selected was a SAFRAN Z16 time fan
out that provided a mix of coaxial cable and fibre optic clock and
timing outputs based on the White Rabbit technology d. A custom
designed clock monitor unit is installed on the coaxial cable out-
puts of the GMC prior to distribution to rack equipment and prior
to the supply of a clock and timing signal to the custom made
Haystack timing instruments.
The fibre optic distribution capability of the GMC allows the
transmission of the 1PPS signal to each SHAO enclosure. The
1PPS signal is received and managed within each SHAO enclo-
sure by the Field Cabinet Clock Distribution module. This unit is
very similar to the GMC monitor and is depicted in Figure 14. The
Field Cabinet Clock Distribution module is a 2RU rack mounted
network device also supported by a RPi5 microprocessor with a
small UPS. Similar to the CCU, the RPi5 enables telescope oper-
ators to monitor the clock and timing pulse via a Grafana based
GUI.
The fibre optic 1PPS pulse is received within the Field Cabinet
Clock Distribution module by a subordinate SAFRAN solutions
WR-LEN module. 1PPS and 10 MHz signals are distributed to two
banks of three outputs for each signal. Within the Timing Module,
an output signal from each of the 1PPS and 10 MHz outputs is
monitored by the RPi5. 1PPS and 10 MHz clock and timing signals
are distributed to each SHAO receiver unit using the remaining
outputs.
4.4.3. Power distribution and filtering module
The site is located in the Australian Radio Quiet Zone Western
Australiae. Within this Zone, all installed equipment must be
designed and engineered to minimise electromagnetic emissions
to protect radio astronomy observations. Consequently, the power
supply and internal power distribution must be designed and
developed to minimise the possibility of any conducted emis-
sions entering the cabinet on the mains supply, but also prevent
any conducted emissions leaving the cabinet on the mains sup-
ply. This requirement for filtering of mains power on the supply
and return paths also requires internal electromagnetic shielding of
all filtering components to prevent the impact of electromagnetic
interference on the SHAO receivers.
The power distribution and shielding module is located very
close to the mains supply (230 V AC) connection point. The mod-
ule consists of a single mains supply, an inline mains noise filter,
and two filtered IEC mains outputs. The module is a completely
enclosed metal box with a RF gasket around the lid access point
(Figure 15).
Two managed, networked AC power rails distribute power
to all internal cabinet equipment and also enable monitoring of
power consumption of each device and remote power cycling of
sub-systems.
4.4.4. Beamformer controller and power supply
Sitting at the nexus between the SHAO receiver and the MW A
beamformer is the MW A Beamformer Controller (BFC) and
Power Supply Module (PSU). Within the Phase I receivers, the
MW A beamformer is powered and controlled from sub-systems
dhttps://white-rabbit.web.cern.ch/
ehttps://www.industry.gov.au/science-technology-and-innovation/space-and-
astronomy/ska-project-australia/australian-radio-quiet-zone-wa

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 11
Figure 13.Phase III MWA clock and timing distribution architecture.
Figure 14.Field Cabinet Clock Module showing the WR LEN input 1PPS supply
fibre optic port and the banks of 10 MHz and 1PPS outputs.
that formed an integral part of the receiver. However, the SHAO
receiver does not provide any form of power supply or con-
trol communications to the MW A Beamformer. Consequently, a
new device was required that could provide DC power to the
beamformer, communicate analogue M&C commands to ana-
logue beamformers connected to SHAO receivers, and receive the
analogue RF signals from the beamformer.
Lessons learnt from previous years of telescope operations
identified that the legacy DC power, M&C, and RF signal chain
were very susceptible to failure during periods of lightning activ-
ity. With the need identified for a new source of DC power,
M&C communications, and RF signal management for the SHAO
receiver, a design requirement was introduced to harden the
‘receiver – beamformer’ nexus against lightning. The intent of this
design requirement was two fold - improve the resilience of the
MW A in adverse weather conditions and control maintenance and
repair costs.
The design development phase faced three significant con-
straints. First, the BFC would have to be installed in the side
of the cabinet furthest from the cooling system. This had two
implications – the BFC would be on the north facing end of the
cabinet (highest solar load) and would have to operate in temper-
atures and airflow conditions significantly different to equipment
installed closer to the cooling system. Second, the built solution
had to re-use the existing coaxial cables between beamformers
and receiver. The cost to replace this cable could not be sup-
ported by the SHAO receiver project budget. Finally, the design
effort occurred during the COVID-19 period. The significant dis-
ruption to global manufacturing and logistics that occurred during
that period made sourcing the microprocessors preferred for the
BFC impossible. This forced the adoption of an alternate solution.
The design team adapted a BFC implementation developed for the
Engineering Development Array (EDA; Wayth et al. (2017)), a
retired SKA-Low benchmarking array.

12 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
Figure 15.Upper image: Cross sectional view of Power distribution and shielding
module. Mains power is supplied through socket at (1) and across to a rail at
(1A), inline noise filter at (2), and two IEC outlets at (3). Middle image: Populated
power filter and distribution module with RF gasket fitted. Lower image: Enclosed
Power filtering and distribution module with managed, networked AC power rails
attached.
The deployed solution is a custom designed rack mounted 2RU
network-managed power supply unit supporting eight ‘Data over
Co-ax’ (DoC) PCBs. Each DoC PCB is connected to an MW A
beamformer via coaxial cables. The BFC PSU provides M&C
communications and DC power to the DoC PCB via a ribbon
cable, whilst RF analog signals are communicated directly to the
SHAO receiver via coaxial cable with push on/ pull off (DIN
1.0/2.3) connectors.
The BFC solution incorporates several key features and
improvements. First, the original EDA Cosel multiple output
switch mode PSU was replaced with a new AC/DC switch-mode
design based around a high-efficiency PCB mounted converter
module and downstream DC-DC conversion. The high temper-
ature tolerance and low thermal dissipation enabled the use of
a large passive finned heatsink without requiring any changes
to internal airflow within the cabinet. Second, communications
between the wider telescope M&C network and the beamformer
through the DoC PCB was achieved through the integration of a
microcontroller based PCB within the BFC, assisting with relia-
bility. The microcontrollers have no operating system or filesystem
that can become corrupted – instead, the firmware is run directly
from flash memory inside the microcontroller, This is read-only
except for the rare occasions when a new version is pushed to the
device. Third, a re-design of the DoC PCB reduced succeptibil-
ity to damage by lightning. Since their deployment in July 2025,
signal paths featuring the hardened DoC PCB have endured sev-
eral significant lightning events without sustaining any failures.
Finally, the modularity of the BFC system means turnaround time
in the event of failure is significantly reduced. Push on ribbon cable
connectors, push on coaxial cable connectors and a single stand-
alone box for the BFC means that, in the event of a complete PSU
failure, a new unit can be installed very quickly.
All components described above can be seen in the as-built
form in Figure 16.
5. MWAX
The MW AX correlator Morrison et al. (2023) was commissioned
in early 2022 and operated successfully up until the end of Phase
II. During development and testing, simulated MW A Phase III
observations were processed by the correlator, ensuring the sys-
tem would be capable of correlating up to 256 tiles on the MW AX
hardware in real-time. As each new receiver was brought online
during Phase III deployment, the number of tiles MW AX had to
correlate increased by eight. At each increment, the system was
tested to confirm that the software, hardware, and network could
handle the extra load.
The MW AX system has been incrementally improved during
Phase III development. The following features and enhancements
are now deployed in the system.
5.1. Cable and geometric delay correction and fringe
stopping
The cable and geometric delay correction and fringe stopping
feature, as described in Morrison et al. (2023), are now fully imple-
mented as described in that work. Observations can be scheduled
to apply all, some, or none of these corrections. The main benefit
of this feature is the ability to use more aggressive averaging of
the output visibilities, significantly reducing the data volume, and
fringe stopping ensures minimal decorrelation due to the Earth’s
rotation.
5.2. Oversampled coarse channels:
The passband response of the original 16 receivers exhibit steep
attenuation at the edges of the coarse channels, resulting in approx-
imately 10% of the channel being unusable Morrison et al. (2023),
due to the critically sampled receiver.
The SHAO and NI receivers both support an oversampling
mode. In oversampling mode, the MW AX UDP captures can now
handle eight seconds of data from a single 1.6384 MHz coarse
channel. Figure 17 provides a comparison of the critically sam-
pled receiver passband and the oversampled receiver passband,
demonstrating that the oversampled receivers maintain a band free

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 13
Figure 16.Top image: Design drawing of built rack mount solution. Bottom image:
(top portion of image) two BFC PSU (silver boxes) connected with two banks of
eight DoC PCBs via ribbon cable and coaxial cables. The bottom of the picture
shows the CCU. This image demonstrates the constrained environment for airflow
movement.
from aliasing across the full 1.28 MHz coarse channel bandwidth,
removing the band edge artifacts experienced in data from the
critically sampled receivers.
The top panel of Figure 17 shows the passbands for the
critically sampled (blue) and oversampled (yellow) cases in com-
parison. The unshaded area represents the frequency range of a
single coarse band. The response of the critically sampled case
shows a band edge drop off within the coarse channel, whereas the
oversampled case does not. The middle and lower panels show
the passbands and aliased responses for the critically sampled
and oversampled cases, respectively. These panels show that the
aliased response is of a low level inside the coarse channel for the
oversampled case, and high and within the band for the critically
sampled case. The high in-band aliasing for the critically sampled
case causes artifacts at the coarse band edges that are problematic
for the EoR experiment.
Figure 17.Comparison of the passband response for the critically sampled
(Phase I/II) receivers and the Phase III (SHAO and NI) receivers, showing the
recovery of the band edges in the oversampled receiver case. Details in the text.
5.3. Automated switching from critically sampled to
oversampled coarse channels
Switching between critically sampled and oversampling modes
entails three main tasks, all triggered when a special previously-
scheduled ‘correlator mode change’ observation occurs. We
describe the tasks below, in the case of the SHAO receivers. The
tasks are similar for the NI receivers:
1. Setting up the SHAO receiver firmware to deliver oversampled
packets. This is done in the SHAO receiver handler process,
running on the M&C server. The handler process for each
SHAO receiver detects each new observation in the schedule
as it starts, and passes the correct observing parameters to the
receiver FPGAs via the firmare API. When a correlator mode
change observation starts, the handler process uses the SHAO

14 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
firmware API to boot into the appropriate mode. This firmware
swap takes a few tens of seconds.
2. Reconfiguring the telescope to include only SHAO receivers
and tiles connected to them (for oversampling), or all receivers
(for critical sampling). This is done by the ‘MW AX oversam-
pling switcher’ process running on the M&C server. When
a correlator mode change observation starts, each receiver is
flagged as ‘active’ or ‘inactive’ in the database as required for
the new mode. This reconfiguration takes a few tens of sec-
onds, including new observations dynamically scheduled to set
up the new configuration.
3. Stopping, reconfiguring, and restarting the MW AX correlator,
using subfiles (temporary packet storage areas in shared mem-
ory) of the appropriate size for either 128 oversampled tiles, or
256 critically sampled tiles. This process is by far the most time
consuming, and takes 10-15 minutes to complete, during which
time no observations can be made. This process is also man-
aged by the ‘MW AX oversampling switcher’ when correlator
mode change observations occur.
5.4. Near-real-time calibration
In an extension of the work of Sokolowski et al. (2020), a
new, seven-server GPU calibration cluster and pipeline (called
“Calvin”) was commissioned on the site in June 2025 to perform
both near-real-time calibration of observations as they are pro-
duced by the correlator, and on-demand calibration of historical
observations via requests from users through the MW A All-Sky
Virtual Observatory (MW A ASVO) data portal. Calibration solu-
tions are generated by the Hyperdrive f calibration software and
are applied when observations are delivered through ASVO via
the Birlig software package Jordan et al. (2025). The calibration
solutions are a key diagnostic tool for the MW A Operations team,
to monitor the array’s health, and they will also be used in the
currently in-development MW AX real-time coherent beamformer.
via requests from users through [ASVO]. Calibration solu-
tions are generated by the Hyperdrive calibration software and are
applied when observations are delivered through ASVO via the
Birli software package.
5.5. Improved archiving data integrity
The ten “mwacache” archive servers situated in one of Curtin
University’s data centres were replaced in June 2025 with ten
new servers and an updated archiving mechanism. The original
mwacache servers transferred data to the Pawsey Supercomputing
Centre (where the MW A’s archive is located) long-term storage
(LTS) system using the Boto3 Python library and, although this
worked well, the data transfer process did not explicitly re-read
the data and verify the checksum at the Pawsey LTS destination to
ensure each file was transferred successfully, leading to some very
rare data corruption issues. After extensive testing and research,
Rcloneh was chosen as the replacement transfer tool for ingest
into Pawsey’s LTS. Rclone’s copy command is used to transfer the
data, then upon detection of a successful exit code, “rclone check”
is called to verify the checksum of the file at the destination. If this
check or the copy fails, the file is re-queued and attempted again
later.
fhttps://github.com/MW ATelescope/mwahyperdrive
ghttps://github.com/MW ATelescope/Birli
hhttps://rclone.org/
Each of the eight active mwacache servers transfer three data
files each in parallel to the Pawsey LTS at an average rate of 0.5
Gbps per file (1.5 Gbps per server / 12 Gbps in aggregate across all
24 streams). A typical 100 GB MW A correlator observation takes
just over one minute to transfer to the archive, and once at Pawsey,
it is available for download via the MW A ASVO data portal a few
minutes later.
5.6. Implications for the MWA data archive
As of writing, the MW A data archive at the Pawsey
Supercomputing Centre has 56.9 PB of capacity, which is a mix
of Ceph object storage and magnetic tape storage. The archive
consumes 49 PB and has 7.9 PB available storage. The data in
the MW A archive consist of over 600,000 observations, involving
24,000 hours of observations and producing over 37 million files
since operations commenced in mid-2013.
The Phase III upgrade increases the maximum number of tiles
in an observation from 128 up to 256. For MW A voltage capture
system (VCS) observations this increases the data volume per unit
time by a factor of two. For correlated observations, this increases
the data volume by just under a factor of four as the number of visi-
bilities approximately quadruples with the doubling of the number
of tiles.
In anticipation of increased Phase III data volumes and the lack
of prospects for increasing the storage allocated to the MW A, some
mitigation strategies were put in place to ensure the archive could
be managed in a sustainable manner.
First, the MW A Data Retention Policyi was adopted. The aim
of the policy is to manage the availability of archive storage so
that new observations can be made, while deleting the oldest,
least useful data. The MW A Data Manager and Principal Scientists
nominate a list of observations which they assess to be old and/or
of low value and start a four-week consultation period where
MW A members can review the deletion list and request them to
be retained if they believe they still hold scientific value. The pol-
icy has been activated twice since it was adopted by the MW A
Board in 2019 and ensures a balance is maintained between new
observations and preservation of as much scientifically useful data
as possible.
Second, fringe-stopping (see Section 5.1) is an effective
method to reduce the volume of archived visibilities, by allow-
ing more aggressive frequency and time averaging of correlated
visibilities. Without fringe-stopping, a standard MW A correlator
observation at 256 tiles would not be able to have greater than
10 kHz fine channel width or 0.5 second integration time, due to
visibility decorrelation caused by the Earth’s rotation, and would
require 6.46 GB per second of storage. However, when fringe-
stopped, a more modest 40 kHz, 2 second correlator mode could
be used which would not suffer materially from decoherence and
result in only 0.4 GB per second of data generated. Thus, in
this example, fringe-stopping produces data volumes sixteen times
smaller than without fringe-stopping, which more than mitigates
the nominal quadrupling of visibility data due to the increase from
128 to 256 tiles.
Finally, another major mitigation for the growth in the MW A
archive is real-time voltage beamforming. As of writing, an
MW AX real-time beamformer mode is under development. The
beamformer will reduce the need to capture and store tile-based
ihttps://www.mwatelescope.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/12/MW A-DATA-
ACCESS-POLICY-v1.3.pdf

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 15
voltages, which are produced at 114 TB per hour, for offline volt-
age beamforming. Instead, the MW AX system will be able to
form several coherent and incoherent beams in real-time, gener-
ating dual-polarisation, complex voltage beams in VDIF format j
and Stokes I Filterbank format files for incoherent beams Lorimer
(2011). The resulting beamformed data products consume much
less space than VCS or even correlated visibilities (approxi-
mately 1/n per beam compared with VCS observations, where n
is the number of tiles). In addition to reducing archive growth,
a real-time beamforming capability will enable the MW A to par-
ticipate in VLBI experiments and contribute to the fast transient
community more effectively through rapid response follow-up
observations of pulsars and similar objects.
6. RFoF conversion
Power distribution around the MW A site is a fixed constraint on the
array layout. The power available at different access points around
the site determines where powered electronics can be positioned.
In Phase I, receiver enclosures were positioned at 230 V power
access points. Receivers supplied 48V power to all Phase I tiles
via coaxial cable. Resistive cable losses determined the maximum
viable distance between receiver and tile of approximately 500 m
Tingay et al. (2013). The development of a small, tile-level, pho-
tovoltaic and battery system enabled the deployment of 56 long
baseline tiles as part of the Phase II upgrade Wayth et al. (2018).
For these tiles, power was generated at the tile location and the tile
output signal transmitted on surface-laid optical fibres (RF over
Fibre: RFoF).
In Phase III 24 additional tiles have been converted from coax-
ial cable to optical fibre output so that receivers can be located
where there is power available to support them. This is achieved
by the introduction of a TIU (Tile Interface Unit) and Pad PSU
(Power Supply Unit). Figure 18 shows schematic views of a coax
configured tile and an RFoF converted tile.
6.1. Tile Interface Unit (TIU)
Every MW A tile includes an analogue beamformer that points the
tile beam on the sky by applying selective delays to the RF sig-
nal received by each antenna and combines the 32 signals (one
signal per polarisation from 16 dipole antennas) into two RF out-
puts—one for each polarisation Tingay et al. (2013). The TIU
(Figure 19) interfaces to the analogue beamformer. It takes the
two RF outputs from the beamformer as inputs via two short
coaxial cables. The same cables deliver 48 VDC and pointing com-
mands (delay settings) from the TIU to the beamformer (Figure
18, bottom). Electrical-to-optical converters inside the TIU transi-
tion the RF signal onto a pair of single mode optical fibres. The
optical modules operate at 1310 nm. The system does not utilise
any form of optical multiplexing. The TIU receives pointing com-
mands, generated by the telescope monitor and control system, via
a receiver, and 48 VDC from a Pad PSU.
6.2. Pad Power Supply Unit (Pad PSU)
Pad PSUs (Figure 20) are collocated with receivers at 230 V access
points. They convert 230 V site power to 48 VDC for delivery
jhttps://vlbi.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/VDIF specification Release 1.1.1.pdf
to the TIU. Transmission to the TIU is via the coaxial cable that
previously connected the antenna tile to a receiver (Figure 18, top).
7. Operational benefits
The Phase III upgrade confers a number of operational bene-
fits, along with the capability and performance improvements
that motivated the upgrade. In Phase II the MW A was manually
reconfigured to switch between compact and extended arrays to
optimise for different observational performance characteristics.
This was necessary because the Phase I receiver fleet, which was
still in use in Phase II, was only able to support 128 tiles. To
reconfigure the array, receivers were disconnected and physically
relocated. This process was time consuming, costly, and involved
significant risk of damage to delicate equipment. In Phase III all
256 tiles are connected to a receiver and can be included in the
operational array. The observing array can be reconfigured in soft-
ware, eliminating the need to manually reconfigure. Not having
to manually reconfigure the array also results in a decrease in the
number of days per year when the MW A site is attended. Reduced
site attendance translates directly to more time on sky, and reduced
operational expense.
Over the course of its operational life the MW A has suffered
significant lightning damage. The MW A’s primary vulnerability to
lightning results from the long, surface laid, coaxial cables that
carry both power and RF signals between many of the tiles and
their receivers. Any lightning in the area can readily induce cur-
rents into these cables, which span between 90m and 524m. The
resulting high-voltage surge propagates to the dual purpose (power
and RF) PCBs on either end of the cable and can destroy the sensi-
tive RF components. In Phase III, the tiles converted from coaxial
to optical fibre (for RF and control signals) become more resilient
to lightning damage. Each tile still has a long, surface laid, coax-
ial cable but it no longer carries the RF signal. The electronics on
the end of the power-only link are more robust against the surges
generated by lightning events. Funding permitting, more tiles will
be converted to optical fibre (for RF and control signals) in the
future, making the telescope more resilient against one of its pri-
mary failure modes. As noted in Section 6, 80 tiles are currently
supported by RFoF, leaving up to 176 available for RFoF upgrade
in the future.
8. Science implications
The upgraded Phase III MW A offers a range of fundamental and
incremental improvements for science. An example of a funda-
mental improvement is the new fleet of oversampled receivers
that have been attached to the set of core MW A tiles, supporting
the short baselines of the array and hence of primary relevance
to the EoR experiment. The improvement lies in the removal of
the coarse channel edge artifacts that have been present for the
EoR experiment during Phases I and II of the MW A, that signif-
icantly disrupt efforts to detect the EoR signal. EoR observations
performed during Phase III commissioning and early operations
have been subject to preliminary processing, and can be shown
here to illustrate the nature of this improvement. Figure 21 shows
two-dimensional power spectra from the Phase I/II MW A, along-
side the same from Phase III observations. In both cases, one hour
of data is used, from the east-west oriented polarisation visibilities
obtained from observations of the EOR0 field (RA = 0 h, Dec = -27

16 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
Figure 18.Top panel: Coax tile configuration. Bottom panel: Phase III converted RFoF tile configuration. Phase III additions are shown in green.
Figure 19.Design drawing of the Tile Interface Unit.
Figure 20.Design drawing of the Pad Power Supply Unit.
deg.) in the 167 - 197 MHz frequency range. The data were iden-
tically processed with calibration and peeling using Hyperdrive
Jordan et al. (2025) and the power spectra estimated with CHIPS
Trott et al. (2016), following, for example, Nunhokee et al. (2025).
As can be seen in the Figure, the so-called EoR window is filled
with a uniform noise-like signal for the Phase III observations, but
suffers from periodic artifacts in the frequency dimension (line-of-
sight) in the Phase I/II observations due to the coarse channel edge
effects caused by the critically sampled receivers used in Phase I
and II.
The cleaner EoR window should allow for deeper integrations,
and a closer examination of the noise properties in the EoR win-
dow, that will hopefully allow upper limits that reach closer to the
expectations of theoretical EoR models.
Broadly applicable to most of the science undertaken with the
MW A, the ability to utilise all 256 tiles simultaneously enables a
factor of two increase in raw sensitivity. Perhaps more important
than the potential of this additional available sensitivity is the flex-
ibility allowed by having all 256 tiles simultaneously available. As
noted in the early sections of this paper, users now have the ability
to switch between different sub-sets of tiles, either to minimise the
data volume generated for their science requirements, or to opti-
mise an array for those requirements. The configurations that allow
both good angular resolution and surface brightness sensitivity are
beneficial, for example for galaxy cluster studies, supernova rem-
nants, and other objects that contain complex structure on different
angualar scales.
One of the highest impact areas of science with the MW A
has been the emergence of Long Period Transients Hurley-Walker
et al. (2022, 2023) as an exciting (and unexpected) new class of
radio transient. Effective searches for transients are best done with
the MW A’s long baseline configurations, which in Phase II were
unavailable for large fractions of the year when the MW A was
dedicated to EoR observations. The ability to perform software-
defined reconfigurations between short and long baseline MW A
configurations now allows the ability to make observations for
transients at short notice, when required.
While, early in Phase III operations, the reconfiguration of the
MW A will be limited to a small (five) set of pre-defined configu-
rations, and conservatively scheduled in optimised blocks, as the
MW A Operations team gains experience in reconfiguration and
continues to build incremental improvements to the MW A’s soft-
ware systems, it will be possible over time to shift toward a more
dynamic and user-defined exploitation of this flexibility.
The enhanced EoR capability and greatly improved flexibil-
ity are both fundamentally enabled by the MW AX correlator,
using modern GPU accelerated computing. As well as supporting
the correlation of all 256 tiles simultaneously, and the reconfig-
urable flexibility described above, MW AX also has the capacity to
perform other non-correlation signal processing tasks. Primarily

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 17
Figure 21.Two dimensional EoR power spectra, from Phase I/II data (left) and preliminary Phase III data (right), showing the improvements to the k ∥ modes due to
removal of aliasing artifacts from coarse channel edges. In both cases, one hour of data is used, from the east-west oriented polarisation visibilities obtained from
observations of the EOR0 field (RA = 0 h, Dec = -27 deg.) in the 167 - 197 MHz frequency range. Further details in the text.
important among these will be the ability to generate real-time
voltage beams using up to the full 256 tiles. During Phases I and II,
the only way to form voltage beams for a range of science applica-
tions (e.g. pulsar studies, gamma-ray burst observations, fast radio
burst studies etc) has been to record all voltages from all tiles and
perform offline beamforming using high performance computing.
Due to the very large data volumes involved and the high cost of
the computing task, exploitation of voltage beams has been limited
and inefficient.
Having the ability to form real-time voltage beams using
MW AX will massively reduce the time and effort required to
undertake relevant science, and greatly relieve users of data han-
dling and processing burdens. The development of a real-time
beamformer using MW AX (based on the approach described in
Ord et al. (2019)) is in advanced stages at the time of writing and
is expected to be a capability released to users in approximately
mid-2026.
9. Discussion and conclusions
The evolution of the capabilities of the MW A into Phase III rep-
resents a continuation of both episodic step change in capability
and gradual evolution/improvement. Each phase of upgrade has
been informed by both operational experience and the direction
of travel of science requirements and opportunities, as these have
inevitably also evolved over time. The result over the course of 13
years since the commencement of operations has been a facility
that has remained relevant and responsive to the needs of users, for
a very low total cost of ownership relative to the scientific output
and impact.
As likely the final major MW A upgrade, Phase III also rep-
resents the culmination of the facility and close to the fullest
possible realisation of the potential of the base technologies and
approaches. As noted in the introduction, we anticipate that the
MW A will operate in its Phase III format until mid-2030, albeit
likely with minor improvements and adjustments as noted in this
paper to fully exploit the Phase III potential. Thus, the MW A will
have its peak performance period for the next approximately five
years.
As a Precursor for the SKA-Low facility, by 2030 the MW A
will have completed its mission (and much of the MW A hardware,
including as part of the Phase III upgrade, will be at end of life),
and the SKA-Low capabilities will outstrip those of the MW A.
This makes 2030 a natural point of transition from the MW A to
the SKA-Low, when it comes to Southern Hemipshere low fre-
quency radio astronomy. It is worth examining some dimensions
of this transition between now and 2030, in order to illuminate the
points at which particular capabilities partially or fully transition,
but also to point out some interesting scientific synergies between
the Phase III MW A and the emerging SKA-Low. Such a summary
may assist low frequency users of the MW A and SKA-Low in their
medium term planning.
9.1. Evolution from MWA Phase III to SKA-Low Phase I
Timelines to SKA-Low science have been recently released, with
details available via the SKAO websitek, and linked pages. In sum-
mary, SKA-Low will enter into Science Verification phases based
on the staged rollout of the SKA-Low instrument. According to
the SKAO website, Science Verification is described thus:
“Science Verification will be the first opportunity for the
community to access SKA data. Six months before Science
khttps://www.skao.int/en/science-users/timeline-science

18 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
Verification begins, the Observatory will issue a Call for Science
Verification ideas. All Science Verification data will be made
publicly available and community participation during this phase
will be essential for validating Observatory processes and shap-
ing effective workflows ahead of regular operations. The SKA
Regional Centres Network (SRCNet) Project delivery timeline is
aiming to be ready for first users at the start of Science Verification,
with testing at appropriate scales starting in the first half of 2026.”
Following Science Verification, the first opportunity for PI-
led proposals and science team ownership of SKA-Low data will
commence with a shared-risk Cycle 0 period in 2030, leading
eventually to the commencement of Key Science Projects (KSPs)
in 2033.
Anticipated in 2027 will be the so-called AA2 (Array
Assembly 2) stage of SKA-Low, which will comprise of 68
SKA-Low stations distributed over an area supporting a maxi-
mum baseline of 65 km. Details are provided in SKAO memo
SKAO-TEL-0002299l. The so-called AA∗ stage of SKA-Low will
represent the instrument that enters Cycle 0 and proceeds into the
KSP era, and is due to be released for Science Verification in 2029.
As such, in the remainder of this section, we focus specifically on
AA2, as the Array Assembly that will primarily overlap with the
remainder of the MW A’s operational lifetime. At most, AA∗ will
overlap with the MW A by∼12 months, thus likely not offering
a major opportunity to consider transitioning or complementary
capabilities between the two facilities.
The 68 SKA-Low AA2 stations will be grouped into clusters
that occupy 16 locations along the extended spiral arms of the
SKA-Low configuration, and are thus referred to as “remote” sta-
tions. AA2 will not involve any of the “core” SKA-Low locations;
the core will be populated subsequent to AA2, leading to AA ∗,
which is currently envisaged to comprise of 257 stations m. As
such, while the sensitivity of AA2 is relatively high, the AA2 (u,v)
coverage is effective driven by only 16 geographically distinct
locations, with very few short baselines. AA2 is therefore largely
an array with high sensitivity to small angular scale structures, and
very little sensitivity to large angular scale structures.
MW A antennas meet the SKA-Low sensitivity requirements
over a significant fraction of the SKA-Low frequency range
Sokolowski et al. (2022). Thus, to zero order, one SKA-Low
station is equivalent in sensitivity to 16 MW A tiles. The AA2
sensitivity (for the same bandwidth) is therefore approximately
a factor of four higher than for the MW A. However, all of the
MW A’s baselines are short, relative to the long baselines realised
by AA2. The MW A’s filled (u,v) coverage and relatively short
baseline distribution means that it has superb low surface bright-
ness sensitivity. This suggests a level of complementarity between
the Phase III MW A and SKA-Low AA2.
In order to explore this complementarity, we utilised the “SKA
SciOps Array Configuration and templates” n, a python package
developed by the SKAO to provide tools to simulate (u,v) cover-
ages, synthesised beams, and other characteristics. We used these
tools to generate a zenith pointed snapshot (u,v) coverage at a sin-
gle frequency of 150 MHz for AA2, and show it in Figure 22,
along with the Phase III MW A (u,v) coverage from Figure 5. The
long baseline (aside from the grouping of very short baselines due
to intra-cluster station baselines), but relatively sparse, nature of
the AA2 coverage can be seen, along with the short baseline but
filled coverage of the Phase III MW A. Importantly there exist a
lhttps://zenodo.org/records/16951020
mhttps://mailchi.mp/skao/skao-pulse-newsletter-9169539
nhttps://gitlab.com/ska-telescope/ost/ska-ost-array-config
reasonable number of overlapping (u,v) points between the two
coverages. For both facilities, (u,v) coverages improve via the use
of bandwidth and Earth-rotation synthesis
This complementarity admits some science opportunities to
utilise both arrays together, with the MW A representing the equiv-
alent of 16 SKA-Low stations of sensitivity on short baselines, and
AA2 representing 68 stations of sensitivity on predominantly long
baselines, with very short AA2 baselines due to intra-cluster sta-
tion baselines. Although the two arrays are not cross-correlated, a
joint deconvolution of AA2 and MW A visibilities, similar to that
achieved between Phase I and Phase II MW A datasets Mantovanini
et al. (2025), should be possible, to support a range of imaging
applications.
The capabilities envisaged to be released under an AA2 Science
Verification program will support such complementary imaging
applications, as AA2 users will be able to access calibrated,
averaged, and gridded visibilities in both continuum and spec-
tral line modes. Aside from science applications, the ability to
jointly deconvolve AA2 and Phase III MW A data should provide
a powerful cross-check of performance between the two arrays.
Another area in which Phase III MW A and AA2 will main-
tain a level of synergy is for Pulsar Searching (PSS) and Timing
(PST). As described above, the MW A Phase III upgrade will soon
include a real-time voltage beamforming capability implemented
using the MW AX correlator. Likewise, AA2 is envisaged to sup-
port a single voltage beam. However, as the AA2 configuration is
approximately 10 times more distributed than the MW A configu-
ration, the AA2 beam area will be 100 times smaller than for the
MW A. The AA2 beams will, however, be four times more sensitive
(for the same bandwidth). The voltage beamforming capabilities
of the Phase III MW A and AA2 may be complementary in the
sense of the MW A being used to cover a larger area of sky more
quickly for pulsar searching, but with lower sensitivity than AA2,
with AA2 being used for higher sensitivity follow-up observation
of any targets of interest. Again, in terms of Science Verification,
simultaneous observations of pulsars with both AA2 and Phase III
MW A are likely to be able to provide powerful cross-checks of
science performance.
While some areas of very interesting synergy and complemen-
tarity exist between Phase III MW A and SKA-Low AA2, there
will be some areas of science that will experience gaps in capabil-
ity when the MW A ceases operations in 2030. One particular area
is in so-called fast imaging, for example for the observation of
Long Period Transients, with imaging timescales from seconds to
minutes. SKA-Low is not projected to support fast imaging modes
in Science Verification until Cycle 2 (2032). Fast imaging should
be supported for AA2 due to the availability of visibility data,
but the supply of visibilities is not supported subsequently, from
AA∗ (2029). So, without the MW A fast imaging modes, and a gap
between AA2 and Cycle 2, some areas of science may experience
two to three years of pause.
Overall, however, the brief analysis and summary presented
here shows that the Phase III MW A capabilities generally rea-
sonably smoothly transition to those of AA ∗ on a timescale of
2029/30. Moreover, it is clear that the capabilities of SKA-Low
AA2 and Phase III MW A have a high level of complementarity in
the period 2027 - 2029. Interestingly, this opens opportunities for
combined science during the first SKA-Low Science Verification
phase, and also offers opportunities to undertake detailed perfor-
mance cross-checks between a well-understood and tested system
in the MW A to the new system in AA2, which should be extremely
helpful to quickly establish and verify SKA-Low capabilities.

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 19
Figure 22.MWA (blue) and SKA-Low AA2 (black) (u,v) coverages for a single
frequency at 150 MHz and for a zenith pointed snapshot. Top: full (u,v) coverages.
Bottom: zoomed in (u,v) coverages.
Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous referee for a close reading of the
paper, and for offering comments that assisted in providing addi-
tional clarity for non-expert readers. This scientific work uses
data obtained from Inyarrimanha Ilgari Bundara, the CSIRO
Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory. We acknowledge the
Wajarri Yamaji as the Traditional Owners and Native Title Holders
of the observatory site. Support for the operation of the MW A is
provided by the Australian Government (NCRIS), under a con-
tract to Curtin University administered by Astronomy Australia
Limited. We acknowledge the Pawsey Supercomputing Centre
which is supported by the Western Australian and Australian
Governments. Part of this work was supported by the Australian
SKA Regional Centre (AusSRC), Australia’s portion of the inter-
national SKA Regional Centre Network (SRCNet), funded by
the Australian Government through the Department of Industry,
Science, and Resources (DISR; grant SKARC000001). AusSRC
is an equal collaboration between CSIRO – Australia’s national
science agency, Curtin University, the Pawsey Supercomputing
Research Centre, and the University of Western Australia. We
acknowledge funding from the National SKA Program of China,
grant number SQ2020SKA0110100, which supported the SHAO
receiver development.
References
Kevin Bandura, Graeme E. Addison, Mandana Amiri, J. Richard Bond,
Duncan Campbell-Wilson, Liam Connor, Jean-Franc ¸ois Cliche, Greg Davis,
Meiling Deng, Nolan Denman, Matt Dobbs, Mateus Fandino, Kenneth
Gibbs, Adam Gilbert, Mark Halpern, David Hanna, Adam D. Hincks, Gary
Hinshaw, Carolin H ¨ofer, Peter Klages, Tom L. Landecker, Kiyoshi Masui,
Juan Mena Parra, Laura B. Newburgh, Ue-li Pen, Jeffrey B. Peterson, Andre
Recnik, J. Richard Shaw, Kris Sigurdson, Mike Sitwell, Graeme Smecher,
Rick Smegal, Keith Vanderlinde, and Don Wiebe. Canadian Hydrogen
Intensity Mapping Experiment (CHIME) pathfinder. In Larry M. Stepp,
Roberto Gilmozzi, and Helen J. Hall, editors,Ground-based and Airborne
Telescopes V, volume 9145 ofSociety of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, page 914522, July 2014. doi: 10.1117/
12.2054950.
A. P. Beardsley, M. Johnston-Hollitt, C. M. Trott, J. C. Pober, J. Morgan,
D. Oberoi, D. L. Kaplan, C. R. Lynch, G. E. Anderson, P. I. McCauley,
S. Croft, C. W. James, O. I. Wong, C. D. Tremblay, R. P. Norris, I. H.
Cairns, C. J. Lonsdale, P. J. Hancock, B. M. Gaensler, N. D. R. Bhat,
W. Li, N. Hurley-Walker, J. R. Callingham, N. Seymour, S. Yoshiura, R. C.
Joseph, K. Takahashi, M. Sokolowski, J. C. A. Miller-Jones, J. V . Chauhan,
I. Bojiˇci´c, M. D. Filipovi´c, D. Leahy, H. Su, W. W. Tian, S. J. McSweeney,
B. W. Meyers, S. Kitaeff, T. Vernstrom, G. G¨urkan, G. Heald, M. Xue, C. J.
Riseley, S. W. Duchesne, J. D. Bowman, D. C. Jacobs, B. Crosse, D. Emrich,
T. M. O. Franzen, L. Horsley, D. Kenney, M. F. Morales, D. Pallot,
K. Steele, S. J. Tingay, M. Walker, R. B. Wayth, A. Williams, and C. Wu.
Science with the Murchison Widefield Array: Phase I results and Phase II
opportunities.PASA, 36:e050, dec 2019. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2019.41.
P. Benthem, R. Wayth, E. de Lera Acedo, K. Zarb Adami, M. Alderighi,
C. Belli, P. Bolli, T. Booler, J. Borg, J. W. Broderick, S. Chiarucci,
R. Chiello, L. Ciani, G. Comoretto, B. Crosse, D. Davidson, A. DeMarco,
D. Emrich, A. van Es, D. Fierro, A. Faulkner, M. Gerbers, N. Razavi-
Ghods, P. Hall, L. Horsley, B. Juswardy, D. Kenney, K. Steele, A. Magro,
A. Mattana, B. McKinley, J. Monari, G. Naldi, J. Nanni, P. Di Ninni,
F. Paonessa, F. Perini, M. Poloni, G. Pupillo, S. Rusticelli, M. Schiaffino,
F. Schillir `o, H. Schnetler, R. Singuaroli, M. Sokolowski, A. Sutinjo,
G. Tartarini, D. Ung, J. G. Bij de Vaate, G. Virone, M. Walker, M. Waterson,
S. J. Wijnholds, and A. Williams. The Aperture Array Verification System
1: System overview and early commissioning results.A&A, 655:A5, nov
2021. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202040086.
Lindsay M. Berkhout, Daniel C. Jacobs, Zuhra Abdurashidova, Tyrone Adams,
James E. Aguirre, Paul Alexander, Zaki S. Ali, Rushelle Baartman, Yanga
Balfour, Adam P. Beardsley, Gianni Bernardi, Tashalee S. Billings, Judd D.
Bowman, Richard F. Bradley, Philip Bull, Jacob Burba, Ruby Byrne,
Steven Carey, Chris L. Carilli, Kai-Feng Chen, Carina Cheng, Samir
Choudhuri, David R. DeBoer, Eloy de Lera Acedo, Matt Dexter, Joshua S.
Dillon, Scott Dynes, Nico Eksteen, John Ely, Aaron Ewall-Wice, Nicolas
Fagnoni, Randall Fritz, Steven R. Furlanetto, Kingsley Gale-Sides, Hugh
Garsden, Bharat Kumar Gehlot, Abhik Ghosh, Brian Glendenning, Adelie
Gorce, Deepthi Gorthi, Bradley Greig, Jasper Grobbelaar, Ziyaad Halday,
Bryna J. Hazelton, Jacqueline N. Hewitt, Jack Hickish, Tian Huang, Alec
Josaitis, Austin Julius, MacCalvin Kariseb, Nicholas S. Kern, Joshua
Kerrigan, Honggeun Kim, Piyanat Kittiwisit, Saul A. Kohn, Matthew

20 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
Kolopanis, Adam Lanman, Paul La Plante, Adrian Liu, Anita Loots, Yin-
Zhe Ma, David Harold Edward MacMahon, Lourence Malan, Cresshim
Malgas, Keith Malgas, Bradley Marero, Zachary E. Martinot, Andrei
Mesinger, Mathakane Molewa, Miguel F. Morales, Tshegofalang Mosiane,
Steven G. Murray, Abraham R. Neben, Bojan Nikolic, Chuneeta Devi
Nunhokee, Hans Nuwegeld, Aaron R. Parsons, Robert Pascua, Nipanjana
Patra, Samantha Pieterse, Yuxiang Qin, Eleanor Rath, Nima Razavi-Ghods,
Daniel Riley, James Robnett, Kathryn Rosie, Mario G. Santos, Peter Sims,
Saurabh Singh, Dara Storer, Hilton Swarts, Jianrong Tan, Nithyanandan
Thyagarajan, Pieter van Wyngaarden, Peter K. G. Williams, Haoxuan
Zheng, and Zhilei Xu. Hydrogen Epoch of Reionization Array (HERA)
Phase II Deployment and Commissioning.PASP, 136(4):045002, April
2024. doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ad3122.
Judd D. Bowman, Iver Cairns, David L. Kaplan, Tara Murphy, Divya Oberoi,
Lister Staveley-Smith, Wayne Arcus, David G. Barnes, Gianni Bernardi,
Frank H. Briggs, Shea Brown, John D. Bunton, Adam J. Burgasser, Roger J.
Cappallo, Shami Chatterjee, Brian E. Corey, Anthea Coster, Avinash
Deshpande, Ludi deSouza, David Emrich, Philip Erickson, Robert F.
Goeke, B. M. Gaensler, Lincoln J. Greenhill, Lisa Harvey-Smith, Bryna J.
Hazelton, David Herne, Jacqueline N. Hewitt, Melanie Johnston-Hollitt,
Justin C. Kasper, Barton B. Kincaid, Ronald Koenig, Eric Kratzenberg,
Colin J. Lonsdale, Mervyn J. Lynch, Lynn D. Matthews, S. Russell
McWhirter, Daniel A. Mitchell, Miguel F. Morales, Edward H. Morgan,
Stephen M. Ord, Joseph Pathikulangara, Thiagaraj Prabu, Ronald A.
Remillard, Timothy Robishaw, Alan E. E. Rogers, Anish A. Roshi,
Joseph E. Salah, Robert J. Sault, N. Udaya Shankar, K. S. Srivani, Jamie B.
Stevens, Ravi Subrahmanyan, Steven J. Tingay, Randall B. Wayth, Mark
Waterson, Rachel L. Webster, Alan R. Whitney, Andrew J. Williams,
Christopher L. Williams, and J. Stuart B. Wyithe. Science with the
Murchison Widefield Array.PASA, 30:e031, apr 2013. doi: 10.1017/pas.
2013.009.
Z. P. Chen, R. L. Wang, J. Peterson, X. L. Chen, J. Y . Zhang, and H. L.
Shi. Design and analysis of a large cylinder antenna array in Tianlai. In
Helen J. Hall, Roberto Gilmozzi, and Heather K. Marshall, editors,Ground-
based and Airborne Telescopes VI, volume 9906 ofSociety of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, page 99065W, July
2016. doi: 10.1117/12.2232570.
Peter E. Dewdney, Peter J. Hall, Richard T. Schilizzi, and T. Joseph L. W.
Lazio. The square kilometre array.Proceedings of the IEEE, 97(8):1482–
1496, 2009. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2009.2021005.
Steven R. Furlanetto, S. Peng Oh, and Frank H. Briggs. Cosmology at low
frequencies: The 21 cm transition and the high-redshift Universe.Physics
Reports, 433(4-6):181–301, oct 2006. doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2006.08.002.
Y . Gupta, B. Ajithkumar, H. S. Kale, S. Nayak, S. Sabhapathy, S. Sureshkumar,
R. V . Swami, J. N. Chengalur, S. K. Ghosh, C. H. Ishwara-Chandra, B. C.
Joshi, N. Kanekar, D. V . Lal, and S. Roy. The upgraded GMRT: open-
ing new windows on the radio Universe.Current Science, 113(4):707–714,
August 2017. doi: 10.18520/cs/v113/i04/707-714.
P. J. Hall, A. T. Sutinjo, E. de Lera Acedo, R. B. Wayth, N. Razavi-Ghods,
T. M. Colegate, A. J. Faulkner, B. Juswardy, B. Fiorelli, T. Booler, J. G. B.
de Vaate, M. Waterson, and S. J. Tingay. First results from AA VS 0.5: A
prototype array for next-generation radio astronomy. In2013 International
Conference on Electromagnetics in Advanced Applications (ICEAA, page 1,
sep 2013. doi: 10.1109/ICEAA.2013.6632250.
N. Hurley-Walker, X. Zhang, A. Bahramian, S. J. McSweeney, T. N.
O’Doherty, P. J. Hancock, J. S. Morgan, G. E. Anderson, G. H. Heald,
and T. J. Galvin. A radio transient with unusually slow periodic emission.
Nature, 601(7894):526–530, jan 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04272-x.
N. Hurley-Walker, N. Rea, S. J. McSweeney, B. W. Meyers, E. Lenc,
I. Heywood, S. D. Hyman, Y . P. Men, T. E. Clarke, F. Coti Zelati, D. C.
Price, C. Horv´ath, T. J. Galvin, G. E. Anderson, A. Bahramian, E. D. Barr,
N. D. R. Bhat, M. Caleb, M. Dall’Ora, D. de Martino, S. Giacintucci, J. S.
Morgan, K. M. Rajwade, B. Stappers, and A. Williams. A long-period radio
transient active for three decades.Nature, 619(7970):487–490, jul 2023.
doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06202-5.
S. Johnston, R. Taylor, M. Bailes, N. Bartel, C. Baugh, M. Bietenholz,
C. Blake, R. Braun, J. Brown, S. Chatterjee, J. Darling, A. Deller,
R. Dodson, P. Edwards, R. Ekers, S. Ellingsen, I. Feain, B. Gaensler,
M. Haverkorn, G. Hobbs, A. Hopkins, C. Jackson, C. James, G. Joncas,
V . Kaspi, V . Kilborn, B. Koribalski, R. Kothes, T. Landecker, E. Lenc,
J. Lovell, J. P. Macquart, R. Manchester, D. Matthews, N. McClure-
Griffiths, R. Norris, U. L. Pen, C. Phillips, C. Power, R. Protheroe, E. Sadler,
B. Schmidt, I. Stairs, L. Staveley-Smith, J. Stil, S. Tingay, A. Tzioumis,
M. Walker, J. Wall, and M. Wolleben. Science with ASKAP. The Australian
square-kilometre-array pathfinder.Experimental Astronomy, 22(3):151–
273, dec 2008. doi: 10.1007/s10686-008-9124-7.
J. Jonas and MeerKAT Team. The MeerKAT Radio Telescope. InMeerKAT
Science: On the Pathway to the SKA, page 1, January 2016. doi: 10.22323/
1.277.0001.
Christopher H. Jordan, Dev Null, Cathryn M. Trott, Jack LB Line, J. Kariuki
Chege, Christene R. Lynch, Chuneeta D. Nunhokee, Greg Sleap, and
Randall B. Wayth. Mwa hyperdrive: Next generation calibration soft-
ware for the murchison widefield array radio telescope. In2025 URSI
Asia-Pacific Radio Science Meeting (AP-RASC), pages 1–4, 2025. doi:
10.46620/URSIAPRASC25/LSCN1310.
N. Kassim, S. White, P. Rodriquez, J. Hartman, B. Hicks, J. Lazio, K. Stewart,
J. Craig, G. Taylor, C. Cormier, V . Romero, and F. Jenet. The Long
Wavelength Array (LW A): A Large HF/VHF Array for Solar Physics,
Ionospheric Science, and Solar Radar. In S. Ryan, editor,Advanced
Maui Optical and Space Surveillance Technologies Conference, page E59,
September 2010.
Matthew Kolopanis, Jonathan C Pober, Daniel C Jacobs, and Samantha
McGraw. New eor power spectrum limits from mwa phase ii using the delay
spectrum method and novel systematic rejection.Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 521(4):5120–5138, 03 2023. ISSN 0035-8711.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad845. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stad845.
C. J. Lonsdale, R. J. Cappallo, M. F. Morales, F. H. Briggs, L. Benkevitch, J. D.
Bowman, J. D. Bunton, S. Burns, B. E. Corey, L. Desouza, S. S. Doeleman,
M. Derome, A. Deshpande, M. R. Gopala, L. J. Greenhill, D. E. Herne,
J. N. Hewitt, P. A. Kamini, J. C. Kasper, B. B. Kincaid, J. Kocz, E. Kowald,
E. Kratzenberg, D. Kumar, M. J. Lynch, S. Madhavi, M. Matejek, D. A.
Mitchell, E. Morgan, D. Oberoi, S. Ord, J. Pathikulangara, T. Prabu,
A. Rogers, A. Roshi, J. E. Salah, R. J. Sault, N. U. Shankar, K. S. Srivani,
J. Stevens, S. Tingay, A. Vaccarella, M. Waterson, R. B. Wayth, R. L.
Webster, A. R. Whitney, A. Williams, and C. Williams. The Murchison
Widefield Array: Design Overview.IEEE Proceedings, 97(8):1497–1506,
aug 2009. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2009.2017564.
D. R. Lorimer. SIGPROC: Pulsar Signal Processing Programs. Astrophysics
Source Code Library, record ascl:1107.016, July 2011.
Giulia Macario, Giuseppe Pupillo, Gianni Bernardi, Pietro Bolli, Paola Di
Ninni, Giovanni Comoretto, Andrea Mattana, Jader Monari, Federico
Perini, Marco Schiaffino, Marcin Sokolowski, Randall Wayth, Jess
Broderick, Mark Waterson, Maria Grazia Labate, Riccardo Chiello, Alessio
Magro, Tom Booler, Andrew Mcphail, Dave Minchin, and Raunaq
Bhushan. Characterization of the SKA1-Low prototype station Aperture
Array Verification System 2.Journal of Astronomical Telescopes,
Instruments, and Systems, 8:011014, jan 2022. doi: 10.1117/1.JATIS.8.1.
011014.
Silvia Mantovanini, Natasha Hurley-Walker, Kathryn Ross, Stefan Duchesne,
Gemma Anderson, and Timothy James Galvin. GaLactic and extragalac-
tic all-sky Murchison Widefield Array survey eXtended (GLEAM-X) III:
Galactic plane.PASA, 42:e137, October 2025. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2025.
10094.
I. S. Morrison, B. Crosse, G. Sleap, R. B. Wayth, A. Williams, M. Johnston-
Hollitt, J. Jones, S. J. Tingay, M. Walker, and L. Williams. MW AX: A new
correlator for the Murchison Widefield Array.PASA, 40:e019, apr 2023.
doi: 10.1017/pasa.2023.15.
C. D. Nunhokee, D. Null, C. M. Trott, N. Barry, Y . Qin, R. B. Wayth,
J. L. B. Line, C. H. Jordan, B. Pindor, J. H. Cook, J. Bowman, A. Chokshi,
J. Ducharme, K. Elder, Q. Guo, B. Hazelton, W. Hidayat, T. Ito, D. Jacobs,
E. Jong, M. Kolopanis, T. Kunicki, E. Lilleskov, M. F. Morales, J. C. Pober,
A. Selvaraj, R. Shi, K. Takahashi, S. J. Tingay, R. L. Webster, S. Yoshiura,
and Q. Zheng. Limits on the 21 cm Power Spectrum at z = 6.5–7.0 from
Murchison Widefield Array Observations.ApJ, 989(1):57, August 2025.
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adda45.

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 21
S. M. Ord, B. Crosse, D. Emrich, D. Pallot, R. B. Wayth, M. A. Clark,
S. E. Tremblay, W. Arcus, D. Barnes, M. Bell, G. Bernardi, N. D. R.
Bhat, J. D. Bowman, F. Briggs, J. D. Bunton, R. J. Cappallo, B. E. Corey,
A. A. Deshpande, L. deSouza, A. Ewell-Wice, L. Feng, R. Goeke, L. J.
Greenhill, B. J. Hazelton, D. Herne, J. N. Hewitt, L. Hindson, N. Hurley-
Walker, D. Jacobs, M. Johnston-Hollitt, D. L. Kaplan, J. C. Kasper, B. B.
Kincaid, R. Koenig, E. Kratzenberg, N. Kudryavtseva, E. Lenc, C. J.
Lonsdale, M. J. Lynch, B. McKinley, S. R. McWhirter, D. A. Mitchell, M. F.
Morales, E. Morgan, D. Oberoi, A. Offringa, J. Pathikulangara, B. Pindor,
T. Prabu, P. Procopio, R. A. Remillard, J. Riding, A. E. E. Rogers, A. Roshi,
J. E. Salah, R. J. Sault, N. Udaya Shankar, K. S. Srivani, J. Stevens,
R. Subrahmanyan, S. J. Tingay, M. Waterson, R. L. Webster, A. R. Whitney,
A. Williams, C. L. Williams, and J. S. B. Wyithe. The Murchison Widefield
Array Correlator.PASA, 32:e006, mar 2015. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2015.5.
S. M. Ord, S. E. Tremblay, S. J. McSweeney, N. D. R. Bhat, C. Sobey,
D. A. Mitchell, P. J. Hancock, and F. Kirsten. MW A tied-array process-
ing I: Calibration and beamformation.PASA, 36:e030, August 2019. doi:
10.1017/pasa.2019.17.
Thiagaraj Prabu, K. S. Srivani, D. Anish Roshi, P. A. Kamini, S. Madhavi,
David Emrich, Brian Crosse, Andrew J. Williams, Mark Waterson,
Avinash A. Deshpande, N. Udaya Shankar, Ravi Subrahmanyan, Frank H.
Briggs, Robert F. Goeke, Steven J. Tingay, Melanie Johnston-Hollitt,
Gopalakrishna M. R, Edward H. Morgan, Joseph Pathikulangara, John D.
Bunton, Grant Hampson, Christopher Williams, Stephen M. Ord, Randall B.
Wayth, Deepak Kumar, Miguel F. Morales, Ludi deSouza, Eric Kratzenberg,
D. Pallot, Russell McWhirter, Bryna J. Hazelton, Wayne Arcus, David G.
Barnes, Gianni Bernardi, T. Booler, Judd D. Bowman, Roger J. Cappallo,
Brian E. Corey, Lincoln J. Greenhill, David Herne, Jacqueline N. Hewitt,
David L. Kaplan, Justin C. Kasper, Barton B. Kincaid, Ronald Koenig,
Colin J. Lonsdale, Mervyn J. Lynch, Daniel A. Mitchell, Divya Oberoi,
Ronald A. Remillard, Alan E. Rogers, Joseph E. Salah, Robert J. Sault,
Jamie B. Stevens, S. Tremblay, Rachel L. Webster, Alan R. Whitney,
and Stuart B. Wyithe. A digital-receiver for the MurchisonWidefield
Array.Experimental Astronomy, 39(1):73–93, mar 2015. doi: 10.1007/
s10686-015-9444-3.
Sandeep M. Satav and V .V . Rama Sarma. Mil-std-461 f - a study report.
In2008 10th International Conference on Electromagnetic Interference &
Compatibility, pages 559–563, 2008.
M. Sokolowski, S. J. Tingay, D. B. Davidson, R. B. Wayth, D. Ung,
J. Broderick, B. Juswardy, M. Kovaleva, G. Macario, G. Pupillo, and
A. Sutinjo. What is the SKA-Low sensitivity for your favourite radio
source?PASA, 39:e015, April 2022. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2021.63.
Marcin Sokolowski, Christopher H. Jordan, Gregory Sleap, Andrew Williams,
Randall Bruce Wayth, Mia Walker, David Pallot, Andre Offringa, Natasha
Hurley-Walker, Thomas M. O. Franzen, Melanie Johnston-Hollitt, David L.
Kaplan, David Kenney, and Steven J. Tingay. Calibration database for the
Murchison Widefield Array All-Sky Virtual Observatory.PASA, 37:e021,
June 2020. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2020.17.
A. T. Sutinjo, T. M. Colegate, R. B. Wayth, P. J. Hall, E. de Lera Acedo,
T. Booler, A. J. Faulkner, L. Feng, N. Hurley-Walker, B. Juswardy,
S. K. Padhi, N. Razavi-Ghods, M. Sokolowski, S. J. Tingay, and J. G.
Bij de Vaate. Characterization of a Low-Frequency Radio Astronomy
Prototype Array in Western Australia.IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, 63(12):5433–5442, dec 2015. doi: 10.1109/TAP.2015.
2487504.
S. J. Tingay, R. Goeke, J. D. Bowman, D. Emrich, S. M. Ord, D. A.
Mitchell, M. F. Morales, T. Booler, B. Crosse, R. B. Wayth, C. J. Lonsdale,
S. Tremblay, D. Pallot, T. Colegate, A. Wicenec, N. Kudryavtseva,
W. Arcus, D. Barnes, G. Bernardi, F. Briggs, S. Burns, J. D. Bunton,
R. J. Cappallo, B. E. Corey, A. Deshpande, L. Desouza, B. M. Gaensler,
L. J. Greenhill, P. J. Hall, B. J. Hazelton, D. Herne, J. N. Hewitt,
M. Johnston-Hollitt, D. L. Kaplan, J. C. Kasper, B. B. Kincaid, R. Koenig,
E. Kratzenberg, M. J. Lynch, B. Mckinley, S. R. Mcwhirter, E. Morgan,
D. Oberoi, J. Pathikulangara, T. Prabu, R. A. Remillard, A. E. E. Rogers,
A. Roshi, J. E. Salah, R. J. Sault, N. Udaya-Shankar, F. Schlagenhaufer,
K. S. Srivani, J. Stevens, R. Subrahmanyan, M. Waterson, R. L. Webster,
A. R. Whitney, A. Williams, C. L. Williams, and J. S. B. Wyithe. The
Murchison Widefield Array: The Square Kilometre Array Precursor at Low
Radio Frequencies.PASA, 30:e007, jan 2013. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2012.007.
Steven J. Tingay. The Murchison Widefield Array Enters Adolescence: A
Personal Review of the Early Years of Operations.Galaxies, 13(5):107,
September 2025. doi: 10.3390/galaxies13050107.
S. E. Tremblay, S. M. Ord, N. D. R. Bhat, S. J. Tingay, B. Crosse, D. Pallot,
S. I. Oronsaye, G. Bernardi, J. D. Bowman, F. Briggs, R. J. Cappallo,
B. E. Corey, A. A. Deshpande, D. Emrich, R. Goeke, L. J. Greenhill, B. J.
Hazelton, M. Johnston-Hollitt, D. L. Kaplan, J. C. Kasper, E. Kratzenberg,
C. J. Lonsdale, M. J. Lynch, S. R. McWhirter, D. A. Mitchell, M. F. Morales,
E. Morgan, D. Oberoi, T. Prabu, A. E. E. Rogers, A. Roshi, N. Udaya
Shankar, K. S. Srivani, R. Subrahmanyan, M. Waterson, R. B. Wayth, R. L.
Webster, A. R. Whitney, A. Williams, and C. L. Williams. The High Time
and Frequency Resolution Capabilities of the Murchison Widefield Array.
PASA, 32:e005, feb 2015. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2015.6.
C. M. Trott, B. Pindor, P. Procopio, R. B. Wayth, D. A. Mitchell, B. McKinley,
S. J. Tingay, N. Barry, A. P. Beardsley, G. Bernardi, Judd D. Bowman,
F. Briggs, R. J. Cappallo, P. Carroll, A. de Oliveira-Costa, Joshua S. Dillon,
A. Ewall-Wice, L. Feng, L. J. Greenhill, B. J. Hazelton, J. N. Hewitt,
N. Hurley-Walker, M. Johnston-Hollitt, Daniel C. Jacobs, D. L. Kaplan,
H. S. Kim, E. Lenc, J. Line, A. Loeb, C. J. Lonsdale, M. F. Morales,
E. Morgan, A. R. Neben, Nithyanandan Thyagarajan, D. Oberoi, A. R.
Offringa, S. M. Ord, S. Paul, J. C. Pober, T. Prabu, J. Riding, N. Udaya
Shankar, Shiv K. Sethi, K. S. Srivani, R. Subrahmanyan, I. S. Sullivan,
M. Tegmark, R. L. Webster, A. Williams, C. L. Williams, C. Wu, and J. S. B.
Wyithe. CHIPS: The Cosmological H I Power Spectrum Estimator.ApJ,
818(2):139, February 2016. doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/818/2/139.
M. P. van Haarlem, M. W. Wise, A. W. Gunst, G. Heald, J. P. McKean, J. W. T.
Hessels, A. G. de Bruyn, R. Nijboer, J. Swinbank, R. Fallows, M. Brentjens,
A. Nelles, R. Beck, H. Falcke, R. Fender, J. H ¨orandel, L. V . E. Koopmans,
G. Mann, G. Miley, H. R ¨ottgering, B. W. Stappers, R. A. M. J. Wijers,
S. Zaroubi, M. van den Akker, A. Alexov, J. Anderson, K. Anderson,
A. van Ardenne, M. Arts, A. Asgekar, I. M. Avruch, F. Batejat, L. B ¨ahren,
M. E. Bell, M. R. Bell, I. van Bemmel, P. Bennema, M. J. Bentum,
G. Bernardi, P. Best, L. B ˆırzan, A. Bonafede, A. J. Boonstra, R. Braun,
J. Bregman, F. Breitling, R. H. van de Brink, J. Broderick, P. C. Broekema,
W. N. Brouw, M. Br ¨uggen, H. R. Butcher, W. van Cappellen, B. Ciardi,
T. Coenen, J. Conway, A. Coolen, A. Corstanje, S. Damstra, O. Davies, A. T.
Deller, R. J. Dettmar, G. van Diepen, K. Dijkstra, P. Donker, A. Doorduin,
J. Dromer, M. Drost, A. van Duin, J. Eisl ¨offel, J. van Enst, C. Ferrari,
W. Frieswijk, H. Gankema, M. A. Garrett, F. de Gasperin, M. Gerbers,
E. de Geus, J. M. Grießmeier, T. Grit, P. Gruppen, J. P. Hamaker,
T. Hassall, M. Hoeft, H. A. Holties, A. Horneffer, A. van der Horst, A. van
Houwelingen, A. Huijgen, M. Iacobelli, H. Intema, N. Jackson, V . Jelic,
A. de Jong, E. Juette, D. Kant, A. Karastergiou, A. Koers, H. Kollen, V . I.
Kondratiev, E. Kooistra, Y . Koopman, A. Koster, M. Kuniyoshi, M. Kramer,
G. Kuper, P. Lambropoulos, C. Law, J. van Leeuwen, J. Lemaitre, M. Loose,
P. Maat, G. Macario, S. Markoff, J. Masters, R. A. McFadden, D. McKay-
Bukowski, H. Meijering, H. Meulman, M. Mevius, E. Middelberg,
R. Millenaar, J. C. A. Miller-Jones, R. N. Mohan, J. D. Mol, J. Morawietz,
R. Morganti, D. D. Mulcahy, E. Mulder, H. Munk, L. Nieuwenhuis, R. van
Nieuwpoort, J. E. Noordam, M. Norden, A. Noutsos, A. R. Offringa,
H. Olofsson, A. Omar, E. Orr ´u, R. Overeem, H. Paas, M. Pandey-
Pommier, V . N. Pandey, R. Pizzo, A. Polatidis, D. Rafferty, S. Rawlings,
W. Reich, J. P. de Reijer, J. Reitsma, G. A. Renting, P. Riemers, E. Rol,
J. W. Romein, J. Roosjen, M. Ruiter, A. Scaife, K. van der Schaaf,
B. Scheers, P. Schellart, A. Schoenmakers, G. Schoonderbeek, M. Serylak,
A. Shulevski, J. Sluman, O. Smirnov, C. Sobey, H. Spreeuw, M. Steinmetz,
C. G. M. Sterks, H. J. Stiepel, K. Stuurwold, M. Tagger, Y . Tang, C. Tasse,
I. Thomas, S. Thoudam, M. C. Toribio, B. van der Tol, O. Usov, M. van
Veelen, A. J. van der Veen, S. ter Veen, J. P. W. Verbiest, R. Vermeulen,
N. Vermaas, C. V ocks, C. V ogt, M. de V os, E. van der Wal, R. van Weeren,
H. Weggemans, P. Weltevrede, S. White, S. J. Wijnholds, T. Wilhelmsson,
O. Wucknitz, S. Yatawatta, P. Zarka, and A. Zensus. LOFAR: The LOw-
Frequency ARray.Astronomy and Astrophysics, 556:A2, aug 2013. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201220873.
Randall Wayth, Marcin Sokolowski, Tom Booler, Brian Crosse, David Emrich,
Robert Grootjans, Peter J. Hall, Luke Horsley, Budi Juswardy, David
Kenney, Kim Steele, Adrian Sutinjo, Steven J. Tingay, Daniel Ung, Mia

22 Murchison Widefield Array Phase III
Walker, Andrew Williams, A. Beardsley, T. M. O. Franzen, M. Johnston-
Hollitt, D. L. Kaplan, M. F. Morales, D. Pallot, C. M. Trott, and C. Wu.
The Engineering Development Array: A Low Frequency Radio Telescope
Utilising SKA Precursor Technology.PASA, 34:e034, aug 2017. doi:
10.1017/pasa.2017.27.
Randall Wayth, Marcin Sokolowski, Jess Broderick, Steven J. Tingay, Raunaq
Bhushan, Tom Booler, Riccardo Chiello, David B. Davidson, David Emrich,
Budi Juswardy, David Kenney, Giulia Macario, Alessio Magro, Andrea
Mattana, David Minchin, Jader Monari, Andrew McPhail, Federico Perini,
Giuseppe Pupillo, Marco Schiaffino, Ravi Subrahmanyan, Andre van Es,
Mia Walker, and Mark Waterson. Engineering Development Array 2:
design, performance, and lessons from an SKA-Low prototype station.
Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems, 8:011010,
jan 2022. doi: 10.1117/1.JATIS.8.1.011010.
Randall B. Wayth, Steven J. Tingay, Cathryn M. Trott, David Emrich, Melanie
Johnston-Hollitt, Ben McKinley, B. M. Gaensler, A. P. Beardsley, T. Booler,
B. Crosse, T. M. O. Franzen, L. Horsley, D. L. Kaplan, D. Kenney,
M. F. Morales, D. Pallot, G. Sleap, K. Steele, M. Walker, A. Williams,
C. Wu, Iver. H. Cairns, M. D. Filipovic, S. Johnston, T. Murphy, P. Quinn,
L. Staveley-Smith, R. Webster, and J. S. B. Wyithe. The Phase II Murchison
Widefield Array: Design overview.PASA, 35:e033, nov 2018. doi:
10.1017/pasa.2018.37.
P. Zarka, M. Tagger, L. Denis, J. N. Girard, A. Konovalenko, M. Atemkeng,
M. Arnaud, S. Azarian, M. Barsuglia, A. Bonafede, F. Boone, A. Bosma,
R. Boyer, M. Branchesi, C. Briand, B. Cecconi, S. C ´elestin, D. Charrier,
E. Chassande-Mottin, A. Coffre, I. Cognard, F. Combes, S. Corbel,
C. Courte, A. Dabbech, S. Daiboo, R. Dallier, C. Dumez-Viou, M. N.
El Korso, E. Falgarone, I. Falkovych, A. Ferrari, C. Ferrari, K. Ferri `ere,
C. Fevotte, A. Fialkov, M. Fullekrug, E. G ´erard, J.-M. Grießmeier,
B. Guiderdoni, L. Guillemot, J. Hessels, L. Koopmans, V . Kondratiev,
L. Lamy, T. Lanz, P. Larzabal, M. Lehnert, F. Levrier, A. Loh,
G. Macario, J.-J. Maintoux, L. Martin, D. Mary, S. Masson, M.-A. Miville-
Deschenes, D. Oberoi, M. Panchenko, M. Pandey-Pommier, A. Petiteau,
J.-L. Pinc ¸on, B. Revenu, F. Rible, C. Richard, H. O. Rucker, P. Salom ´e,
B. Semelin, M. Serylak, O. Smirnov, B. Stappers, C. Taffoureau, C. Tasse,
G. Theureau, P. Tokarsky, S. Torchinsky, O. Ulyanov, W. van Driel,
I. Vasylieva, J. Vaubaillon, F. Vazza, S. Vergani, M. Was, R. Weber, and
V . Zakharenko. NenUFAR: Instrument description and science case. In
2015 International Conference on Antenna Theory and Techniques (ICATT,
page ICATT.2015.7136773, June 2015. doi: 10.1109/ICATT.2015.7136773.
Qian Zheng, Xiang-Ping Wu, Melanie Johnston-Hollitt, Jun-hua Gu, and
Haiguang Xu. Radio Sources in the NCP Region Observed with the
21 Centimeter Array.ApJ, 832(2):190, December 2016. doi: 10.3847/
0004-637X/832/2/190.