Title: The magnetic field of the Milky Way: an observational perspective
Authors: Marijke Haverkorn
Published: 2026-06-01
Categories: astro-ph.GA

The magnetic field of the Milky Way: an
observational perspective
Marijke Haverkorn
Department of Astrophysics/IMAPP, Radboud University, PO Box
9010, 6500 GL, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): m.haverkorn@astro.ru.nl;
Abstract
Magnetic fields are an important and enigmatic component of the Milky Way’s
ecosystem. Mostly frozen into interstellar plasma, they play key roles in (tur-
bulent) gas dynamics, star formation, energy household, evolution of interstellar
objects, and cosmic-ray propagation. This paper reviews recent progress on
measuring and characterizing these Galactic magnetic fields, limited to the
larger-scale fields in mostly diffuse media, and to an observational perspective.
On Galaxy-wide scales, the magnetic field roughly follows the spiral arms in the
Galactic disk, and includes an additional component perpendicular to the disk
away from the Galactic plane. The field configuration is different in the Galactic
disk and the Galactic gaseous halo, qualitatively consistent with different dom-
inating dynamo modes. Deviations from this idealized model are ubiquitously
observed and include anomalously high Faraday rotation, variable magnetic field
orientations and field reversals on kiloparsec scales.
On smaller scales, the magnetic field is turbulent, anisotropic and intermittent.
Much used descriptions of the turbulent magnetic field such as power laws and
Gaussianity are being replaced by higher-order statistics that better capture the
complexities of the field. Magnetic field orientations and possibly strength are
correlated with both cold and warm components of the multi-phase interstellar
gas, and with the interstellar dust distribution.
The near future will bring a large increase in observational data in rotation
measure grids, Faraday Tomography data and measurements of interstellar polar-
ization of optical starlight, promising exciting developments in characterizing and
understanding magnetic fields in the Milky Way in the next few years.
Keywords:Galactic magnetism, Milky Way, Interstellar medium, Magnetic fields
1
arXiv:2606.02149v1  [astro-ph.GA]  1 Jun 2026

Contents
1 Introduction 3
1.1 Reviews reviewed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2 Terminology of magnetic field components 5
3 Origin, amplification and maintenance of galactic magnetic fields 7
3.1 Mean field dynamos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.2 Fluctuation dynamos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.3 Seed magnetic fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
4 Observational tracers 9
4.1 Polarized dust emission and absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
4.2 Synchrotron emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4.3 Faraday rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4.4 Zeeman effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.5 Other tracers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5 Analysis methods 13
5.1 Davis–Chandrasekhar–Fermi method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.2 Rotation Measure (RM) grids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.3 Rotation Measure Synthesis/Faraday Tomography . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.4 Gradient techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
6 The coherent Galactic magnetic field component 22
6.1 Coherent magnetic fields in the Galactic disk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.1.1 Field strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.1.2 Orientation of the disk magnetic field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.2 Coherent magnetic fields in the Galactic halo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7 Small-scale magnetic fields 29
7.1 Magnetized turbulence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7.1.1 Description in terms of power spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.2 Correlations with other interstellar components . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
7.2.1 Correlations between magnetic field orientation and atomic
hydrogen filaments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
7.2.2 Correlations with Faraday rotation and depolarization structures 34
7.3 Variations in Galactic magnetic field along lines of sight . . . . . . . . 35
8 The Local Bubble 37
9 Current surveys and future prospects 39
9.1 RM grid surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
9.2 Spectro-polarimetric surveys of diffuse emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
9.3 Optical/NIR stellar polarization surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
2

10 Conclusions 43
References 44
1 Introduction
The Universe is rife with intriguing objects and processes, and astronomers and astro-
physicists are unraveling their mysteries. Besides theory, numerical simulations and
experiments, observations are the fourth indispensable key to understanding these
mysteries - usually through electro-magnetic radiation, but increasingly also other mes-
sengers like particles or gravitational waves. One of the Universe’s components that
remains relatively hidden are magnetic fields, which do not emit observable radiation
or particles at all.
Magnetism seemingly plays a very different role in space than on Earth. While
daily life appears on the surface to be not much affected by magnetic fields, their
effects are ubiquitous and abundant in space. The crucial difference is that most matter
on Earth is electrically neutral, while practically the entire Universe is ionized, from
stars to cosmic filaments: even in the densest, darkest molecular cloud a small amount
of free electrons remains. Although electric fields in space are quickly canceled out
on larger scales due to the random configurations of positive and negative charges
creating these electric fields, magnetic fields do maintain in the vast volumes of space,
and can grow either extremely strong, or to extremely large spatial scales. Ionized
gas directly interacts with these magnetic fields through the Lorentz force, effectively
freezing in the field lines in plasma. Except for the densest molecular cloud cores with
extremely low ionization degrees, all interstellar gas in galaxies and galaxy clusters
has a sufficiently high ionization for the plasma to remain coupled to the magnetic
field (Ferri` ere 2001). Because of this, magnetic pressure and/or magnetic tension play
a major role in many astrophysical situations and the magnetic field is an active
component in the dynamics and energy balance of many cosmic objects.
On galaxy-wide scales, magnetic pressure is a significant component in the Milky
way’s vertical hydrostatic equilibrium, its energy density comparable to cosmic ray
and turbulent gas energy density (Boulares and Cox 1990), although much smaller
than galactic rotational energy (Heiles and Haverkorn 2012). Magnetic fields in the
interstellar medium may influence the formation of galaxies (Naab and Ostriker 2017),
although likely only to a limited extent (Pakmor et al. 2017). Galactic dynamics are
affected by magnetic fields in e.g. the shaping of spiral arms (G´ omez and Cox 2002)
and spurs (Kim and Ostriker 2002), or the Milky Way’s rotation curve at outer (Bat-
taner et al. 1992) and inner radii (Chan and Del Popolo 2022). Large-scale galactic
magnetic fields influence the evolution of diffuse objects such as superbubbles (Ntor-
mousi et al. 2017) or supernova remnants (Slavin and Cox 1992), pulsar wind nebulae
(Reynolds et al. 2012), planetary nebulae (Sabin et al. 2007), and HII regions (Pavel
et al. 2012). Magnetic fields obviously are an indelible part of magneto-hydrodynamic
(MHD) turbulence, which is pervasive throughout the Universe. MHD turbulence is
vital in many processes in the Milky Way, such as driving star formation (Mac Low and
3

Klessen 2004), or the maintenance of magnetic fields through dynamo action (Bran-
denburg and Ntormousi 2023). Magnetic reconnection may be a significant heating
source in the interstellar medium (Raymond 1992).
In molecular clouds, magnetic pressure and tension significantly affect the gas
dynamics at the scales probed by the Planck satellite (Planck Collaboration et al.
2016c). Cloud cores can collapse when they lose magnetic support, becoming magnet-
ically supercritical, by processes like ambipolar diffusion of neutral and ionized species
(Mestel and Spitzer 1956; Zweibel 2015), or diffusion of magnetic fields and plasma
due to magnetic reconnection (Lazarian 2014; Santos-Lima et al. 2021). Increased
magnetic tension in collapsing clouds counteracts this effect (’magnetic braking’), car-
rying angular momentum outwards which significantly slows down star formation (e.g.,
Mouschovias 1976).
In addition, magnetic fields dictate the propagation and spatial distribution of
cosmic rays by deflecting their paths, and affect their spectra (Mollerach and Roulet
2018). Galactic (lower-energy) cosmic rays are completely randomized by the inter-
stellar magnetic field (Strong et al. 2007), while there is hope to trace back the paths
of ultra-high energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) to reveal their origins, depending on their
energy and charge (e.g. Farrar and Sutherland 2019; Korochkin et al. 2025).
As it is impossible to review the complete works on interstellar magnetic fields, and
guided by my expertise and limitations therein, this review concentrates on insights on
magnetic fields in the Milky Way on larger scales (largely ignoring magnetic fields in
star formation and molecular clouds), and from an observational perspective. For read-
ers who are interested in the aspects of magnetic fields not considered here, Sect. 1.1
presents an overview of other reviews on interstellar magnetic fields worth consulting.
After an intermezzo in Sect. 2 explaining used terminology of magnetic field compo-
nents, some background is provided on the origin, amplification, and maintenance of
galactic magnetic fiels in Sect. 3. The most used observational tracers of magnetic
fields are explained in Sect. 4 and Sect. 5 treats the analysis methods using those trac-
ers. Section 6 discusses magnetic fields on roughly kiloparsec scales, including models
of the global structure of magnetic field in the disk and halo of the Milky Way, and
observed large-scale and intermediate-scale deviations in those. Magnetic fields on
smaller scales, turbulent fields and how magnetic fields interact with various other
interstellar components, is described in Sect. 7. The magnetic field of the Local Bub-
ble is arguably not a part of larger-scale Galactic magnetic fields; however, as it is
relevant for many magnetic field measurements beyond the edge of the Local Bubble,
a discussion on its magnetic field is included in Sect. 8. Finally, in Sect. 9, I provide
an overview of the major current and future efforts to observe magnetic fields, and
close in the last section.
1.1 Reviews reviewed
This review focuses on observational studies of interstellar magnetic fields, from
approximately parsec scales to Galaxy scales, in typical diffuse interstellar environ-
ments, and focuses mostly on recent work. Therefore, many important studies of
magnetic fields in the Milky Way will be missing. This section gives an incomplete
4

but well-intended summary of where to find the information that is not discussed in
this paper.
For mostly observational reviews on Galactic magnetic fields until about a decade
ago, please see Noutsos (2012); Haverkorn (2015); Han (2017). An overview of
parametrized Galactic magnetic field models up to that time can be found in Planck
Collaboration et al. (2016b) and more recently in Jaffe (2019). Beck and Wielebinski
(2013)1 review magnetic fields in the Milky Way and other galaxies. Extensive infor-
mation on astrophysical magnetic fields is presented in the excellent book by Shukurov
and Subramanian (2021). For Galactic magnetism as seen in the radio domain, see
Landecker (2012) for an overview with emphasis on polarimetric surveys of diffuse
Galactic emission, and read Akahori et al. (2018) for an outline of cosmic magnetism
on scales from the interstellar medium to the cosmic web.
A theoretical review on galactic magnetic fields can be found in Ferri` ere (2015),
while Brandenburg and Ntormousi (2023) provide a recent overview of galactic dynamo
theory and simulations, and Subramanian (2019) discusses the origin and maintenance
of coherent galactic magnetic fields, from primordial seed fields to galactic dynamos.
Magnetic fields in and near the Galactic center are discussed in Ferri` ere (2011), plasma
turbulence and its tracers are explained in Ferri` ere (2020), and magnetic fields in dis-
crete Galactic objects, from radio loops and supernova remnants to HII regions and
molecular clouds, are reviewed in Han (2017). For example van Loo et al. (2012);
McKee and Ostriker (2007); Krumholz and Federrath (2019) discuss the role of mag-
netic fields in star formation. Magnetic fields in molecular clouds are reviewed from
an observational perspective by Crutcher (2012) and by Li (2021), while Hennebelle
and Inutsuka (2019) focus on the numerical and theoretical aspects of magnetic fields
in the formation and evolution of molecular clouds.
2 Terminology of magnetic field components
Galactic magnetic fields are exceedingly complex, and structured on a huge range
of scales: from fields following spiral arms over many tens of kiloparsecs, to fields
connected to interstellar turbulence on sub-parsec scales. On any range of scales,
interstellar magnetic fields may be e.g. compressed by interstellar shocks, be (anti-
)correlated with directions of filaments of ionized and/or neutral gas, be distorted by
collapse of molecular clouds, or align with supernova remnant and superbubble walls.
For characterization and description of these interstellar magnetic fields, they are
traditionally divided into large-scale and small-scale components. The large-scale com-
ponent, also often named coherent, regular, or uniform, is meant to denote the global
field structure on scales of approximately kiloparsecs and higher. This includes spi-
ral structure in the Galactic disk, and kiloparsec-scale fluctuations resulting from a
Galactic dynamo in the halo. The small-scale (also called random, turbulent, incoher-
ent) component describes the field on scales of roughly a (few) hundred parsecs and
smaller, commonly described in terms of statistical parameters like power spectral
index and correlation length.
1Please refer to https://arxiv.org/abs/1302.5663 for the latest updated version v11 in 2023.
5

Fig. 1Overview of magnetic field components, and properties of radio-polarimetric observables.
From left to right: sketch of a coherent field component, ordered random component and isotropic
random component, and of a helical magnetic field. The eyes denote viewing directions, and some
properties along this viewing direction of rotation measure (RM), dispersion of rotation measure
(σRM), total synchrotron intensity (I) and polarized intensity (PI). Reproduced from Jaffe (2019),
Galaxies, under a CC BY 4.0 license.
Within the description of a turbulent magnetic field, an isotropic random (also
called ordered random, or striated) field and an anisotropic random component can
be distinguished (see Fig. 1 and the extensive explanation in Jaffe 2019). Anisotropic
random magnetic fields contain small-scale structure in direction, but not in orienta-
tion. These fields can arise from isotropic random magnetic field structure as a result
of shear due to Galactic differential rotation, density waves in spiral arms, or com-
pression e.g. due to the passage of a shock wave. This component can be determined
by the different response of isotropic and anisotropic turbulence to measured total
intensity, polarized intensity and rotation measure, see Fig. 1.
This distinction is useful, although it ignores many complexities. First of all, meso-
scale structure is hard to classify, such as kiloparsec-scale deviations from spiral arm
structures. Also, magnetic helicity, a measure of the twisting and curling of the field,
is missing in this simple description (see Fig. 1). Lastly, correlations of magnetic field
with discrete interstellar gas or dust structures such as interstellar shocks, clouds or
filaments are usually not adequately described by this distinction, especially when
they are phenomenologically studied on a case by case basis.
6

This paper contains a slightly more detailed distinction. Coherent, large-scale
fields are discussed separately for the Galactic disk (Sect. 6.1) and the Galactic halo 2
(Sect. 6.2). In the discussion of small-scale magnetic fields (Sect. 7), distinction is
made between a description in terms of turbulence in Sect. 7.1 and correlations with
interstellar gas and dust structures in Sect. 7.2.
3 Origin, amplification and maintenance of galactic
magnetic fields
In galaxies (and most other astrophysical contexts), the electrical conductivity of the
plasma is so high (i.e. magnetic Reynolds number is so large) that Ohmic resistiv-
ity can be neglected at most scales. This would mean that magnetic fields present in
this plasma would survive indefinitely. However, due to turbulent plasma motions, the
magnetic field fluctuations are rapidly transported to small scales, where magnetic and
kinetic energy is converted into heat, producing decay of the magnetic field. However,
magnetic fields on the order of a few microGauss at galactic scales are known to exist
already at redshift∼1.3 (Bernet et al. 2008), which means that a mechanism must
exist that maintains these magnetic fields despite the fact that galaxies and proto-
galaxies are turbulent. This mechanism is dynamo action, which converts kinetic (and
to a smaller scale gravitational) energy into magnetic energy. Dynamos can amplify
small magnetic fields to microGauss strength, but cannot create magnetic fields in a
non-magnetized plasma. Therefore, some kind of weak magnetic seed field is needed
for the dynamo to act.
Dynamos can be classified into two categories: mean-field dynamos and fluctua-
tion dynamos (also commonly called large-scale and small-scale dynamos). Mean-field
dynamos can amplify and maintain magnetic fields on spatial scales larger than the
correlation length of the turbulent flows involved, while the fluctuation dynamo only
amplifies fields on scales smaller than that. In the early phases of a dynamo, magnetic
fields are still so weak that their feedback is negligible: the induction equation is linear
in the magnetic field, which means that field grows exponentially; this is the linear or
kinematic regime. When the field strength increases, feedback on the dynamo process
becomes significant and the dynamo enters a non-linear regime. As the time scales
for magnetic field growth in spiral galaxies are very small for fluctuation dynamos
(≲10 Myr), but also not long in mean-field dynamos (∼0.5−1 Gyr), we expect that
the dynamos acting in the Milky Way and other low-redshift spiral galaxies are in the
non-linear, saturated regime (Shukurov and Subramanian 2021, hereafter SS21).
3.1 Mean field dynamos
The mean field dynamo process was first described by Parker (1955) and first applied to
a disk galaxy by Parker (1971) and Vainshtein and Ruzmaikin (1971). Assuming (near
or perfect) flux freezing, differential rotation of the magnetized interstellar plasma
2The ’Galactic halo’ in the interstellar medium and Galactic magnetism communities is differently defined
as (dark matter dominated) galaxy haloes in galaxy formation. Here, the Galactic halo is described as the
layers of interstellar medium above the thin Galactic star-forming disk, containing the hot coronal gas, the
Reynolds’ Layer of ionized gas, neutral gas and dust, magnetic fields and cosmic rays beyond the Galactic
disk.
7

will shear any poloidal magnetic field component into a toroidal component (the Ω-
effect). Turbulent motions in a stratified plasma combined with the Coriolis force
can convert this toroidal component back in a poloidal component (theα-effect).
These turbulent motions are thought to be mostly driven by supernova explosions in
the disks of galaxies (SS21), possibly enhanced by the magneto-rotational instability
(Balbus and Hawley 1991) in the outer parts where supernova driving is weaker or
absent (Piontek and Ostriker 2007). Magnetic buoyancy, amplified by cosmic rays,
enhances the creation of poloidal motions (Parker 1992; Qazi et al. 2025). Combined,
the differential rotation and helical turbulence can amplify galactic magnetic fields in
a so-calledα−Ω dynamo mechanism to the observed microGauss strengths.
In the Milky Way, there is ample evidence that a mean-field dynamo is at work.
The observed magnitude and sign of the pitch angle of the magnetic spiral arms, the
quadrupolar (’butterfly pattern’) signature of magnetic field direction in the Galactic
halo, and large-scale reversals in the direction of the disk magnetic field (see Sect. 6)
are all consistent with a mean-field dynamo in the Milky Way (Shukurov 2004).
3.2 Fluctuation dynamos
A fluctuation dynamo creates small-scale, random magnetic fields, from random
plasma motions in a medium with high magnetic Reynolds number such as the
interstellar medium (Kazantsev 1968). It can amplify magnetic field fluctuations expo-
nentially, through stretching and folding magnetic field lines in interstellar turbulence
on increasingly smaller scales. The produced magnetic fields are intermittent and
locally concentrated into intense thin filaments (of a length comparable to the tur-
bulent scale) surrounded by a less ordered magnetic field. A fluctuation dynamo is
thought to maintain magnetic fields in astrophysical situations where the mean-field
dynamo is absent due to lack of differential rotation (e.g. in galaxy clusters), but is
also active in the Milky Way’s interstellar medium, possibly as a seed mechanism for
the mean-field dynamo (SS21).
3.3 Seed magnetic fields
A dynamo can amplify magnetic fields, but not create fields in a non-magnetized
plasma. Therefore, a minute seed field needs to be generated by other processes, for
a dynamo to amplify. In primordial magnetogenesis, magnetic fields can be created
through a number of exotic physical processes such as quantum fluctuations of the
electro-magnetic field during inflation or in phase transitions.
In the inflation era, electromagnetic quantum fluctuations could be transformed to
classical fluctuations and stretched to large scales. However, finetuning of parameters
seems to be necessary, and it is as yet unclear how to amplify electromagnetic wave
fluctuations to a strong enough seed magnetic field, which requires breaking conformal
invariance of the electromagnetic field (Turner and Widrow 1988; Subramanian 2016).
Primordial magnetic fields may also be created in various phase transitions, such as
the electroweak or quark-hadron phase transitions (Hogan 1983; Vachaspati 2021).
This explanation is appealing if these processes create fields on large spatial scales
in the present, but it is not evident that strong enough seed fields can be created
8

to enable significant amplification of magnetic fields on sufficiently small timescales
(Kandus et al. 2011).
More traditional physics can create small magnetic fields through some battery
mechanism, in which positive and negative charges are separated, creating an electric
field, which under certain circumstances can create a magnetic field. The most well-
known of these mechanisms is the Biermann battery (Biermann 1950). Here, a pressure
gradient in the plasma accelerates the electrons faster than the far more massive
protons, creating an electric field. If there is a density gradient that is not aligned with
the pressure gradient, this generates a weak magnetic field. Battery mechanisms can
only grow magnetic fields linearly with time, and can only produce very small seed
fields.
Plasma instabilities in the formation of galaxies and galaxy clusters from cosmo-
logical density perturbations can also provide a seed field. An example is the Weibel
instability (Weibel 1959), which is created in anisotropic velocity distributions of the
plasma. Even though the Weibel instability amplifies magnetic fields exponentially,
the fields are on such small scales that this process is not believed to create a relevant
seed field at galactic scales. The same objections hold for seed fields created in smaller
objects such as active galactic nuclei or even stars and then ejected into the interstel-
lar gas, which can amplify magnetic fields fast but on too small scales. A fluctuation
dynamo is a viable option to amplify minute seed fields to the strengths that a mean-
field dynamo can amplify to and maintain at the observed microGauss strengths of
galactic magnetic fields. For details, see SS21.
4 Observational tracers
4.1 Polarized dust emission and absorption
Both, Hall (1949) and Hiltner (1949) semi-independently discovered that starlight
can be partially linearly polarized, and suggested from the uniformity of polarization
directions in nearby stars that this polarization was not intrinsic to the star but caused
by the intervening interstellar medium.
Asymmetric dust grains with some angular momentum in an ambient magnetic
field will align their angular momentum with the local magnetic field orientation, see
Figure 2. Dichroic absorption of starlight propagating through this medium will then
incite partial linear polarization (Stein 1966), which is directed parallel to the plane-
of-sky magnetic field component averaged along the dust-weighted line of sight. In
the following, we refer to this as interstellar polarization of starlight. The alignment
efficiency can be low in very dense media, but can in most interstellar gas be assumed
to be 100%: the relatively high ratio of polarization over extinction (Jones 1996),
the wavelength dependence of polarization (Mathis 1986) and more complex dust
population models (Kim and Martin 1995) are all best explained with high alignment
efficiency.
The mechanism causing alignment was long thought to be due to the Davis–
Greenstein effect (Davis and Greenstein 1951), but is currently best explained by the
Radiative Alignment Torque (RAT) theory, giving torques due to asymmetries in the
grain shapes and in ambient radiation fields (Purcell 1975; Lazarian and Hoang 2007),
9

possibly in combination with the Davis–Greenstein effect. Note however that in excep-
tional cases, alignment mechanisms may cause alignment perpendicular to the local
plane-of-sky field orientation (Rao et al. 1998).
Aligned dust grains will not only incite a partial linear polarization in (optical and
infrared) passing starlight, but also emit thermal far infrared (FIR)/submillimeter
(submm) emission which is partially linearly polarized, orientedperpendicularto the
plane-of-sky magnetic field component averaged along the dust-weighted line of sight,
i.e. perpendicular to the orientation of interstellar polarization of starlight by the same
medium, as demonstrated in Fig. 2.
The amount of polarization carries information on the orientation of magnetic field
in dusty environments and of the dust properties, while the polarization angle traces
the line-of-sight integrated and dust-weighted magnetic field orientation projected on
the plane of the sky. The two observational methods mentioned here are nicely com-
plementary: dense environments are typically observable in submm and FIR polarized
thermal dust emission, due to the high amounts of dust along a line of sight, where
extinction is so high that polarized background stars are scarce. In more diffuse envi-
ronments, where dust emission is weak, optical and near infrared (NIR) polarization
in background stars is measurable.
Fig. 2Effects of polarized radiation by interstellar dust grains in an ambient magnetic field. Top:
unpolarized light from a background star attains partial (optical and NIR) linear polarization by
propagating through a magnetized dusty medium, which is parallel to the magnetic field orienta-
tion projected on the plane of the sky. Bottom: dust grains attain (FIR and submm) partial linear
polarization in an ambient magnetic field, which is perpendicular to the magnetic field orientation
projected on the plane of the sky.
10

4.2 Synchrotron emission
Relativistic cosmic-ray electrons in galaxies circling around magnetic field lines under
influence of the Lorentz force emit synchrotron emission. A power law distribution of
energies of the relativistic electrons translates into a power law in emission. At the
low field strengths and ubiquitous cosmic-ray presence in the interstellar medium, this
emission is pervasive and is detected in the submm to radio domain (Fermi 1949).
Synchrotron emission is intrinsically highly linearly polarized in the direction of
the local magnetic field component perpendicular to the line of sight, but is partially
depolarized by the integration along the line of sight and within the observing beam
in case of a non-uniform magnetic field orientation. At high radio (microwave) wave-
lengths, where Faraday rotation is negligible (see Sect. 4.3), the observed orientation of
linear polarization angle represents the orientation of the plane-of-sky magnetic field
component averaged over the path length. The degree of polarization gives informa-
tion on the tangling of the magnetic field along the line of sight (Beck and Wielebinski
2013). The synchrotron intensity can also be a measure of the magnetic field strength
under certain energy assumptions such as local equipartition or pressure equilibrium,
although these assumptions may be problematic (Seta and Beck 2019). Measuring
total and polarized synchrotron emission is an excellent method to estimate magnetic
field strengths and the amount of tangledness of the field in external galaxies, and is
one of the main tracers used in large-scale modeling of the Milky Way’s magnetic field
(see Sect. 6). Synchrotron emission is also used to trace the properties of the magne-
tized turbulent magnetic field component through various analysis methods, see the
review by Zhang and Wang (2022).
4.3 Faraday rotation
Faraday rotation is the rotation of linear polarization angle in a magnetized and ionized
medium, caused by different phase velocities for left and right hand circular polarized
radiation in magnetized plasma, called circular birefringence. The Faraday rotation
of a linearly polarized wave rotates its polarization angleχin an intervening medium
with thermal electron densityn e and magnetic fieldB, by an amount:
∆χ=χ 0 + RMλ2 =χ 0 +

0.81
Z 0
source
 ne
cm−3
 B
µG

·
ds
pc

λ2,
whereχ 0 is the intrinsic polarization angle at emission,λthe observing wavelength,
and RM the rotation measure. For emission sources behind the Faraday rotating
medium, RM can be easily determined as the linear relation between ∆χandλ 2.
However, when synchrotron emitting and Faraday rotating media are mixed, RM is
not defined anymore. Instead, the medium can be described by the Faraday spectrum,
which depicts polarized intensity as a function of Faraday depth defined as
 ϕ(d)
rad m−2

= 0.81
Z 0
d
 ne
cm−3
 B
µG

·
ds
pc

,
wheredis the distance to a particular component of the synchrotron emission.
11

If estimates of the mean free electron density and of the path length of the inter-
vening ionized medium can be independently obtained, Faraday rotation provides an
estimate of the strength of the magnetic field component directed along the line of
sight, either path length integrated (RM) or in a spectrum (ϕ(d)). This calculation
assumes that electron density and magnetic field strength are uncorrelated. If pres-
sure equilibrium holds, magnetic field and electron density will be anticorrelated, in
which case the magnetic field strength will be underestimated; on the other hand, a
positive correlation will overestimate magnetic field strength (Beck et al. 2003). Even
if reliable estimates of free electron density and/or path length are not available, the
sign of the RM still carries direct information on the direction of the (path length inte-
grated) line-of-sight component of the magnetic field. Analysis methods using Faraday
rotation will be discussed in Sections 5.2 and 5.3.
4.4 Zeeman effect
The Zeeman effect splits a spectral line into several components of slightly different
frequency under influence of a magnetic field (Zeeman 1897). The transversal Zeeman
effect creates two linearly polarized lines proportional to the plane-of-sky magnetic
field component; this is regularly observed in the Sun (Hale 1908). The longitudinal
Zeeman effect splits the line into two circularly polarized components proportional to
the magnetic field component parallel to the line of sight. As opposed to the transversal
Zeeman effect, the longitudinal effect can be detected in the interstellar environment
through its circular polarization signal, however still only in the coldest gas. Zeeman
splitting is therefore complementary to many other methods, in that it gives anin
situmeasurement of magnetic field component along the line of sight in the cold dense
interstellar medium. It is very challenging, as the high signal-to-noise ratio required for
this weak effect necessitates long observing times. However, it is an important method
to measure magnetic field strengths in molecular clouds (e.g., Crutcher et al. 2010).
4.5 Other tracers
TheGoldreich–Kylafis effect(Goldreich and Kylafis 1982) is a quantum mechanical
effect that predicts linearly polarized spectral lines from rotational transitions under
influence of a magnetic field parallel to the line of sight. Polarization would only arise
if magnetic sublevels of rotational levelJ= 1 are unequally populated e.g. due to
an anisotropic radiation field (Goldreich and Kylafis 1981). In addition, the optical
depth of the cloud should be around unity, and radiative transition rates should be
comparable to or dominate over collisional rates – conditions that are not uncommon in
the interstellar medium. The Goldreich-Kylafis effect was first detected in a molecular
outflow from a protostar (Girart et al. 1999) and later found in a variety of molecular
sources.
A similar process isGround State Alignment (GSA), the alignment of angular
momentum of atoms and ions with fine or hyperfine structure by external radiation
fields and realignment through precession in a magnetic field (Yan and Lazarian 2006).
This atomic alignment induces a few percent polarization in interstellar absorption
lines of e.g. Oi, Siior Tiii. It is sensitive to very weak fields in dilute media, and
12

uniquely informs about the local 3D magnetic field. It has been successfully used in
stellar systems (Zhang et al. 2020) and supernovae (Yang et al. 2022), but is not yet
observed in the interstellar medium.
Houde et al. (2000a) reviews the determination of magnetic field strength based on
line width variations of co-spatial ionic and neutral molecules. Molecular lines from
ionized species are observed to be narrower than lines from co-spatial neutral species
(Houde et al. 2000b). This is thought to be due to ambipolar diffusion in the turbulent,
magnetized multi-phase medium, allowing determination of the local magnetic field
strengths (Li and Houde 2008).
5 Analysis methods
Since magnetic fields can solely be observed indirectly, a multitude of methods exist to
interpret the various polarization measurements discussed above, in terms of magnetic
fields. This Section summarizes the most used of these.
5.1 Davis–Chandrasekhar–Fermi method
Davis (1951) and Chandrasekhar and Fermi (1953) realized that one could estimate
the magnetic field strength in gaseous media through the dispersion in observed polar-
ization angle, under certain assumptions about the medium and the field. Assuming
isotropic, incompressible Alfv´ enic magnetic field fluctuations in the plane of the sky,
and assuming small fluctuations, the dispersion in observed polarization angle in
submm dust emission or optical/NIR dust absorption measurements is then related
to the magnetic field strength in the plane of the sky as
σθ = σb
B0
,
withσ b the dispersion in turbulent magnetic field strengthb, andB 0 the regular mag-
netic field strength. Assuming that turbulent magnetic energy density and turbulent
kinetic energy density are in equipartition, the turbulent magnetic field strength can
be described in terms of the gas densityρand velocity dispersionσ v as:
1
2 ρσ2
v = σ2
b
8π ,
Combining these expressions leads to the Davis–Chandrasekhar–Fermi (DCF)
equation
B0 =
p
4πρ σv
σθ
.
The DCF mechanism is a quite tricky method to estimate the interstellar magnetic
field, as the necessary assumptions are stringent and often not applicable in the inter-
stellar medium. Many efforts have been made to adapt the original DCF formalism
to relieve these assumptions and allow for less stringent additions. The assumptions,
followed by mitigation efforts, are listed below:
13

• perturbations in the magnetic field are much smaller than the mean field, so that
the small-angle approximation holds (Ostriker et al. 2001). Accuracy increases by
replacing the dispersion in polarization angleθby the dispersion of tanθ,σ(tanθ),
(Heitsch et al. 2001) or using the tangent of the angle dispersion, tan(σ θ) (Falceta-
Gon¸ calves et al. 2008; Li et al. 2022). Alternatively, one can express the angle
dispersion in terms of the Stokes parametersQandUto avoid the small-angle
approximation (Zweibel 1996).
• the velocity fluctuations are all due to turbulence. However, in reality there will
be contributions from the larger-scale magnetic field to the angular dispersion, and
non-turbulence contributions to linewidths. Larger-scale fluctuations in the regu-
lar magnetic field can be simple modelled and subtracted (Girart et al. 2006), or
removed by spatial filtering of the polarization angle map (Pattle et al. 2017; Pil-
lai et al. 2015). Undesired contributions to the linewidth from thermal broadening
can be avoided by using the positional fluctuations in the velocity centroids of a
spectral line, i.e. the first moments of each spectrum (Esquivel and Lazarian 2005;
Kandel et al. 2017), since thermal broadening is symmetric around a line center and
therefore does not affect velocity centroids.
• turbulent magnetic field fluctuations are isotropic and Alfv´ enic, i.e. cause transverse
incompressible waves in the magnetic field lines. However, the interstellar magne-
tized gas is highly compressible. Skalidis and Tassis (2021) describe an attempt to
include compressible waves; also see Lazarian et al. (2022) for a discussion about
their assumptions.
• equipartition between kinetic and magnetic turbulent energies holds. If actual
equipartition does not hold, or includes also other energetic components such as
thermal or cosmic ray pressure or external gravity sources, the magnetic field will
be overestimated (Zweibel 1996).
• the maximum angular scales of turbulent velocity and magnetic field fluctuations
are smaller than the field of view. If this is not the case, the dispersion in velocity
and polarization angle are only lower limits to the true dispersion. In this case,
one can use the structure function (SF, Falceta-Gon¸ calves et al. (2008)) or the
angular dispersion function (ADF, Hildebrand et al. (2009); Houde et al. (2009)) 3
to estimate angle fluctuations on a range of scales. Structure functions of both dust
emission polarization angle as well as of turbulent velocities can be compared to
MHD simulations, to obtain estimates of small-scale magnetic fields in an approach
called Differential Measure Analysis (DMA, Lazarian et al. (2022)).
• the dusty medium is homogeneous. If the medium is clumpy, magnetic field estimates
will deviate, with stronger magnetic fields inferred for large covering factors of the
clumps (Zweibel 1990).
• no ambipolar diffusion. The effect of ambipolar diffusion will decrease the tangling of
the magnetic field, thus causing an overestimate of the DCF magnetic field strength
(Zweibel 1990).
• the path length through the dusty medium is much shorter than the line of sight, as
integration along the line of sight can decrease the polarization angle dispersion by
3The ADF is defined as the square root of the structure function, so that this method is also sometimes
referred to as the Structure Function DCF (SF-DCF or DCF/SF) method.
14

depolarization (Myers and Goodman 1991). Cho and Yoo (2016) provide a correction
to the DCF equation, viz the square root of the ratio of turbulence driving scale
over line of sight length, to take into account line of sight averaging.
In addition, observational constraints will alter DCF results: beam-smoothing of
polarized submm dust emission will decrease the angle dispersion, causing overestima-
tions of magnetic field strengths (Heitsch et al. 2001; Falceta-Gon¸ calves et al. 2008;
Houde et al. 2009), and interferometric filtering of large spatial scales causes under-
estimation of magnetic field strengths, which however can be modeled and accounted
for (Houde et al. 2016).
Because of the large number of assumptions and simplifications inherent to the
DCF methods, tesing DCF with numerical simulations is a crucial endeavor. A
first-order correction to the DCF-obtained magnetic field strengths is introducing a
fudge factorfthat absorbs errors due to effects like medium-scale inhomogeneities,
anisotropies, and averaging along the line-of-sight, as:
B0 =f
p
4πρ σv
σθ
.
Various MHD simulations for cold compressible medium in giant molecular clouds
(Ostriker et al. 2001; Heitsch et al. 2001; Padoan et al. 2001; Kudoh and Basu 2003;
Liu et al. 2021) determine suitable fudge factorsfgenerally between∼0.4 and∼0.8.
Generally, the DCF-approximation works better for strong fields than for weak fields
(Heitsch et al. 2001; Liu et al. 2021).
5.2 Rotation Measure (RM) grids
Faraday rotation measurement of background sources is an extremely versatile way
to probe magnetic fields in the gaseous medium in between the source and observer.
Linearly polarized extragalactic background sources such as quasars and radio galaxies
mostly occur as point sources on the sky at the relatively low spatial resolutions of
large-coverage radio surveys. Their measured rotation measure is a combination of any
contributions from the source itself (intrinsic), from the circumsource medium, from
the intragalactic medium (IGM), from the Galaxy, and from the Earth’s ionosphere
(plus intracluster medium if appropriate):
RMmeas =RM intr +RM cs +R IGM +R MW +RM ion(+RMintracl).
Large angular-scale correlations imply local effects, generally dominated by the Milky
Way. At all but the highest Galactic longitudes, the contribution from magnetic fields
in the Milky Way dominates (Simard-Normandin and Kronberg 1980). RMs from
intergalactic filaments, galaxy groups, clusters and superclusters are measured to be
of the order of 1 to a few rad m −2 (e.g. Johnston-Hollitt and Ekers 2004; Carretti
et al. 2025), and RMs intrinsic to the extragalactic radio source are estimated to be
≲7 rad m −2 (Oppermann et al. 2015).
The ionospheric contribution to the RM is up to a few rad m −2 depending on
time of day and Solar activity, and can be calibrated out in data processing. RM
15

contributions from the magneto-ionized medium intrinsic to the extragalactic sources
and/or their surroundings are expected to be independent from source to source and
therefore can be corrected for or removed. The simplest method to do this is simply
(weighted) averaging over a large number of sources (Taylor et al. 2009; Pshirkov
et al. 2011; Xu and Han 2014), but more sophisticated methods are used like spherical
harmonics decomposition (Dineen and Coles 2005), or various methods taking into
account uncertainties in the noise covariance (Short et al. 2007; Oppermann et al.
2012, 2015; Hutschenreuter and Enßlin 2020), leading to the currently most accurate
map of the Galactic Faraday sky in Hutschenreuter et al. (2022) (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3Galactic Faraday rotation measures over the whole sky, derived from extragalactic source
RMs where intrinsic source contributions have been removed. Figure reproduced from Hutschenreuter
et al. (2022) (CC BY 4.0).
Pulsar RM’s can be used to create a 3D RM grid as long as pulsar distances are
known. Known pulsar distances are a great advantage in disentangling magnetic struc-
ture along a line of sight, as is the absence of intrinsic or intergalactic RM contributions
(Noutsos et al. 2008; Han et al. 2018; Sobey et al. 2019; Ng et al. 2020). Disadvan-
tages of using pulsars is their relatively small number (as compared to extragalactic
radio sources), especially outside the Galactic disk, and at times large distance uncer-
tainties. The current largest catalogue of pulsar RMs (as assembled frompsrcat 4
Manchester et al. (2005) and Oswald et al. (2025)) is shown in Fig. 4.
4http://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/psrcat
16

From pulsar RMs and DMs one can estimate the line-of-sight averaged strength of
the magnetic field component parallel to the line of sight⟨B ∥⟩as
⟨B∥⟩= 1.232 RM
DM ,(1)
(Smith 1968; Sobey et al. 2019). This approximation holds under the assumption that
magnetic field and electron density are uncorrelated, which is reasonable for subsonic
and transonic media (Seta and Federrath 2021). However, the average value of the
magnetic field strength can be misleading or not very meaningful if there are many
reversals in magnetic field direction along the line of sight. For any two pulsars in
a similar direction at distancesD 1 andD 2, this quantity can be evaluated along a
shorter path length|D 2 −D 1 |as (e.g., Han et al. 2018)
⟨B∥⟩(D2−D1) ≈1.232 RM2 −RM 1
DM2 −DM 1
.
An exciting prospect is building an RM grid from Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) to
probe Galactic magnetic fields (Pandhi et al. 2022). FRBs are extremely short (mil-
lisecond) bursts of radio emission discovered by Lorimer et al. (2007). Although their
exact source population is still unknown (Zhang 2020), their large DMs indicate that
they are extragalactic. Due to their short timescales, both DM and RM can be deter-
mined, so that an estimate of their line-of-sight integrated parallel magnetic field
strength⟨B ∥⟩can be estimated using Eq. (1). Observations of FRB RMs and DMs
are rapidly growing with the new generation of high-time-resolution radio telescopes
(CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al. 2021; Hackstein et al. 2020).
5.3 Rotation Measure Synthesis/Faraday Tomography
Rotation Measure Synthesis describes the process that generates a Faraday Dispersion
Function (FDF), generally calledFaraday spectrum, from measurements of Faraday-
rotated linearly polarized emission at a range of closely spaced frequency channels.
The principle of Rotation Measure Synthesis is first explained in Burn (1966) and first
applied in Brentjens and de Bruyn (2005). Clear explanations can be found in Heald
(2009) and Ideguchi et al. (2018).
The complex linear polarization as a function of wavelength squared,P(λ 2) =
Q(λ2) +iU(λ 2), can be written as the integral over all components of Faraday depth
ϕalong a line of sight, i.e. a Faraday spectrumF(ϕ), as:
P(λ 2) =
Z ∞
−∞
F(ϕ)e 2iϕλ2
dϕ(2)
(Burn 1966). As the polarized radiation can only be observed over a finite frequency
range, the observed polarization ˜P(λ 2) can be described as
˜P(λ 2) =W(λ 2)
Z ∞
−∞
F(ϕ)e 2iϕλ2
dϕ(3)
17

Fig. 4Top: distribution of pulsar RMs on the sky. Color indicates derived magnetic field strength
along the line of sight (B ∥), where red (blue) indicatesB ∥ towards (away from) the observer, capped
at±3µG. Dots are pulsars from thepsrcatcatalog, pluses are from Oswald et al. (2025). Bottom:
RM distribution of pulsars from the same two sources, only for pulsars with a distance to the plane
|z|<1 kpc, overlaid on an artist impression of a bird’s-eye view of the Galaxy based on spiral arms,
made by Robert Hurt in Churchwell et al. (2009). Figures reproduced from Oswald et al. (2025) (CC
BY 4.0).
withW(λ 2) the window function describing the observed frequency range. Eq. (3) can
be Fourier transformed to
˜F(ϕ) =F(ϕ)∗R(ϕ) =K
Z ∞
−∞
˜P(λ 2)e−2iϕλ2
dλ2 where (4)
18

R(ϕ) =
R ∞
−∞ W(λ 2)e−2iϕλ2
dλ2
R ∞
−∞ W(λ 2)dλ2 (5)
Here, ˜F(ϕ) is an approximate reconstruction of the Faraday spectrumF(ϕ), consider-
ing the limited frequency range, and theRotation Measure Spread Function (RMSF) 5
R(ϕ) is the normalized Fourier Transform of the window function (Brentjens and de
Bruyn 2005). Therefore, observations of polarized radiation at a range of frequencies
allow the calculation of a Faraday spectrum, which is convolved with an RMSF that
reflects a limited wavelength coverage. The deconvolution of a Faraday spectrum from
the RMSF can be attempted using the technique of RM-CLEAN (Heald 2009; Bell
et al. 2013), analogous to the well-known iterative subtraction algorithm CLEAN for
radio interferometry (H¨ ogbom 1974).
Faraday Tomography is commonly defined as the application of Rotation Mea-
sure Synthesis to frequency cubes, resulting in a Faraday cube consisting of sky maps
of polarized intensity at a range of Faraday depths. A Faraday spectrum which con-
sists of a single unresolved peak, corresponding to a Faraday-rotating screen in front
of a synchrotron-emission source, is called Faraday thin or Faraday simple. A Fara-
day thick, or Faraday complex, medium contains Faraday rotation and synchrotron
emission interspersed, resulting in a complex Faraday spectrum with multiple and/or
broad peaks.
Entirely similar to radio interferometry, the quality of the reconstruction of the
Faraday spectrum, ˜F(ϕ), depends on the coverage inλ 2. As the wavelength coverage
is both finite and positive, the Fourier Transform is necessarily based on incomplete
information. Therefore, the inversion problem is ill-posed, and additional assumptions
have to be made to convert linear polarization into the Faraday spectrum.
These assumptions could be constraints on the Faraday spectrum (e.g. Brentjens
and de Bruyn (2005) discuss the situation where the Faraday spectrum is real) or
the morphology of the probed magnetic fields (e.g. Frick et al. (2011) assume an even
and symmetric magnetic field in face-on disk galaxies). In more complex situations
of multiple components and Faraday depth rising non-monotonically with distance,
Frick et al. (2010) introduce Faraday Tomography based on wavelets, which they show
can reproduce simulated Faraday depth structures at different physical scales. Fur-
thermore, some artifacts can be avoided by directly applying a 3D Fourier Transform
from visibilities to Faraday depth, avoiding the spectro-polarimetric imaging stage in
between. Bell and Enßlin (2012) pioneered this method, named Faraday Synthesis, and
Gustafsson et al. (2025) show that it, combined with direction-dependent calibration,
can increase dynamic range by reducing artifacts.
A much-used assumption to impose upon the unknown Faraday spectrum is the
assumption of sparsity, i.e. the assumption that the Faraday spectrum consists of
only a low number of non-zero components. The signal processing technique using the
assumption of sparsity, Sparse sampling or Compressive Sampling (CS) (Candes et al.
2005; Donoho 2006) seeks a solution which has the smallest number of (thin or thick)
Faraday depth components needed to fit the data (Li et al. 2011; Andrecut et al. 2012;
Akiyama et al. 2018; C´ arcamo et al. 2023). A computationally relatively inexpensive
5Brentjens and de Bruyn (2005) call this the Rotation Measure Transfer Function (RMTF).
19

way to solve the inversion problem is a technique called Constraining and Restoring
iterative Algorithm for Faraday Tomography (CRAFT, Cooray et al. 2021). CRAFT
approximates solutions, using iteratively improving assumptions about the extremes
of Faraday depth bounds.
If some characteristics of a Faraday spectrum are known or can be estimated, such
as the number of components in the spectrum or the wavelength dependent depolar-
ization behavior, one can use parametrized modeling and obtain best-fit parameters
for the Faraday components. This fitting, commonly called QU-fitting, was initially
performed using a least-squares approach (Farnsworth et al. 2011) or maximum likeli-
hood methods (O’Sullivan et al. 2012; Ideguchi et al. 2014). Later, these were replaced
by more sophisticated fitting methods like Markov Chain Monte Carlo approaches
(Ozawa et al. 2015; Kaczmarek et al. 2017; Sakemi et al. 2018), or using Convolutional
Neural Networks (Brown et al. 2019).
Sun et al. (2015) make a comparison between various methods to obtain reli-
able Faraday spectra from Faraday Tomography, viz. Compressive Sensing techniques,
wavelet transformations and QU-fitting. They found that all methods have diffi-
culty reliably retrieving Faraday-thick structures (see also Miyashita et al. 2019),
but QU-fitting performs better than Fourier-based methods for multiple Faraday-thin
components.
5.4 Gradient techniques
Magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence is anisotropic, with eddies elongated along
the local magnetic field orientation (Goldreich and Sridhar 1995). Therefore, one would
expect turbulent fluctuations to be aligned with the local magnetic field orientations.
In addition, magnetic flux freezing causes gas motions along field lines, resulting in
gaseous filamentary structures aligned with the local magnetic field. In principle, any
observable that traces these anisotropic fluctuations can be used to probe the local
magnetic field orientations, without the need for accurate spectro-polarimetric data.
Fluctuations in velocity, velocity centroids, synchrotron intensity, synchrotron polar-
ization, dust emission or dust polarization have been used to analyze magnetic fields,
of which an overview follows:
• Radio Polarization Gradients(Gaensler et al. 2011) are spatial gradients of
polarization pseudo-vectors. Guided by turbulence properties of these gradients as
determined from MHD simulations (Burkhart et al. 2012), Gaensler et al. (2011)
show that the properties of the distributions of these gradients can indicate whether
the magnetized turbulence is subsonic, transonic or supersonic.
• Gradients in dust continuum emissioncorrelate with orientations of dust
polarization in molecular cloud cores. Using the MHD force equation, Koch et al.
(2012) present a method to calculate magnetic field strengths in these cores from
the angle difference between emission gradients and polarization orientation, if the
local gravitational forces and pressure gradients can be estimated. Even though
Koch et al. (2012) applies the method to a collapsing cloud core, they state that the
method is applicable more broadly, as long as local gravitational forces and pressure
gradients can be determined.
20

• Histograms of Relative Orientations(HRO, Soler et al. (2013)) compare
plane-of-sky projected magnetic field orientations to gradient directions in density
structure in molecular clouds. Soler et al. (2013) show in simulations of self-
gravitating molecular clouds that the orientations of magnetic field and density
gradients change from aligned to perpendicular depending on density and magneti-
zation of the clouds. Hu et al. (2019) modified the HRO algorithm to use velocity
instead of density structures.
• Velocity Gradient Technique(VGT): gradients in the velocity field as a tracer
of magnetic fields were introduced by Gonz´ alez-Casanova and Lazarian (2017), who
showed that in numerical simulations, for sub-Alfv´ enic turbulence, velocity gradi-
ents indeed correlate with local magnetic field orientations. This method makes it
possible to trace the plane-of-sky magnetic field orientations from Hispectra in
absence of polarimetric data, and avoids some of the complexities present in density
fluctuations analysis. Velocity gradients have the potential to map out the plane-
of-sky magnetic field orientation in three spatial dimensions if velocity information
can be reliably mapped into distance information, which is possible for part of the
Galactic plane. In addition, Lazarian et al. (2018) showed that the velocity gradi-
ent distribution is related to the Alv´ enic Mach number in MHD simulations, and
therefore allows estimation of the magnetic field strength.
• Synchrotron Intensity Gradients(SIGs), introduced in Lazarian et al. (2017),
use gradients in synchrotron intensity as proxies for line-of-sight integrated magnetic
field orientation. Advantages of this method are that synchrotron intensity is strong
at lower wavelengths, and that it does not contain the complexity of Faraday rota-
tion. The method is not applicable in the Galactic plane, as synchrotron structures
there tend to not be associated with interstellar turbulence (only). Comparison of
Planck synchrotron intensity gradients with Planck synchrotron polarization angles
shows that at high latitudes, gradients agree well with polarization angles in about
half of the sky (Fig. 10 in Lazarian et al. (2017)). Simulations show better align-
ment in subsonic turbulence than in supersonic turbulence (Ho and Lazarian 2023).
Koch et al. (2012) conjecture that their method (presented above) is also applicable
to gradients in synchrotron intensity under certain conditions.
• Synchrotron Polarization Gradients(SPGs, Lazarian and Yuen (2018)),
defined as gradients in polarized intensityP, align with line-of-sight averaged mag-
netic field significantly when averaged over large scales, but less so on smaller scales.
In the limit of low Faraday rotation, its results are similar to SIGs, as expected.
SPGs retrieve magnetic field parameters consistent with power spectra of polarized
intensity in spectro-polarimetric radio data (Zhang and Liu 2025), and to Faraday
Tomography based methods, tracing magnetic fields also in regimes where Faraday
Tomography is not reliable (Ho et al. 2019).
• Intensity Gradients(IGs, Hu et al. 2019) are defined as gradients in intensity in
velocity-channel-integrated maps of neutral hydrogen (or other species), which trace
the gas density fluctuations and not velocity fluctuations. Numerical simulations
show that velocity gradients are more accurate and reliable predictors of mag-
netic field than intensity gradients, although intensity gradients trace high density
contrasts around shocks and can therefore be used to identify shocks.
21

6 The coherent Galactic magnetic field component
The galaxy-scale, coherent component of the Milky Way’s magnetic field is determined
through modeling constrained by measurements of mostly synchrotron emission, Fara-
day rotation, polarized emission from dust and/or interstellar polarization of starlight.
Generally, two kinds of models are being used: parametric heuristic models and para-
metric dynamo-based models. Non-parametric models of the Galactic magnetic field
include magnetic fields on all scales; these show great promise but are for the moment
still confined to small parts of the Galaxy, therefore mostly probing magnetic fields
on relatively small scales.
Parametric heuristic models generally piece together a magnetic field structure
from log-normal spiral arms and other magnetic field components. Apart from com-
monly being divergence-free, there is little or no physically rigid basis to the magnetic
field structures in these models. Advanced parametric heuristic models from the 2010s
and earlier are based on an axisymmetric spiral structure in the Galactic disk, often
with exponential decay away from the disk. Various models include vertical magnetic
field structure in the halo; some include the turbulent component of the magnetic field
addressed in various ways, see the review by Jaffe (2019). Since that review, some
advanced heuristic models have been published: Unger and Farrar (2023) consists of
a suite of eight different models, and Korochkin et al. (2025) includes modeling of the
Local Bubble for the first time (see Sect. 8). Both models are fit to Galactic RMs
from extragalactic sources, and polarized synchrotron emission from the WMAP and
Planck satellites. Becker and Kachelrieß (2025) provide a toy model to explain both
synchrotron polarization and cosmic ray diffusion data, including a disk, halo, and
extended halo component. Even though these models have been used extensively and
successfully for Galactic and extragalactic research, they have limitations. Apart from
using idealized spiral structure (see Sect. 6.1) and simplified treatment of small-scale
fields (see Sect. 7), they rely on necessarily incomplete and uncertain models for cos-
mic ray electrons, thermal electrons, and (for some of these) dust distributions; also,
there is little connection with the underlying physical processes.
An alternative approach to these heuristic models is to include dynamo physics
in Galactic magnetic field models. Analytic models of such dynamo-based galactic
magnetic field configurations are described e.g. by Shukurov et al. (2019) who derive
magnetic field models based on eigenfunctions of the mean-field dynamo equations or
of the magnetic field diffusion equation, or Ferri` ere and Terral (2014) who present a
number of X-shaped halo magnetic field models. The latter models are used to show
that the Galactic magnetic field is possibly bisymmetric and X-shaped (Terral and
Ferri` ere 2017), and to model halo fields in otherwise heuristic models (Unger and
Farrar 2023). An ambitious project with the aim of reconstructing the Galactic mag-
netic field through both parametric modeling and non-parametric inversion methods is
the Interstellar MAGnetic field Inference Engine (IMAGINE, Boulanger et al. (2018);
Steininger et al. (2018)) project.
Evidence accumulates that the large-scale magnetic field in the Galactic disk
behaves differently from that in the Galactic halo. Therefore, we will discuss these two
components separately in the two following subsections.
22

6.1 Coherent magnetic fields in the Galactic disk
The coherent disk magnetic field follows the spiral arms to first order. This is observed
in any nearby, (partially) face-on external spiral galaxy, although deviations from a
regular spiral pattern exist (Beck and Wielebinski 2013). Milky Way data also strongly
suggest magnetic field orientations following material spiral arms, at least approxi-
mately. Although an even-parity (log-normal) spiral structure is the best starting point
for parametric modeling of large-scale magnetic fields in or close to the Galactic plane,
there is no denying that this description is wildly oversimplified. It is still unclear how
well spiral arms are followed, and how the field strength varies in spiral arm and inter-
arm regions. There is strong evidence for (at least) one reversal in the magnetic field
direction on scales of kiloparsecs or more, but no agreement on the exact location,
number, and extent of magnetic field reversals.
6.1.1 Field strength
Synchrotron intensity measurements indicate a total Galactic magnetic field strength
in the Solar neighborhood of 6±2µG, increasing towards the Galactic Center to
about 10±3µG at 3 kpc distance (Beck 2001). These calculations assume equipar-
tition, which is likely valid at large scales (Seta and Federrath 2021). The coherent
part of this field is estimated from pulsar data through Eq. (1) to be 1.4±0.2µG
in the Solar neighborhood, increasing towards the Galactic Center to 4.4±0.9µG in
the Norma arm, assuming uncorrelated magnetic field and thermal electron density
(Beck and Wielebinski 2013; Han et al. 2006). These values are qualitatively supported
by global parametric models. Those models that include random components tend
to show turbulent fields dominating over coherent fields, with comparable isotropic
and anisotropic components (Jaffe et al. 2010; Jansson and Farrar 2012a; Orlando
and Strong 2013). Becker and Kachelrieß (2025) argue that random fields dominate
over regular fields only in the Galactic disk but not in the halo. This is also qual-
itatively consistent with face-on external spirals, where ratios of isotropic turbulent
to ordered (coherent and anisotropic random) fields are observed to be more than
5 in spiral arms, and 0.5–2 in interarm regions (Beck and Wielebinski 2013). Fluc-
tuation dynamos would produce ratios ofB coh/Bran ∼0.03−0.1, and tangling of
coherent magnetic fields by turbulent gas or interstellar shocks is expected to result
in comparable coherent and random field strengths (SS21).
The magnetic field strengthBdepends on the interstellar densitynfor both dense
(molecular and atomic) and diffuse (atomic and ionized) gas, often modeled as a power
lawB∝n α with different spectral indicesαfor dense and diffuse gas. An early,
comprehensive study of Zeeman splitting in molecular clouds and diffuse HI clouds
found thatα≈2/3 forn≳200 cm −3, whileBwas consistent with independent
ofnat lower densities (Crutcher et al. 2010). Subsequent studies, including ionized
gas by way of pulsar measurements and/or DCF measurements in neutral clouds,
tend to find similar broken power laws, mostly with also non-zero (slightly positive)
dependencies ofBonnfor the diffuse gas (Harvey-Smith et al. 2011; Tritsis et al.
2015; Kalberla and Haud 2023, however, see Jiang et al. 2020). Recasting theB−n
relation into the dependence of magnetic energy on turbulent kinetic energy, Seta and
23

McClure-Griffiths (2025) showed that this satisfies a single relationE mag ∝E β
kin, with
β≈0.64−0.72 (depending on the data from which turbulent velocities are derived).
This relation can be physically understood as a fraction of the kinetic energy converted
to magnetic energy. They also conclude that magnetic field fluctuations are caused by
both density and velocity fluctuations, and that magnetic and thermal pressures are
comparable in all ISM phases.
Many spiral galaxies show stronger ordered magnetic fields in the material inter-
arm regions than in the spiral arms, sometimes ordered into ’magnetic arms’. This
may be accompanied by enhanced magnetic fields at the inner edges of the material
arms, or magnetic fields crossing over spiral arms (Patrikeev et al. 2006; Beck 2015).
Determining the relative field strengths in spiral arms vs interarm regions in the Milky
Way is more difficult due to our inside vantage point, as evidenced by varying results
from GMF models. Jaffe et al. (2013) find large coherent and anisotropic random
magnetic field strengths co-located with dust arms, but an enhanced isotropic random
field strength in the interarm regions. This can be caused by a large-scale shockwave
associated with the arms that compresses isotropic random fields, also consistent with
varying RM structure functions in Galactic arms and interarm regions (Haverkorn
et al. 2006, 2008). This is confirmed by a pulsar study in the first and second Galac-
tic quadrant, which finds stronger large-scale magnetic fields in the arms than in the
interarms (Curtin et al. 2024). By contrast, Unger and Farrar (2023) find a minimum
coherent field strength at the material arm locations, and a maximum coherent field
strength in the interarm regions, indicating ’magnetic arms’ as in some external spirals.
Low-frequency absorption of HII regions indicates that surplus synchrotron emis-
sivity exists in the far Galactic plane that is not accounted for in the GMF models;
either caused by enhanced magnetic field strengths, meso-scale magnetic field orien-
tation changes, or an overdensity in Galactic cosmic rays (Polderman et al. 2019,
2020).
6.1.2 Orientation of the disk magnetic field
Although the Galactic magnetic field roughly follows the spiral arm directions in the
Galactic disk, detailed studies reveal meso-scale structures in the orientation of the
magnetic field in various ways.
Pitch angle
The Milky Way’s material arms have a pitch angle 6 p∼11 ◦ (Reid et al. 2019; Hou
and Han 2014). Many parametric GMF models either use this pitch angle value as an
input parameter, or find similar pitch angles when fitting data. However, pitch angles
2−3 times as high or as low have been reported, see Table 1 and its discussion in
Haverkorn (2015) for more background.
Standard non-linear mean-field dynamo models in a thin disk predict pitch angles
p≲−20 ◦, although Chamandy and Taylor (2015) show that variations in disk scale
height or turbulence correlation length can result in widely varying pitch angle values.
The prediction that the pitch angle decreases with distance to the Galactic centre is
6The pitch anglepof a spiral magnetic field is defined as tanp= Br/Bϕ, whereB r is the radial
component of the magnetic field andB ϕ its azimuthal component.
24

tentatively observed in some nearby spiral galaxies (SS21, Fig 13.1), but this possibility
is not yet included in any of the heuristic magnetic field models in the Milky Way.
Local derivations of the pitch angle have been observed e.g. towards the Galac-
tic anti-center, where the local magnetic field direction in the Perseus arm is most
consistent with a pitch angle of∼0 ◦ (Rae and Brown 2010; Van Eck et al. 2011).
Large-scale reversals in magnetic field direction
At the Sun’s location, the coherent magnetic field is oriented along the spiral arms,
and directed clockwise when seen from the North Galactic pole. There has been strong
evidence for many decades for a reversal in this field direction towards the inner
Galaxy, directed along a spiral arm (Thomson and Nelson 1980; Simard-Normandin
and Kronberg 1980). This observation started the ongoing discussion on large-scale
Galactic reversals in magnetic field direction along spiral arms. Pulsar RMs are in
many ways ideal probes for spiral arm reversals, as they are mostly located close to the
Galactic plane and many pulsars have known distances. However, interpretation of the
results requires care as these studies rely on thermal electron density models, generally
assume a certain (or no) correlation between electron density and magnetic field, and
use at times very uncertain distance estimates. Pulsar studies relying on differential
RM and DM measurements along lines of sight (often combined with extragalactic
source RMs) tend to find many reversals in the coherent field direction, from arm
to arm or even between every arm and interarm, both in the inner and the outer
Galaxy (Han et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2022). Curtin et al. (2024) introduce a new method
to determine spiral arm magnetic fields from pulsar data in the northern sky. Using
Eq. (1), they calculate a magnetic field which is assumed to be directed along a
spiral arm and constant in strength, per spiral arm or interarm region. Then they
’geometrically correct’ the RM by subtracting the resulting longitude-dependent RM in
any foreground arms and interarms from further pulsar RMs. This results in magnetic
field strengths and directions in spiral arms and interarm regions, at both sides of the
Galactic midplane. They confirm the well-documented reversal between the Sagittarius
and Perseus arms (agreeing with Han et al. (2018)), but do not find a reversal in the
Perseus arm (disagreeing with Han et al. (2018)).
Parametric Galactic magnetic field models of log-normal spiral arms fitted to extra-
galactic source RMs (often combined with pulsar RM measurements) allow global
modeling out to larger distances, but these RMs are integrated throughout the entire
Milky Way as opposed to pulsar RMs. These models find typically less (but not zero)
reversals along spiral arms, but do not give a consistent number of reversals (Jaffe
2019).
No global reversals have been observed in external spirals (Beck and Wielebinski
2013), which leads to alternative explanations for the Milky Way data. The field rever-
sal may be only a few kpc in size (Unger and Farrar 2023), similar to a local reversal
observed in M51 (Berkhuijsen et al. 1997). Alternatively, the apparent reversals may
in fact be caused by local structure such as HIIregions (Mitra et al. 2003).
The mean-field dynamo mechanism can create global field reversals in galactic
disks (Ruzmaikin et al. 1985), but can also result in local reversals at approximately
the Galactocentric radius where the nearest observed magnetic field direction reversal
25

is found (Bykov et al. 1997). MHD simulations of spiral galaxies show magnetic field
reversals for some spiral potentials, in locations of large velocity changes across spiral
shocks (Dobbs et al. 2016).
The region around the Sagittarius arm tangent
One particularly well-studied area concerning magnetic field reversals is the approxi-
mate direction of the Sagittarius arm tangent, fromℓ∼40 ◦ toℓ∼70 ◦. This region
contains a large-scale reversal in sign of extragalactic RMs, which is significantly tilted
with respect to the Galactic plane. Figure 5 relates the various RM measurements in
this region of sky. Ordog et al. (2017) (black box in Figure 5) noted that this reversal
was present both in extragalactic source RMs and in Faraday depth measurements
from diffuse extended synchrotron emission (with an estimated polarization horizon
of∼2 kpc), with the extragalactic source RMs being∼150 rad m −2 larger in value.
Ordog et al. (2017) offer various explanations for this consistency in sign but differ-
ence in value of the RMs: a larger polarization horizon than assumed, a quick decay
in magnetic field and/or electron density with galactic radius, or RM sign reversals at
large distances.
Booth et al. (2026) proposed that this RM structure is due to a local (≲550 pc)
magnetic field reversal which is slanted with respect to the Galactic plane and which
passes the plane between the Local and Sagittarius Arms. Their model is local and
therefore considers a simple planar reversal in a homogeneous medium, but recovers the
large-scale RM structures remarkably well. This model implies that the local medium
dominates the Faraday sky except in a narrow Galactic disk region, as also indicated
in MHD simulations of Milky Way-like galaxies (Pakmor et al. 2018).
This conclusion is supported by various other observational studies. From anal-
ysis of new low-latitude pulsar RMs, Oswald et al. (2025) conclude that the RM is
mostly antisymmetric across the plane, but symmetric in the direction of the Scu-
tum–Centaurus and Sagittarius arms. They suggest that the plane of antisymmetry in
magnetic field may be tilted or curved. This symmetry across the plane in the Sagit-
tarius arm was also noted by Ma et al. (2020) in extragalactic source RMs. They use
models of local odd-parity magnetic field reversals in various spiral arms to explain
the RM sign change across the Galactic plane, but their observations seem also con-
sistent with the Booth et al. (2026) slanted reversal model. Curtin et al. (2024) notice
asymmetries across the midplane in magnetic field strength, which they also interpret
as an inclined magnetic field reversal with respect to the line of sight. Xu and Han
(2019) discuss a magnetic field reversal in this direction at a distance of∼1 kpc. They
report both positive and negative pulsar RMs in this direction at distances of≳1 kpc,
which may well be consistent with a tilted reversal.
Shanahan et al. (2019) discovered unexpectedly high extragalactic source RM val-
ues in the high-RM Galactic plane region as indicated in Fig. 5. In particular, RMs
over 1000 rad m −2 were found in a few degrees around longitude 48 ◦, interpreted as
being due to enhanced electron density at the inside of the Sagittarius spiral arm, pos-
sibly coupled to compressed magnetic fields. These anomalously high RMs were not
detected in pulsar RMs, leading Curtin et al. (2024) to conclude that the anomalous
RMs were created at distances beyond the Sagittarius arm. However, none of these
26

Fig. 5Combination of studies in the Sagittarius arm tangent region. The colored background denotes
Galactic RMs from Hutschenreuter et al. (2022) (corrected for free-free emission), overlaid with
extragalactic source RMs from Ordog et al. (2017) (circles, black box), Ma et al. (2020) (circles,
grey box) and Shanahan et al. (2019) (squares, white box). The black dashed line is a sign reversal
discussed in Ordog et al. (2017), and the yellow band indicates the approximate region of RM reversal
according to the model by Booth et al. (2026). The small white ellipse shows the area of anomalously
large RMs (≳1000 rad m −2) discussed in Shanahan et al. (2019).
pulsars are actually located in the small region of anomalous RMs (the elliptical region
in Figure 5), so the high RMs in extragalactic source RMs and their absence in pulsar
RMs may still be consistent if the high RMs are concentrated in a very small region
(about 100 pc at the distance of the Sagittarius arm). The enhanced electron density
can be due to a shock wave located along the edge of the spiral arm, as also detected
in external galaxies (Shanahan et al. 2019).
6.2 Coherent magnetic fields in the Galactic halo
Polarized synchrotron emission from nearby edge-on spirals generally indicates a
vertical (i.e. perpendicular to the galactic midplane) component of magnetic field,
extending a few to many kpc away from the galactic disk. Although less straight-
forward to characterize in the Milky Way, there is ample evidence for a vertical
component in the large-scale magnetic field in the Milky Way halo as well. Dynamo
models predict various large-scale configurations of the halo magnetic field, which are
being constrained with an increasing amount of observations.
The scale height of the magnetic field can be estimated from measurements of rota-
tion measures and dispersion measures of high-latitude pulsars. Fitting exponential
scale heights to these data give widely varying results depending on Galactic quadrant
and hemisphere, with an average scale height over quadrants I and II and northern
and southern hemispheres estimated as 2.7±0.3 kpc (Xu et al. 2022) or 2.0±0.3 kpc
(Sobey et al. 2019). Note that this is effectively a lower limit for the magnetic field
scale height due to the measurements’ dependence on the electron density scale height.
A conspicuous clue on large-(angular-)scale magnetic structures in the Galactic
halo are large anti-symmetries in rotation measure at mid and high Galactic latitudes,
27

Fig. 6Sketch of field lines in a spherical object where dipolar modes dominate (left), and in a disk-
like object where quadrupolar modes are more easily excited (right). Top panels: magnetic field lines
of the poloidal field component. Bottom panels: contours of constant field strength of the toroidal
field component, where solid and dashed lines denote opposite magnetic field directions into and out
of the plane.
known as the ’butterfly pattern’, which have been known for many years (Simard-
Normandin and Kronberg 1980). The large-scale patterns on both sides of the Galactic
plane are described by Dickey et al. (2022) as a sin(ℓ) pattern in the Southern sky and
a sin(2ℓ) pattern in the Northern sky, withℓGalactic longitude. They show that these
patterns at mid-latitudes are consistent with some variants of dipolar and quadrupolar
dynamo models. These structures can similarly be interpreted by invoking a toroidal
magnetic field in the Galactic halo, with reversing rotation measure sign above and
below the Galactic plane (Han et al. 1997; Prouza and ˇSm´ ıda 2003; Xu and Han 2024).
Alternatively, they can be attributed to magnetized foreground structures such as the
Galactic loops (Wolleben et al. 2010; Dickey et al. 2022), a magnetic field component
in, and along, the Local Arm (Unger and Farrar 2023), or a diagonal local magnetic
field reversal as discussed in Sect. 6.1.2.
In addition to a toroidal component, there is evidence for a poloidal (often also
indicated as vertical or X-shaped) component of the Galactic halo magnetic field. Para-
metric Galactic magnetic field models including a poloidal component tend to better
capture high-latitude structure than models with magnetic field parallel to the disk
only (Jansson and Farrar 2012b; Unger and Farrar 2023). Faraday moment analysis
28

shows that Faraday depths become increasingly positive as a function of cosec(b) in
the northern hemisphere and increasingly negative in the southern hemisphere. This
strongly suggests a large-scale vertical magnetic field component pointing from the
northern to the southern hemisphere at the Solar radius (Dickey et al. 2019), as does
analysis of high-latitude extragalactic source RMs in the Solar neighborhood (Han
and Qiao 1994; Taylor et al. 2009). In addition, only Galactic magnetic field models
including a vertical component can explain the shape of barrel-like supernova remnants
expanding into the local magnetic field (West et al. 2016).
There is some evidence for a magnetized wind or outflow from the (vicinity of
the) Galactic Center, from a large RM gradient within globular Cluster 47Tuc in the
direction perpendicular to the Galactic plane, interpreted as arising from interaction
with a Galactic wind (Abbate et al. 2020), and from radio-polarimetric measurements
of large radio lobes extending above and below the Galactic Center, similar to the
Fermi bubbles (Carretti et al. 2013).
In the standard paradigm, a dynamo mechanism is invoked to explain the
large-scale coherent magnetic field in the Milky Way halo — although alternative
explanations of a vertical component to the halo magnetic field such as a battery
mechanism (Myserlis and Contopoulos 2021) or magnetohydrodynamic flows due to
galactic wind and rotation (Henriksen 2022) have also been proposed. In a spherical
object like a star, dipolar magnetic fields are most easily excited (Parker 1971), while
a quadrupolar field is more common in a disk-like object (Stix 1975), see Fig. 6. This
gives credence to the idea that in the Milky Way, combining a flat disk with a more
spherical-like halo, a combination of quadrupolar, odd-parity fields in the halo and
dipolar, even-parity fields in the disk may be a zeroth-order approximation for the
field structure in the Galactic halo (Sokoloff and Shukurov 1990). However, theoreti-
cal conditions for these modes to coincide are specific and time dependent (Moss and
Sokoloff 2008; Ferri` ere and Schmitt 2000). Some observational (Sun et al. 2008) and
theoretical (Shukurov et al. 2019; Ntormousi et al. 2020) evidence exists that such a
disk-even-halo-odd configuration may be possible in the Milky Way. However, more
evidence points towards a more complicated halo magnetic field structure that is not
consistent with a dipolar or quadrupolar field nor a combination of these (Mao et al.
2010; Pavel et al. 2012).
7 Small-scale magnetic fields
In Milky Way magnetic field studies, the term “small-scale magnetic fields” is com-
monly used for magnetic fields that are not connected to any galactic large-scale
features such as spiral arms or mean-field dynamo modes. Small-scale magnetic fields
in the Milky Way can be traced through fluctuations in Galactic synchrotron emission
and/or Faraday rotation, through fluctuations in polarization angle in polarized dust
emission and/or optical/NIR polarization of starlight, or through depolarization of
radio synchrotron radiation, submm dust emission, and/or optical/NIR stellar polar-
ized emission. These small-scale fluctuations in the Galactic magnetic field are caused
29

by any dynamical process in the ISM that is coupled to the field. As energy densi-
ties of gas and magnetic field are comparable, feedback mechanisms are crucial and
magnetic field is an active agent in, rather than a passive tracer of, gas motions.
Turbulent magnetic fields can arise due to the tangling of the large-scale field
in interstellar turbulence or self-generation by turbulence in a fluctuation dynamo
(Sect. 3). Small-scale fields are also created by compression or distortion of ambi-
ent magnetic fields by e.g. collapsing molecular clouds, shock waves, jets from young
stellar objects, supernova remnant expansion, etc. And vice versa, gaseous and dust
structures can be shaped by strong magnetic fields, creating alignments in direction
between fields and filaments. Descriptions in terms of their statistical properties such
as the commonly used power spectral indices, correlation scales, and sonic and mag-
netic mach numbers, are given in Sect. 7.1, while Sect. 7.2 discusses the correlations
with other interstellar components. This distinction into two separate sections is some-
what artificial, as magnetic field structures are expected to be affected by turbulence
and interaction with discrete gaseous or dust structures simultaneously and the one
can feed back to the other. It is only a way of categorizing, not implying separated,
independent mechanisms in reality.
7.1 Magnetized turbulence
Magnetized interstellar turbulence is exceedingly complex: it is partially compressible,
non-gaussian, spatially intermittent; it is anisotropic, increasingly so towards smaller
scales (Goldreich and Sridhar 1995), and exists in a multi-phase medium, which means
that its properties are spatially variable, depending on environment. It can be caused
by turbulent dynamo action (Wilkin et al. 2007) or shock compression (Bykov and
Toptygin 1985), often related to stellar feedback mechanisms (with the dominant con-
tribution from supernova remnants (MacLow 2004)), but it can also be driven by
instabilities such as the magneto-rotational instability (Balbus and Hawley 1991) or
the streaming instability (Kulsrud and Pearce 1969).
Ideal isotropic incompressible turbulence is well described by a power spectrum,
i.e. by the power spectral index and correlation scales. However, this treatment fails
to capture the complexities of non-gaussianity such as anisotropy or intermittence
known to exist in the magnetized interstellar medium. Various more sophisticated
tools characterize various aspects of the complexity. Most work was done on neu-
tral gas and molecular clouds due to the availability of high-resolution imaging and
velocity spectral information, for example changing topology as a function of scale or
density (e.g., Rosolowsky et al. 2008), probing intermittency in molecular clouds by
non-gaussian wings in velocity probability distribution functions and imaging (Falgar-
one et al. 2009), or comparisons of solenoidal and compressible modes of turbulence
(Orkisz et al. 2017). For the magneto-ionic ISM, higher-order statistical moments are
used, such as higher-order structure functions (Seta et al. 2023) or bispectra which
preserve phase information of the turbulence (Burkhart et al. 2009). However, uncer-
tainties increase with increasing orders of moments, and especially in limited data sets
outliers can have disproportionally high influence. This disadvantage is largely over-
come using wavelet transforms; in particular, Allys et al. (2019) apply the Reduced
30

Wavelet Scattering Transform to the magnetized ISM, which describes both scales and
directions with a limited number of parameters.
Observational characterization of turbulent magnetic fields is equally complicated
due to the indirect nature of magnetic field measurements, the dependence of the
observables on other interstellar components such as cosmic ray, gas and dust distribu-
tions, and the complexity of appropriate turbulence parameters. Observational studies
typically estimate statistical turbulence parameters with the caveats that these mea-
sures are line-of-sight integrated, weighted by distributions of other species, and only
probe one component of the magnetic field.
Some characterization of small-scale magnetic fields is obtained from parametric
global Galactic magnetic field models. Early parametric models of large-scale Galactic
magnetic fields tended to include small-scale magnetic fields as gaussian random fields
with a Kolmogorov (Kolmogorov 1941) spectral index (Fauvet et al. 2011; Sun et al.
2008); fluctuations in Rotation Measure and polarized intensity due to these turbulent
fluctuations would average out over large path lengths. These studies find widely vary-
ing ratios of turbulent-to-regular magnetic field, from negligible to dominant turbulent
fields. A more sophisticated treatment of the turbulent magnetic field component is
inclusion of an anisotropic random magnetic field component (Jaffe et al. 2010; Jans-
son and Farrar 2012a). However, these parametric models are still not able to include
increasingly sophisticated descriptions of anisotropic, incompressible turbulence (e.g.,
Ferri` ere 2020; Beattie et al. 2025).
Non-parametric modeling uses inversion methods to directly derive magnetic field
structure as a function of distance and location on the sky, using assumptions about
the nature of the structure. Various methods based on Bayesian inference have been
well-developed for inversion of scalar data such as the dust distribution in the Galactic
neighborhood (Rezaei Kh. et al. 2017; Lallement et al. 2019; Leike and Enßlin 2019).
However, applying inversion methods to vector distributions like magnetic fields is
still a huge challenge. Early efforts trace back trajectories of UHECR’s through the
Milky Way, using Bayesian inference to reconstruct the Galactic magnetic field in a
few specific directions (Tsouros et al. 2024). Similarly,B ∥ can be traced back in 3
spatial dimensions in the Solar neighborhood using forward modeling of RM based on
an electron density model and the Faraday Sky (McCallum et al. 2026).
7.1.1 Description in terms of power spectra
Power law spectral index
Power spectra of diffuse Galactic synchrotron emission carry information on the under-
lying magnetized turbulence, and are relatively easy to measure. However, the diffuse
synchrotron emission also depends on the cosmic-ray electron spectrum and spatial
distribution, and the orientation of any large-scale magnetic field component. There-
fore, it is no surprise that measurements of the synchrotron power spectral index give
variable results, depending on probed sky coverage, frequency range and multipole
range (see Chatterjee et al. 2025 for an overview of these measurements). Lazarian and
Pogosyan (2012) introduced a theoretical formalism to describe synchrotron spectral
index in terms of magnetic field fluctuations without assumptions about the spec-
tral index of the cosmic-ray electron distribution or isotropy. They concluded that
31

the synchrotron spectral index depends more strongly on the amplitude than on the
spectral index of the cosmic ray electron spectrum, and that synchrotron fluctua-
tions are increasingly anisotropic towards smaller spatial scales. Padovani et al. (2021)
show that the energy dependence of the cosmic-ray spectrum is essential to inter-
pret the synchrotron spectral index, and provide a look-up table on howB ⊥ depends
on the cosmic-ray electron spectral index and observing frequency, tested on MHD
simulations.
Similarly, power spectra of Faraday rotation measurements can be used to probe
the turbulent magnetized ISM. However, RMs of extragalactic sources and pulsars are
irregularly distributed over the sky, which induces significant artifacts in the Fourier
analysis to obtain a power spectrum. Instead, (second order) structure functions are a
more useful tool; slopes of structure functions and power spectra are linearly related.
Then-th order structure function of RM is defined as
SF(δθ) =⟨RM(θ)−RM(θ+δθ) n⟩θ
for angular distances between sourcesδθ. Typically, the slope of these structure func-
tions is shallower than Kolmogorov turbulence (Haverkorn et al. 2006, 2008; Roy et al.
2008; Stil et al. 2011) and is direction dependent (Simonetti et al. 1984) (although
Kolmogorov-like spectral indices have also been found using RM structure functions
in an Hiiregion (Raycheva et al. 2022) or polarization gradients Zhang and Liu
(2025)). Some studies report broken power laws, which can be interpreted as the tran-
sition from 3D to 2D structure (Minter and Spangler 1996), discrete structures (Stil
et al. 2011), superposition of two Faraday screens (Haverkorn et al. 2004), or different
power laws for magnetic field and electron density (Xu and Zhang 2016). The power
spectrum of the distribution of magnetic fieldB ∥ itself is also flatter than Kolmogorov
(−2.73±0.19) in the Solar neighborhood (McCallum et al. 2026). Under the assump-
tion that neutral hydrogen filaments trace magnetic field (see Sect. 7.2), anisotropic
magnetized turbulence is probed by observed direction-dependence of measured power
spectral indices of structure in neutral hydrogen filaments (Kalberla and Kerp 2016;
Kalberla et al. 2017). The only direct measurements of interstellar turbulent magnetic
field come from the Voyager satellites and reveal weak, compressible turbulence in the
local interstellar medium, showing a Kolmogorov spectrum (Burlaga et al. 2015).
Correlation length
Next to the power spectral index, correlation length is another important parameter
characterizing interstellar turbulence. Correlation lengths are found to be in the order
of a few tens of parsecs to about a hundred pc, from dispersion in RMs of pulsars
or extragalactic sources (calculated with single-cell-size models, Rand and Kulkarni
(1989); Ohno and Shibata (1993); Mao et al. (2010)). Careful treatment of turbulent
magnetic fields in the Jansson and Farrar (2012b) model also shows best fits for a large
correlation length of∼220 pc (Beck et al. 2016). However, smaller RM correlation
lengths are found (∼10−20 pc) in the Galactic spiral arms (Haverkorn et al. 2008;
Iacobelli et al. 2013) and closer to the Galactic Center (Roy et al. 2008; Livingston
et al. 2021). Note that these measurements of RM correlation lengths do not necessarily
32

imply a similar correlation length of magnetic field, which can be significantly different
(Hollins et al. 2017). The correlation length of fluctuations in magnetic field itself,
obtained from modeling combined with pulsar RM, DM observations, is found to be
a few tens of parsec (Dhakal and Seta 2025).
Turbulent magnetic field strength
Estimates of magnetic field strengths from the heuristic global magnetic field models
give widely varying results depending on model assumptions and input data: ratios
of random to regular magnetic field strength vary from∼0.25 to several (Miville-
Deschˆ enes et al. 2008; Jaffe et al. 2010; Fauvet et al. 2011; Sun et al. 2008). This
can likely be explained by the necessarily simplified assumptions used to describe the
turbulent magnetic field, the variety in data sets, and different components included
in these models.
Detailed studies using depolarization of synchrotron radiation or variance in RMs
in smaller fields result in values for turbulent magnetic field strength between one and
a few microGauss (Gaensler et al. 2001; Mao et al. 2010; Schnitzeler et al. 2007).
The variety in these methods and resulting magnetic field values indicate that the
small-scale magnetic field strength typically may be up to a factor of a few higher than
the large-scale magnetic field strength. However, it also implies that turbulent field
strength is a much too simplified diagnostic for the small-scale magnetic field across
the Galaxy. More sophisticated methods of characterizing the turbulent magnetic field
are captured in numerical simulations, an overview of which is beyond the scope of
this observational paper.
7.2 Correlations with other interstellar components
One could say that if the last decade was the period of large-scale Galactic magnetic
field modeling, this decade sees major and exciting progress on correlations of Galactic
magnetic field structure with many, if not all, other interstellar medium components.
An increasing amount of impressively detailed observations of polarization measure-
ments combined with interstellar gas and dust components have shifted the focus from
a statistical global description of interstellar magnetic fields and turbulence towards
more zoomed in, detailed descriptions of correlations of magnetic field (tracers) with
other components.
7.2.1 Correlations between magnetic field orientation and atomic
hydrogen filaments
Interstellar dust and atomic hydrogen are known to be well mixed in the interstel-
lar medium. In addition, almost all interstellar gas has a (partial) ionization degree
large enough to enable flux-freezing of magnetic field in the gas. Therefore, it may be
expected that some correlation between orientations of magnetic field as probed by
dust (submm dust emission or optical/NIR dust absorption) and orientations of Hi
filaments would exist.
Indeed, dust intensity ridges are aligned with magnetic field orientation from
dust polarization at intermediate and high Galactic latitudes (column densities≲
33

1022 cm−2), however they tend to be perpendicular to magnetic field orientation in
molecular clouds (Planck Collaboration et al. 2016a,c).
Similarly, correlations between Hifilaments and magnetic field orientation are
ubiquitous. Clark et al. (2014) noted that slender, long filaments in Galactic neutral
hydrogen (’fibers’) correlate with the magnetic field orientation as probed by interstel-
lar polarization of starlight, which were likely originating in the Local Bubble (Sect. 8).
These results were generalized in Clark et al. (2015), who showed correspondence
between neutral hydrogen filament orientations with Planck 353 GHz dust polarization
orientations at intermediate and high latitudes, concluding that it is possible to trace
magnetized dust CMB foregrounds with neutral hydrogen. This alignment between
Hifilaments and magnetic field orientation was confirmed through other tracers such
as Centroid Velocity Gradients (Yuen and Lazarian 2017), anisotropies in the distribu-
tion of spectral power correlated with magnetic field orientations (Kalberla and Kerp
2016), and polarization gradients (Campbell et al. 2022), making these Hifilaments
a new tracer of magnetic field orientation (Clark and Hensley 2019).
The alignment with magnetic fields is found to be the strongest for the Cold
Neutral Medium (CNM) component (Kalberla et al. 2017; Bracco et al. 2020), leading
to the idea that the CNM may be more magnetically aligned, and forming out of a
more disordered magnetized Warm Neutral Medium (WNM) gas (Lei and Clark 2024).
However, some neutral hydrogen filaments are also aligned with filaments in Faraday
depth (Van Eck et al. 2019), indicating a connection between the neutral and ionized
gas components as well.
A measured correlation between the total intensity and the B-mode polarization
component (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020) indicates a small (∼2 ◦, Cukierman
et al. 2023) but systematic misalignment between observed dust filaments and submm
polarization. Several origins have been put forward to explain this positive TB signal:
the helicity of the Galactic magnetic field (Bracco et al. 2019), misalignment between
Hifilaments and their plane-of-sky projected magnetic field orientations (Clark et al.
2021), the nature of the morphologies in the ISM (Halal et al. 2024a), or line-of-sight
projection effects of magnetic fields in different phases of the local ISM (Bracco et al.
2025).
7.2.2 Correlations with Faraday rotation and depolarization
structures
In addition to the correlations described above, many studies find correlations between
Faraday rotation and radio-polarimetric structures on the one hand, and neutral
hydrogen or dust filament orientations on the other, which is less straightforward to
understand as Faraday rotation generally traces ionized gas. In addition, structures in
Faraday rotation indicate a common strength of the magnetic field componentalong
the line of sight, while submm dust polarization traces the magnetic field orientation
in the plane of the sky. A correlation may be expected, but more involved and less
intuitive.
A good example is the well-studied high-latitude field around the bright quasar and
radio calibrator source 3C 196, which has bright and conspicuous low-frequency radio
polarized structures (Jeli´ c et al. 2015), aligned with polarization angles from submm
34

dust emission (Zaroubi et al. 2015). These filaments appeared to also be aligned with
Hifilaments and with low-frequency depolarization canals (Jeli´ c et al. 2018). Numer-
ical simulations trying to reproduce these data hint at its use for probing magnetic
field morphology in the multi-phase ISM, but also show that accurate reproduction of
the observational characteristics is difficult (Berat et al. 2026). At low radio frequen-
cies (such as the LOFAR data used for these studies), Faraday rotation can cause total
depolarization in ionized gas, so that the remaining Faraday rotation signature actu-
ally originates in neutral gas (Van Eck et al. 2017). Histograms of Oriented Gradients
(HOG, (Soler et al. 2019)) analysis shows that polarized emission is indeed correlated
primarily with Cold and Lukewarm Neutral Medium components, but also partially
with ionized gas (Bracco et al. 2020). These conclusions also hold for the immediate
surroundings of the 3C 196 field, although dominating magnetic field orientations and
polarization morphology vary (Bracco et al. 2020; Turi´ c et al. 2021).
On larger scales, Erceg et al. (2024a) conclude that this alignment is not universal
over the sky — regions where they do find alignment between neutral filaments and
polarized magnetic field tracers are nearby and believed to be associated with the Local
Bubble wall. However, the warm neutral medium does produce a Faraday rotation
signal across that field, even if there is no visible alignment of filaments (Boulanger
et al. 2024).
7.3 Variations in Galactic magnetic field along lines of sight
A few of the methods mentioned in Sect. 5 have the ability to distinguish magnetic
field measurements along the line of sight: pulsar RMs, Faraday Tomography, and
interstellar polarization of starlight. Pulsar RMs give estimates of the strength ofB ∥
integrated over the distance to a pulsar, and observations of many pulsars in the
same part of the sky therefore allows to seen trends inB ∥ variations along the line
of sight (Han 2017; Noutsos 2012; Curtin et al. 2024). Faraday Tomography allows
distinguishing synchrotron emitting components with different Faraday depths, which
carry information aboutB ∥ of which generally only the (line-of-sight integrated) field
direction can be reliably determined, unless the Faraday depths can be connected
to known structures. Interstellar polarization of starlight gives information on the
orientation of theB ⊥ component, in subsequent dust clouds along a line of sight.
With the increasing abundance of interstellar polarization of starlight measurements
towards the more diffuse ISM (as opposed to focusing on dense clouds), combined
with stellar distances from the Gaia mission (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016), first
attempts are being made to map out variations in magnetic field orientation in dust
clouds in 3D space. Lastly, dust submm polarization and line information from HI,
12CO and 13CO can be combined to estimate orientations ofB ⊥ in subsequent dust
clouds (Ferri` ere et al. 2026).
Alignment of polarization angle with the Galactic plane
Roughly speaking, the orientation of the plane-of-sky magnetic field component as
observed from interstellar polarization of starlight is largely along the Galactic plane,
and increasingly so at longer distances (Uppal et al. 2024), as one would expect from
35

dynamo models and arguing that turbulent field structure is averaged out along suf-
ficiently long lines of sight in the plane (Fosalba et al. 2002), or at higher Galactic
latitudes (Berdyugin et al. 2004).
However, on smaller angular scales, magnetic field orientations are observed to
significantly deviate from Galactic plane alignment in optical stellar polarimetry from
the optical Interstellar Polarization Survey (IPS, Versteeg et al. 2023), and NIR stellar
polarimetry from the Galactic Plane Infrared Polarization Survey (GPIPS, Clemens
et al. 2020), with deviations of tens of degrees on typically degree angular scales. IR
stellar polarimetry towards (in front of and behind) the Galactic Center finds that
most sight lines exhibit polarization angles that only slightly deviate form a plane-
oriented magnetic field, although polarization angles in a few sight lines deviate by
more than 45◦ from the plane (Zenko et al. 2020). Locally, the Galactic magnetic field
is aligned with the stellar Radcliffe wave Panopoulou et al. (2025) and roughly aligned
with the Local Bubble wall (Sect. 8).
These deviations in magnetic field orientation with respect to the Galactic plane
should correlate with submm dust polarization orientations, as both tracers probe
(mostly) the same dust distribution. However, this correlation should decrease for
increasingly different line-of-sight lengths in the two tracers. Indeed, Planck Collabo-
ration et al. (2015) showed that the submm data in the first quadrant have an average
polarization angle orientation not consistent with the infrared GPIPS results, and
explain this by the longer path lengths towards Planck emission than the infrared
data path lengths. On the other hand, the ratios of polarization degree of submm
and infrared polarization of the farthest detectable stars suggest that path lengthsare
fairly comparable in the first quadrant (Versteeg 2025).
The common deviations of both optical/NIR interstellar polarization of starlight
and submm dust polarized emission orientations from the Galactic plane orientation
are remarkable, considering the long lines of sight involved, typically up to a few kpc.
This indicates that the deviations from Galactic plane orientation must either be due
to the magnetic field orientation in a dominating local feature, or must be prolonged
over a significant distance along the line of sight.
Galactic magnetic field tomography based on interstellar polarization of
starlight
Interstellar polarization of starlight provides a way to probe the orientation of the
plane-of-sky magnetic field componentlocallyin dust clouds along the line of sight, if
one can disentangle various (foreground) components along the line of sight. Provided
that the magnetic field orientation changes with each dust cloud, the polarization
properties of stars in front of and behind this cloud will change. Therefore, observations
of observed polarization changes at a certain distance indicate that there is a dust
cloud at that distance.
Using this optical starlight tomography method, care has to be taken to subtract
polarization signal from foreground clouds. Several methods have been used for this
foreground subtraction, such asχ 2-like minimization (Andersson and Potter 2006),
maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio of polarization degree of a far cloud as a function
of assumed cloud distance (Panopoulou et al. 2019), breakpoint analysis detecting
36

abrupt changes in polarization as a function of distance (Doi et al. 2021), cluster-
ing algorithms (Versteeg et al. 2024), bayesian inference (Pelgrims et al. 2023), or
changes in the slope of cumulative Mahalanobis distances 7 of StokesQandU(Uppal
et al. 2026). Angarita et al. (2025) showed that clustering algorithms and bayesian
inference gave consistent results. Note that these methods rely on variations in polar-
ization along the line of sight: multiple clouds along the line of sight with constant
magnetic field orientation, and hence constant polarization, are undetectable through
their polarization properties alone.
In all of these studies, large deviations of polarization angles from the Galactic
plane orientation and from cloud to cloud are ubiquitous (Panopoulou et al. 2019; Doi
et al. 2024; Versteeg et al. 2024; Pelgrims et al. 2023; Angarita et al. 2025). Polarization
angles are mostly (but not always, see Angarita et al. 2025; Pelgrims et al. 2023)
coherent in the plane of the sky, which can be explained by the small size of the fields
which typically probe a fraction of a parsec. In the only study that analyzes a larger
field of view of 4 square degrees, coherence in polarization angles is seen up to a scale
of∼20 pc (Pelgrims et al. 2023). The emerging image of variable polarization angle
orientations in multiple dust components along the line of sight was also noted by
Halal et al. (2024b), who find that the polarization fraction of Planck dust emission
data decreases for an increasing number of dust components along the line of sight.
All results seem qualitatively consistent with a turbulent magnetized ISM; however,
in those clouds associated with the Local Bubble, more coherent structure is also
observed (see Sect. 8).
8 The Local Bubble
The Local Bubble, also commonly called Local Cavity or Local Chimney, is a low-
density cavity with the Sun roughly in its center, as first discovered due to its low
extinction (Fitzgerald 1968). It is thought to originate from clustered supernova explo-
sions about 14 Myrs ago (Zucker et al. 2022). The bubble is mostly filled with hot,
dilute gas, although small amounts of denser neutral or ionized gas (clouds) and dust
manage to survive in the hot environment (Frisch 2007; Farhang et al. 2019; Zucker
et al. 2025). Matter and magnetic field are compressed into a denser shell of irregular
shape, including a ring of star forming regions (Zucker et al. 2022). Inversion methods
using dust extinction or color excess show a shell with varying distances to the Sun,
from∼50 pc to∼150 pc (Vergely et al. 2010; Lallement et al. 2019), or even higher
in particular directions (O’Neill et al. 2024).
These tracers show that the Local Bubble is elongated in the direction roughly
perpendicular to the Galactic plane, and is shaped very irregularly due to interaction
with gaseous structures such as the walls of neighboring bubbles, ”interstellar tunnels”
connecting to these bubbles, and chimneys in which hot gas escapes from the Galactic
disk (Lallement et al. 2003; O’Neill et al. 2024). The embedding and interaction of the
Local Bubble wall with other structures can make it difficult to distinguish it properly,
7The Mahalonobis distance is used here as a measure of the probability distribution of the combined
StokesQandUdistributions.
37

especially at lower Galactic latitudes (Gontcharov and Mosenkov 2019; Versteeg et al.
2024).
In principle, the magnetic field in the Local Bubble wall is a very local feature
and not directly part of the general magnetic field in the Milky Way. However, since
all observations of magnetic field tracers probe through the Local Bubble wall, its
magnetic field influencesalldata used for investigation of Galactic magnetism. The
Local Bubble wall is the dominant source of magnetically-aligned neutral hydrogen
fibers (Clark et al. 2014), and is a significant contributor to polarized dust emission
(Skalidis and Pelgrims 2019) and Faraday rotation (Reissl et al. 2023; Erceg et al.
2024b) at intermediate and high latitudes. Including the Local Bubble magnetic field
in large-scale heuristic models pre-empts the need for an anisotropic random field com-
ponent in the Galactic magnetic field (Korochkin et al. 2025). Therefore, a discussion
of current knowledge of the magnetic field of the Local Bubble wall is warranted here.
The larger-scale magnetic field in the Solar neighborhood is oriented along the
Local Arm (also called Local Spur, Orion Arm) at Galactic longitudeℓ∼80 ◦ −90 ◦
(Rand and Lyne 1994; Heiles 1996; Xu and Han 2019; Hutschenreuter and Enßlin
2020), consistent with galaxy-scale models of magnetic fields following spiral arms
(Jaffe 2019). However, the magnetic field in the Local Bubble wall does not follow this
large-scale field but is deformed (Leroy 1999), roughly consistent with a deformation
due to a bubble blown in a uniform magnetic field (Heiles 1998), as predicted by
models of expanding supernova-blown bubbles (Stil et al. 2009).
A first analytical model of the structure and strength of the Local Bubble mag-
netic field used an ellipsoidal model with a bubble-blown magnetic field aligned with
the bubble wall (Alves et al. 2018). Their results are roughly consistent with Planck
353 GHz dust polarization measurements towards the Galactic pole regions (|b|>60 ◦),
but they concluded that more complex and irregular models were needed. Pelgrims
et al. (2020) modeled the Local Bubble shape from spherical harmonics fit to extinc-
tion measurements, combined with an analytical magnetic field model adapted from
Alves et al. (2018). Their derived orientation of the original large-scale magnetic field
is consistent with earlier estimates. LOFAR Faraday tomography observations are
consistent with a magnetic field orientation along the wall of this bubble, but need
an ionized component to the bubble wall density to explain the data (Erceg et al.
2024b). In addition, these authors find magnetic field orientations towards the Galac-
tic polar regions with a small component parallel to the line of sight, consistent with
Faraday rotation measurements. This line of modeling was continued by O’Neill et al.
(2024), who employed a new, more detailed 3D dust distribution and derived the wall’s
magnetic field from dust polarization measurements, assuming it is tangent to the
wall’s surface. They confirm a small magnetic field component parallel to the line of
sight towards the galactic caps, and also find a consistent orientation of the original
large-scale magnetic field.
There are multiple lines of evidence suggesting that the Local Bubble wall is a
dominant contributor to polarized dust emission at intermediate and high latitudes.
The ratio of dust polarization fraction over the degree of interstellar polarization of
starlight flattens out behind the Local Bubble wall at|b|≳60 ◦, suggesting that
the Local Bubble wall dominates dust submm observations (Skalidis and Pelgrims
38

2019). This conclusion is confirmed by the plateauing of the fraction of interstellar
polarization of starlight after 150–250 pc across the sky (Gontcharov and Mosenkov
2019). MHD simulations of a Local Bubble analogue also find that the dust polarization
degree and morphology of the field lines are in qualitative agreement with their Local
Bubble model Maconi et al. (2023).
However, no correlation between observed Planck polarization degree and magnetic
field inclination angle was found from comparisons of the observed Planck polarization
degree and magnetic field inclination angle with respect to the Local Bubble wall in
both the Pelgrims et al. (2020) and O’Neill et al. (2024) models (Halal et al. 2024b).
These authors conclude that either the Local Bubble cannot be the dominant contrib-
utor to the dust polarization at intermediate/high latitudes, or the assumption that
the magnetic field runs parallel to the Local Bubble wall is incorrect.
The magnetic field strength in the Local Bubble wall has been estimated from inter-
stellar polarization of starlight measurements and DCF analysis as variable between
∼8−40µG (Andersson and Potter 2006; Medan and Andersson 2019).
Concluding: the dusty, magnetized wall of the Local Bubble has a significant influ-
ence on interstellar polarization measurements over a large part of the sky. Towards
the galactic polar regions (|b|≳60 ◦), the Local Bubble wall even dominates mea-
surements of interstellar magnetic fields through optical interstellar polarization of
starlight and Faraday rotation, although some polarizing dust is coming from longer
distances. The orientation of the magnetic field is roughly consistent with a field tan-
gent to the intricately shaped Local Bubble wall, assuming that the original magnetic
field in which the Local Bubble expanded has an orientation along the local Orion
arm. However, there is small-scale structure in the wall’s magnetic field and/or in the
orientation of the wall itself.
9 Current surveys and future prospects
In all main tracers of the Galactic magnetic field, exciting current and near-future
developments will greatly increase available data in many dimensions. Below is an
attempted overview of the main projects, divided up into radio-polarimetric (RM Grids
and/or Faraday Tomography of diffuse emission) and optical/NIR stellar polarization
surveys that promise to shed more light on magnetism in the Milky Way in the near
future.
9.1 RM grid surveys
For more than a decade, the NVSS RM catalog of Taylor et al. (2009) was the main
source of extragalactic point source RMs across the global sky (although in the plane,
Galactic Plane Surveys with higher RM source density existed (Brown et al. 2003; Stil
et al. 2006; Brown et al. 2007)). With its 37,543 sources distributed over the sky, this
means a RM source density of less than 1 source per square degree; using only two
frequencies, RMs were vulnerable to 2-pi-ambiguities; typical errors are 1–2 rad m −2.
A high source density is not only essential for probing external galaxies, galaxy
clusters or the cosmic web, but also the Faraday rotation of the Milky Way shows
39

small-scale large variations in RM (e.g. Shanahan et al. 2019, , in Sect. 6.1.2). In addi-
tion, high accuracy of point source RM measurements is crucial for detecting weaker
structure in magnetic field and/or electron density. Several surveys are currently being
executed that will significantly improve our global RM Grid on these points.
POSSUM
The Polarisation Sky Survey of the Universe’s Magnetism (POSSUM) is a multi-year
survey with the Australian SKA Pathfinder (ASKAP) currently in its third year. It
has a frequency range of primarily 800–1088 MHz, an angular resolution of 20 ′′ and
sensitivity of 18µJy beam −1. It will produce an RM grid of the entire Southern sky
with the high density of∼30−50 RMs per square degree with a median uncertainty
of∼1 rad m −2. Results from POSSUM pilot observations at two broad frequency
bands (800–1087 MHz and 1316–1439 MHz) achieve RM source densities of∼35,30
sources with RM uncertainty of∼1.5,13 rad m −2 for the lower and upper frequency
band, respectively (Vanderwoude et al. 2024).
SPICE-RACS
The Spectral and Polarisation in Cutouts of Extragalactic sources from RACS (SPICE-
RACS) project has the aim of providing an RM Grid from spectro-polarimetric Rapid
ASKAP Continuum Survey (RACS) data across the Southern sky, at 15 ′′ angular
resolution, at∼200µJy/PSF rms noise, and in a 800–1088 MHz frequency range. The
second data release covers the entire southern sky up to a declination of +49 ◦. This
survey presents 3.4×10 5 RM sources above 6σ, reaching a source density of∼7 RMs
per square degree (Thomson et al. 2026).
VLASS
The Very Large Array Sky Survey (VLASS) images the entire sky visible to VLA
(δ >−40 ◦) in the broad band of 2–4 GHz with a high resolution of 2.5 ′′ (Lacy
et al. 2020). Data taking for the first phase (three epochs) is finished, while a fourth
epoch is ongoing. About 10 5 detected RM soures are projected. The advantage of the
higher frequency range is possible detection of sources that are depolarized at lower
frequencies, and sensitivity to high RM values.
MMGPS
The MPIfR-MeerKAT Galactic Plane Survey (MMGPS) is a commensal survey with
MeerKAT at a frequency range of 856–1712 MHz and covers various sky areas in the
Galactic plane (Padmanabh et al. 2023). More than 5000 RM sources are expected,
leading to a high source density of about 25 per square degree over selected areas of
the Galactic plane. The wide frequency range of 800−3500 GHz ensures sensitivity
to Faraday-thick structures and extreme RMs.
LoTSS
The LOFAR Two-metre Sky Survey (LoTSS) is a low-frequency (120–168 MHz) radio-
polarimetric survey of most (∼88%) of the Northern Sky at an angular resolution of 6′′
40

down to a median sensitivity of 92µJy beam−1 (Shimwell et al. 2026). An RM Grid has
been constructed of the LoTSS Data Release 2, which covers 7520 square degrees on
the Northern sky, yielding 2431 RM sources (O’Sullivan et al. 2023). Due to increased
depolarization at low frequencies, the source density is not the highest, but the unique
strength of low-frequency RM grids is the high RM precision, with a median RM
uncertainty of 0.06 rad m −2, not including a possible systematic uncertainty of≲
0.3 rad m −2 due to the ionospheric correction.
MWA-POGS
The POlarised GaLactic and Extragalactic All-Sky MWA Survey (the POlarised
GLEAM Survey, POGS) has a similar low frequency range of 169–231 MHz as LoTSS,
but covers almost the entire southern sky at delcination−82 ◦ to +30◦ (Riseley et al.
2020). The Phase I Faraday Rotation Measure survey has an angular resolution
between 3 ′ and 7 ′ and contains 517 RM sources with a median RM uncertainty of
0.38 rad m −2.
SKA
For the Square Kilometre Array (SKA), under construction at the moment, an RM
Grid survey of the entire Southern sky is planned with SKA-Mid, which is expected
to produce RM measurements from 2–3 million extragalactic sources, a factor of a few
more than POSSUM (Heald et al. 2020). A low-frequency RM Grid survey using SKA-
Low will complement this, contributing less sources but a 100 times higher precision
in RM.
9.2 Spectro-polarimetric surveys of diffuse emission
For imaging diffuse polarized emission, sensitivity to large-angular-scale structure is
crucial. Hence, most surveys of diffuse polarized emission are single-dish surveys, pos-
sibly with matching interferometer data to increase angular resolution (POSSUM,
SKA-MID). Only at the lowest frequencies, even small RM fluctuations cause ran-
domizedQ, Ufluctuations on sufficiently small scales that there is no large-scale
component in polarized emission left. In that case, interferometric surveys (LOFAR,
MWA, SKA-LOW) can cover the complete signal.
GMIMS
The Global Magneto-ionic Medium Survey (GMIMS) endeavors to complete a spectro-
polarimetric survey of the entire sky from∼300 MHz to∼1800 MHz. GMIMS
consists of various sub-surveys in different frequency ranges and hemispheres, some of
which are published, others are ongoing. Due to the differences in frequency ranges and
angular resolutions, resulting in varying amounts of depolarization, the sub-surveys
largely probe different sightlines through the interstellar medium (Hill 2018). GMIMS
consists of:
• GMIMS-Low Band South: 300–480 MHz with Murriyang, the Parkes radio telescope
(Wolleben et al. 2019);
• GMIMS-Low Band North: 400–800 MHz with CHIME, in progress;
41

• DRAGONS: 350–1030 MHz with the DRAO 15m Telescope (Ordog et al. 2026);
• GMIMS-Mid Band South (PEGASUS, PI Carretti): 704–1440 MHz, with Mur-
riyang, in progress;
• GMIMS-Mid Band North: 900–1700 MHz, with the DRAO 15-m Telescope and/or
John A. Galt Telescope, in planning phase;
• GMIMS-High Band South (STAPS): 1328–1768 MHz, with Murriyang (Sun et al.
2025; Raycheva et al. 2025);
• GMIMS-High Band North: 1280–1750 MHz, John A. Galt Telescope (Wolleben et al.
2021; Dickey et al. 2019).
S-PASS
The S-Band Polarization All Sky Survey (S-PASS) with Murriyang complements
GMIMS at the high-frequency end for the Southern sky, in the bands of 2176–
2216 MHz and 2272—2400 MHz, at an angular resolution of 8.9 ′ and a pixel rm
sensitivity of 0.815 mK (Carretti et al. 2019). It does not report Faraday spec-
tra because the small frequency coverage would introduce significant artifacts, but
calculated RM from a linear relation between angle and wavelength squared.
LoTSS
Besides an RM Grid, the LoTSS survey provides spectro-polarimetry of diffuse emis-
sion in the entire Northern sky. Significant parts of the Northern sky are imaged (Erceg
et al. 2022, 2024a,b) at an angular resolution between 4 ′ and 5.5 ′, a Faraday depth
resolution of 1.8 rad m −2 and a mean sensitivity of 117µJy PSF −1 RMSF−1. Due to
the high depolarization at low frequencies, these measurements probe only the very
nearby interstellar medium, such as the large synchrotron loops and the Local Bubble
wall.
9.3 Optical/NIR stellar polarization surveys
Polarization measurements of stars have been recorded for many decades, recently
assembled into an all-sky catalog of 55,742 polarization measurements from 42,482
stars, including their distances (Panopoulou et al. 2025). This catalog, containing
slightly more than one source per square degree on average, will be complemented
by two surveys measuring polarization of stars at much higher source densities,
PASIPHAE and SouthPol, allowing both small-angular-scale magnetic field orien-
tations to be investigated, as well as magnetic structure resolved along the line of
sight.
NIR polarized stellar measurements are advantageous as stars at larger distances
can be probed; however, as both the brightness and polarization degree are lower in
the NIR than in optical, observing polarized stars in NIR over large parts of the sky is
difficult. The largest existing survey is the Galactic Plane Infrared Polarization Survey
(GPIPS) with the 1.83m Perkins telescope (Clemens et al. 2020). GPIPS surveyed
part of the Northern Galactic plane (18 ◦ < ℓ <65 ◦,|b|<1 ◦) at 1.6µm (H-band),
and cataloged more than a million stars withm H <12.5 mag and uncertainties in
polarization percentage<2%.
42

SouthPol
SouthPol aims to survey the entire Southern sky in V-band (551 nm) down to a depth
ofV≈14−15 with a new 1m telescope at Observat´ orio do Picos dos Dias in Brazil,
resulting in millions of stars across the Southern sky (Magalh˜ aes et al. 2005). The
pilot Interstellar Polarization Survey (IPS, Versteeg et al. 2023)) demonstrated that
a source density of over 5000 stars per square degrees at polarization degree≳0.8%
is possible for comparable exposure times, making SouthPol an excellent resource for
magnetic field tomography in the Galactic plane, probing dust clouds and star forming
regions.
PASIPHAE
The Polar-Areas Stellar Imaging in Polarization High-Accuracy Experiment
(PASIPHAE) plans to survey the Northern and Southern Galactic polar caps in R-
band (658 nm), together covering>10,000 square degrees, at the South African
Astronomical Observatory in Sutherland, South Africa, and the Skinakas Observa-
tory in Crete, Greece (Tassis et al. 2018). PASIPHAE is predicted to result in over
360 measurements of stellar optical polarization per square degree with polarization
percentages≳0.5% (at>3σ). The high high latitudes are ideal for probing Cosmic
Microwave Background Radiation foregrounds, but also allow investigation of Galactic
magnetism out of the plane.
10 Conclusions
Observational studies of the Milky Way’s magnetic field have yielded a wealth of new
knowledge — along with new questions — driven by major recent advances in instru-
mental capabilities and thus high-resolution, high-sensitivity data across large portions
of the sky. Equally impressive progress was achieved through major advances in numer-
ical simulations and theoretical studies, although these fall outside the scope of this
review. Over the past decade, RM Grids have increased substantially in source density
and RM precision, as have the methods used to distinguish Galactic foreground from
intrinsic and other background RM components. The application of Faraday Tomog-
raphy has matured from exploratory to a deeper and more nuanced understanding
of its results, including its limitations and pitfalls. The Planck satellite has revealed
an entirely new view on polarized dust, uncovering detailed magnetic field structures
both near the Galactic plane and at high latitudes. Meanwhile, a resurgence in inter-
stellar starlight polarization observations — now capable of probing larger regions of
the sky and detecting weaker polarization signals — holds great promise for mapping
magnetic field structure across three spatial dimensions.
Heuristic models of the large-scale Galactic magnetic field have confirmed the spiral
structure of the field in the disk, placed significant constraints on its strength and
direction, and revealed distinct magnetic field configurations in the Galactic disk and
halo. However, these models are gradually approaching their limits as tools for global
Galactic magnetic field modeling. The growing volume and quality of data reveals
increasing complexity and deviations from large-scale models, creating the need for an
excessive number of free parameters; however, nput from dynamo models may help to
43

partially constrain these parameters. Non-parametric models of the Galactic magnetic
field circumvent these limitations, but remain in their early stages, having so far been
applied only to limited fields of view and/or the near Solar neighborhood, including
artifacts and/or returning only one magnetic field component.
Driven by these developments, research is increasingly focused on sophisticated
methods for characterizing an anisotropic and intermittent turbulent magnetic field,
as well as on the correlations between magnetic field structure and other ISM trac-
ers. These investigations are revealing complex relationships between magnetic field
structures and the multi-phase interstellar gas and dust. Both gas and dust are fila-
mentary across a wide range of scales, shaped by the structure and orientation of the
magnetic field; therefore, these filamentary structures are increasingly used as proxies
for magnetic field orientation.
Numerous exciting observational developments are currently underway, generating
new RM Grids, Faraday Tomography data cubes, and catalogs of optical interstellar
starlight polarization across large areas of the sky. These efforts inspire well-founded
confidence in equally exciting advances in the near future.
Acknowledgements.The author acknowledges insightful discussions with Andrea
Bracco, Susan Clark, JinLin Han, Yue Hu, Alex Lazarian, Naomi McClure Griffiths,
Theo O’Neill, Rafael Skalidis, and Mehrnoosh Tahani. Thank you to Anvar Shukurov
for comments on parts of the paper, and likely to a number of others once this
document is on astro-ph.
The author acknowledges the Interstellar Institute’s program “II7” and the
Paris-Saclay University’s Institut Pascal for hosting discussions that nourished the
development of the ideas behind this work. The author also gratefully acknowledges the
hospitality of the NWO-I Institute HFML-FELIX while writing parts of this review.
Declarations
The author acknowledges funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant
agreement No 772663).
Declarations
Conflict of interest.The author declares no conflict of interest.
References
Abbate F, Possenti A, Tiburzi C, et al (2020) Constraints on the magnetic field in the
Galactic halo from globular cluster pulsars. Nature Astronomy 4:704–710. https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41550-020-1030-6, arXiv:2003.02867 [astro-ph.HE]
Akahori T, Nakanishi H, Sofue Y, et al (2018) Cosmic magnetism in centimeter- and
meter-wavelength radio astronomy. PASJ 70(1):R2. https://doi.org/10.1093/pasj/
psx123, arXiv:1709.02072 [astro-ph.HE]
44

Akiyama K, Akahori T, Miyashita Y, et al (2018) Faraday Tomography with Sparse
Modeling. arXiv e-prints arXiv:1811.10610. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1811.
10610, arXiv:1811.10610 [astro-ph.IM]
Allys E, Levrier F, Zhang S, et al (2019) The RWST, a comprehensive statistical
description of the non-Gaussian structures in the ISM. A&A 629:A115. https://doi.
org/10.1051/0004-6361/201834975, arXiv:1905.01372 [astro-ph.CO]
Alves MIR, Boulanger F, Ferri` ere K, et al (2018) The Local Bubble: a magnetic
veil to our Galaxy. A&A 611:L5. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201832637,
arXiv:1803.05251 [astro-ph.GA]
Andersson BG, Potter SB (2006) The Magnetic Field Strength in the Wall of the Local
Bubble toward l, b ˜300°, 0°. ApJ 640(1):L51–L54. https://doi.org/10.1086/503199
Andrecut M, Stil JM, Taylor AR (2012) Sparse Faraday Rotation Measure Syn-
thesis. AJ 143(2):33. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-6256/143/2/33, arXiv:1111.4167
[astro-ph.CO]
Angarita Y, Versteeg MJF, Haverkorn M, et al (2025) Interstellar Polarization Survey.
V. Galactic magnetic field tomography in the spiral arms using optical and near-
infrared starlight polarization. arXiv e-prints arXiv:2506.01564. https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2506.01564, arXiv:2506.01564 [astro-ph.GA]
Balbus SA, Hawley JF (1991) A Powerful Local Shear Instability in Weakly Magne-
tized Disks. I. Linear Analysis. ApJ 376:214. https://doi.org/10.1086/170270
Battaner E, Garrido JL, Membrado M, et al (1992) Magnetic fields as an alternative
explanation for the rotation curves of spiral galaxies. Nature 360(6405):652–653.
https://doi.org/10.1038/360652a0
Beattie JR, Federrath C, Klessen RS, et al (2025) The spectrum of magnetized turbu-
lence in the interstellar medium. Nature Astronomy 9:1195–1205. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41550-025-02551-5, arXiv:2504.07136 [astro-ph.GA]
Beck MC, Beck AM, Beck R, et al (2016) New constraints on modelling the random
magnetic field of the MW. J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys. 2016(5):056. https://doi.
org/10.1088/1475-7516/2016/05/056, arXiv:1409.5120 [astro-ph.GA]
Beck R (2001) Galactic and Extragalactic Magnetic Fields. Space Sci. Rev. 99:243–260.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1013805401252, arXiv:astro-ph/0012402 [astro-ph]
Beck R (2015) Magnetic fields in the nearby spiral galaxy IC 342: A multi-
frequency radio polarization study. A&A 578:A93. https://doi.org/10.1051/
0004-6361/201425572, arXiv:1502.05439 [astro-ph.GA]
Beck R, Wielebinski R (2013) Magnetic Fields in Galaxies. In: Oswalt TD,
45

Gilmore G (eds) Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 5: Galactic Struc-
ture and Stellar Populations. Springer, Dordrecht, p 641, https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-94-007-5612-0 13, arXiv:1302.5663
Beck R, Shukurov A, Sokoloff D, et al (2003) Systematic bias in interstellar
magnetic field estimates. A&A 411:99–107. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:
20031101, arXiv:astro-ph/0307330 [astro-ph]
Becker CT, Kachelrieß M (2025) Polarized synchrotron data and the structure of
the Galactic magnetic field. Phys. Rev. D 111(6):063057. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevD.111.063057, arXiv:2408.02554 [astro-ph.GA]
Bell MR, Enßlin TA (2012) Faraday synthesis. The synergy of aperture and rotation
measure synthesis. A&A 540:A80. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201118672,
arXiv:1112.4175 [astro-ph.IM]
Bell MR, Oppermann N, Crai A, et al (2013) Improved CLEAN reconstructions
for rotation measure synthesis with maximum likelihood estimation. A&A 551:L7.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201220771, arXiv:1211.5105 [astro-ph.IM]
Berat J, Miville-Deschˆ enes MA, Bracco A, et al (2026) Contribution of neutral
gas to Faraday tomographic data at low frequencies: A first extensive compar-
ison between real and synthetic data. A&A 708:A245. https://doi.org/10.1051/
0004-6361/202557351, arXiv:2602.08839 [astro-ph.GA]
Berdyugin A, Piirola V, Teerikorpi P (2004) Interstellar polarization at high galactic
latitudes from distant stars. VII. A complete map for southern latitudesb <−70 ◦.
A&A 424:873–876. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20040308
Berkhuijsen EM, Horellou C, Krause M, et al (1997) Magnetic fields in the disk and
halo of M 51. A&A 318:700–720. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/9610182,
arXiv:astro-ph/9610182 [astro-ph]
Bernet ML, Miniati F, Lilly SJ, et al (2008) Strong magnetic fields in normal galaxies
at high redshift. Nature 454(7202):302–304. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07105,
arXiv:0807.3347 [astro-ph]
Biermann L (1950) ¨Uber den Ursprung der Magnetfelder auf Sternen und im
interstellaren Raum (mit einem Anhang von A. Schl¨ uter). Z Naturforsch A 5:65
Booth RA, Ordog A, Brown JA, et al (2026) A Three-dimensional Model for the
Reversal in the Local Large-scale Interstellar Magnetic Field. ApJ 997(2):304. https:
//doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ae28d1, arXiv:2512.03332 [astro-ph.GA]
Boulanger F, Enßlin T, Fletcher A, et al (2018) IMAGINE: a comprehensive view
of the interstellar medium, Galactic magnetic fields and cosmic rays. J. Cosmol-
ogy Astropart. Phys. 2018(8):049. https://doi.org/10.1088/1475-7516/2018/08/049,
46

arXiv:1805.02496 [astro-ph.GA]
Boulanger F, Gry C, Jenkins EB, et al (2024) Associating LOFAR Galactic Faraday
structures with the warm neutral medium. A&A 687:A102. https://doi.org/10.1051/
0004-6361/202348953, arXiv:2404.19002 [astro-ph.GA]
Boulares A, Cox DP (1990) Galactic Hydrostatic Equilibrium with Magnetic Tension
and Cosmic-Ray Diffusion. ApJ 365:544. https://doi.org/10.1086/169509
Bracco A, Ghosh T, Boulanger F, et al (2019) Link between E-B polarization modes
and gas column density from interstellar dust emission. A&A 632:A17. https://doi.
org/10.1051/0004-6361/201935951, arXiv:1905.10471 [astro-ph.GA]
Bracco A, Jeli´ c V, Marchal A, et al (2020) The multiphase and magnetized neu-
tral hydrogen seen by LOFAR. A&A 644:L3. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/
202039283, arXiv:2011.05647 [astro-ph.GA]
Bracco A, Cukierman AJ, Skalidis R, et al (2025) The multiphase interstellar
medium as a common origin for magnetic misalignment and TB parity viola-
tion. arXiv e-prints arXiv:2512.11656. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2512.11656,
arXiv:2512.11656 [astro-ph.GA]
Brandenburg A, Ntormousi E (2023) Galactic dynamos. ARA&A 61(1):561–606. https:
//doi.org/10.1146/annurev-astro-071221-052807
Brentjens MA, de Bruyn AG (2005) Faraday rotation measure synthesis.
A&A 441(3):1217–1228. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20052990, arXiv:astro-
ph/0507349 [astro-ph]
Brown JC, Taylor AR, Jackel BJ (2003) Rotation Measures of Compact Sources in the
Canadian Galactic Plane Survey. ApJS 145(2):213–223. https://doi.org/10.1086/
346082
Brown JC, Haverkorn M, Gaensler BM, et al (2007) Rotation Measures of Extragalac-
tic Sources behind the Southern Galactic Plane: New Insights into the Large-Scale
Magnetic Field of the Inner Milky Way. ApJ 663(1):258–266. https://doi.org/10.
1086/518499, arXiv:0704.0458 [astro-ph]
Brown S, Bergerud B, Costa A, et al (2019) Classifying complex Faraday spectra with
convolutional neural networks. MNRAS 483(1):964–970. https://doi.org/10.1093/
mnras/sty2908, arXiv:1711.03252 [astro-ph.IM]
Burkhart B, Falceta-Gon¸ calves D, Kowal G, et al (2009) Density Studies of MHD
Interstellar Turbulence: Statistical Moments, Correlations and Bispectrum. ApJ
693(1):250–266. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/693/1/250, arXiv:0811.0822
[astro-ph]
47

Burkhart B, Lazarian A, Gaensler BM (2012) Properties of Interstellar Turbulence
from Gradients of Linear Polarization Maps. ApJ 749(2):145. https://doi.org/10.
1088/0004-637X/749/2/145, arXiv:1111.3544 [astro-ph.GA]
Burlaga LF, Florinski V, Ness NF (2015) In Situ Observations of Magnetic Turbu-
lence in the Local Interstellar Medium. ApJ 804(2):L31. https://doi.org/10.1088/
2041-8205/804/2/L31
Burn BJ (1966) On the depolarization of discrete radio sources by Faraday dispersion.
MNRAS 133:67. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/133.1.67
Bykov A, Popov V, Shukurov A, et al (1997) Anomalous persistence of bisymmet-
ric magnetic structures in spiral galaxies. MNRAS 292(1):1–10. https://doi.org/10.
1093/mnras/292.1.1
Bykov AM, Toptygin IN (1985) Shock Generation of Turbulence and Cosmic-Ray
Diffusion in the Interstellar Medium. Soviet Astronomy Letters 11:75–77
Campbell JL, Clark SE, Gaensler BM, et al (2022) A Comparison of Multiphase
Magnetic Field Tracers in a High Galactic Latitude Region of the Filamentary
Interstellar Medium. ApJ 927(1):49. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac400d,
arXiv:2112.03247 [astro-ph.GA]
Candes E, Romberg J, Tao T (2005) Stable Signal Recovery from Incomplete and
Inaccurate Measurements. arXiv e-prints math/0503066. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.math/0503066, arXiv:math/0503066 [math.NA]
C´ arcamo M, Scaife AMM, Alexander EL, et al (2023) CS-ROMER: a novel compressed
sensing framework for Faraday depth reconstruction. MNRAS 518(2):1955–1974.
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stac3031, arXiv:2205.01413 [astro-ph.IM]
Carretti E, Crocker RM, Staveley-Smith L, et al (2013) Giant magnetized outflows
from the centre of the Milky Way. Nature 493(7430):66–69. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature11734, arXiv:1301.0512 [astro-ph.GA]
Carretti E, Haverkorn M, Staveley-Smith L, et al (2019) S-band Polarization All-
Sky Survey (S-PASS): survey description and maps. MNRAS 489(2):2330–2354.
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stz806, arXiv:1903.09420 [astro-ph.GA]
Carretti E, Vazza F, O’Sullivan SP, et al (2025) The nature of LOFAR rotation
measures and new constraints on magnetic fields in cosmic filaments and on magne-
togenesis scenarios. A&A 693:A208. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202451333,
arXiv:2411.13499 [astro-ph.CO]
Chamandy L, Taylor AR (2015) Non-linear Galactic Dynamos and the Mag-
netic Pitch Angle. ApJ 808(1):28. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/808/1/28,
arXiv:1506.03245 [astro-ph.GA]
48

Chan MH, Del Popolo A (2022) The effect of magnetic field on the inner Galactic
rotation curve. MNRAS 516(1):L72–L75. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnrasl/slac091,
arXiv:2208.06098 [astro-ph.GA]
Chandrasekhar S, Fermi E (1953) Magnetic Fields in Spiral Arms. ApJ 118:113. https:
//doi.org/10.1086/145731
Chatterjee S, Sarkar S, Choudhuri S, et al (2025) A measurement of Galactic syn-
chrotron emission using MWA drift scan observations. PASA 42:e103. https://doi.
org/10.1017/pasa.2025.10065, arXiv:2506.14310 [astro-ph.GA]
CHIME/FRB Collaboration, Amiri M, Andersen BC, et al (2021) The First
CHIME/FRB Fast Radio Burst Catalog. ApJS 257(2):59. https://doi.org/10.3847/
1538-4365/ac33ab, arXiv:2106.04352 [astro-ph.HE]
Cho J, Yoo H (2016) A Technique for Constraining the Driving Scale of Turbulence
and a Modified Chandrasekhar-Fermi Method. ApJ 821(1):21. https://doi.org/10.
3847/0004-637X/821/1/21, arXiv:1603.08537 [astro-ph.GA]
Churchwell E, Babler BL, Meade MR, et al (2009) The Spitzer/GLIMPSE Surveys: A
New View of the Milky Way. PASP 121(877):213. https://doi.org/10.1086/597811
Clark SE, Hensley BS (2019) Mapping the Magnetic Interstellar Medium in Three
Dimensions over the Full Sky with Neutral Hydrogen. ApJ 887(2):136. https://doi.
org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab5803, arXiv:1909.11673 [astro-ph.GA]
Clark SE, Peek JEG, Putman ME (2014) Magnetically Aligned H I Fibers and the
Rolling Hough Transform. ApJ 789(1):82. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/789/
1/82, arXiv:1312.1338 [astro-ph.GA]
Clark SE, Hill JC, Peek JEG, et al (2015) Neutral Hydrogen Structures Trace Dust
Polarization Angle: Implications for Cosmic Microwave Background Foregrounds.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 115(24):241302. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.241302,
arXiv:1508.07005 [astro-ph.CO]
Clark SE, Kim CG, Hill JC, et al (2021) The Origin of Parity Violation in Polarized
Dust Emission and Implications for Cosmic Birefringence. ApJ 919(1):53. https:
//doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac0e35, arXiv:2105.00120 [astro-ph.GA]
Clemens DP, Cashman LR, Cerny C, et al (2020) The Galactic Plane Infrared Polar-
ization Survey (GPIPS): Data Release 4. ApJS 249(2):23. https://doi.org/10.3847/
1538-4365/ab9f30, arXiv:2006.15203 [astro-ph.GA]
Cooray S, Takeuchi TT, Akahori T, et al (2021) An iterative reconstruction algo-
rithm for Faraday tomography. MNRAS 500(4):5129–5141. https://doi.org/10.
1093/mnras/staa3580, arXiv:2011.10840 [astro-ph.IM]
49

Crutcher RM (2012) Magnetic Fields in Molecular Clouds. ARA&A 50:29–63. https:
//doi.org/10.1146/annurev-astro-081811-125514
Crutcher RM, Wandelt B, Heiles C, et al (2010) Magnetic Fields in Interstellar Clouds
from Zeeman Observations: Inference of Total Field Strengths by Bayesian Analysis.
ApJ 725(1):466–479. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/725/1/466
Cukierman AJ, Clark SE, Halal G (2023) Magnetic Misalignment of Interstel-
lar Dust Filaments. ApJ 946(2):106. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/acb0c4,
arXiv:2208.07382 [astro-ph.GA]
Curtin AP, Weisberg JM, Rankin JM (2024) Determining the Magnetic Field in the
Galactic Plane from New Arecibo Pulsar Faraday Rotation Measurements. ApJ
975(2):217. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ad7b15, arXiv:2410.07967 [astro-
ph.GA]
Davis JLeverett, Greenstein JL (1951) The Polarization of Starlight by Aligned Dust
Grains. ApJ 114:206. https://doi.org/10.1086/145464
Davis L (1951) The strength of interstellar magnetic fields. Phys Rev 81:890–891.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.81.890.2
Dhakal S, Seta A (2025) Probing the magneto-ionic medium of the Milky Way
using pulsars. MNRAS 544(3):2698–2712. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staf1816,
arXiv:2510.12991 [astro-ph.GA]
Dickey JM, Landecker TL, Thomson AJM, et al (2019) The Galactic Magneto-ionic
Medium Survey: Moments of the Faraday Spectra. ApJ 871(1):106. https://doi.org/
10.3847/1538-4357/aaf85f, arXiv:1812.05399 [astro-ph.GA]
Dickey JM, West J, Thomson AJM, et al (2022) Structure in the Magnetic Field of
the Milky Way Disk and Halo Traced by Faraday Rotation. ApJ 940(1):75. https:
//doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac94ce, arXiv:2209.10819 [astro-ph.GA]
Dineen P, Coles P (2005) A Faraday rotation template for the Galactic
sky. MNRAS 362(2):403–410. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.09331.x,
arXiv:astro-ph/0410636 [astro-ph]
Dobbs CL, Price DJ, Pettitt AR, et al (2016) Magnetic field evolution and rever-
sals in spiral galaxies. MNRAS 461(4):4482–4495. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/
stw1625, arXiv:1607.05532 [astro-ph.GA]
Doi Y, Hasegawa T, Bastien P, et al (2021) Two-component Magnetic Field along the
Line of Sight to the Perseus Molecular Cloud: Contribution of the Foreground Tau-
rus Molecular Cloud. ApJ 914(2):122. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/abfcc5,
arXiv:2104.11932 [astro-ph.GA]
50

Doi Y, Nakamura K, Kawabata KS, et al (2024) Tomographic Imaging of the Sagit-
tarius Spiral Arm’s Magnetic Field Structure. ApJ 961(1):13. https://doi.org/10.
3847/1538-4357/ad0fe2, arXiv:2311.13054 [astro-ph.GA]
Donoho D (2006) Compressed sensing. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory
52(4):1289–1306. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2006.871582
Erceg A, Jeli´ c V, Haverkorn M, et al (2022) Faraday tomography of LoTSS-DR2
data. I. Faraday moments in the high-latitude outer Galaxy and revealing Loop
III in polarisation. A&A 663:A7. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202142244,
arXiv:2203.01351 [astro-ph.GA]
Erceg A, Jeli´ c V, Haverkorn M, et al (2024a) Faraday tomography of LoTSS-DR2
data. II. Multi-tracer analysis in the high-latitude outer Galaxy. A&A 687:A23.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202348586, arXiv:2404.19068 [astro-ph.GA]
Erceg A, Jeli´ c V, Haverkorn M, et al (2024b) Faraday tomography of LoTSS-DR2 data.
III. Revealing the Local Bubble and the complex of local interstellar clouds in the
high-latitude inner Galaxy. A&A 688:A200. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/
202450082, arXiv:2406.14679 [astro-ph.GA]
Esquivel A, Lazarian A (2005) Velocity Centroids as Tracers of the Turbulent Veloc-
ity Statistics. ApJ 631(1):320–350. https://doi.org/10.1086/432458, arXiv:astro-
ph/0401603 [astro-ph]
Falceta-Gon¸ calves D, Lazarian A, Kowal G (2008) Studies of Regular and Ran-
dom Magnetic Fields in the ISM: Statistics of Polarization Vectors and the
Chandrasekhar-Fermi Technique. ApJ 679(1):537–551. https://doi.org/10.1086/
587479, arXiv:0801.0279 [astro-ph]
Falgarone E, Pety J, Hily-Blant P (2009) Intermittency of interstellar turbulence:
extreme velocity-shears and CO emission on milliparsec scale. A&A 507(1):355–368.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/200810963, arXiv:0910.1766 [astro-ph.GA]
Farhang A, van Loon JT, Khosroshahi HG, et al (2019) A three-dimensional map of
the hot Local Bubble using diffuse interstellar bands. Nature Astronomy 3:922–927.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-019-0814-z, arXiv:1907.07429 [astro-ph.GA]
Farnsworth D, Rudnick L, Brown S (2011) Integrated Polarization of Sources atλ
˜1 m and New Rotation Measure Ambiguities. AJ 141(6):191. https://doi.org/10.
1088/0004-6256/141/6/191, arXiv:1103.4149 [astro-ph.CO]
Farrar GR, Sutherland MS (2019) Deflections of UHECRs in the Galactic mag-
netic field. J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys. 2019(5):004. https://doi.org/10.1088/
1475-7516/2019/05/004, arXiv:1711.02730 [astro-ph.HE]
51

Fauvet L, Mac´ ıas-P´ erez JF, Aumont J, et al (2011) Joint 3D modelling of the polarized
Galactic synchrotron and thermal dust foreground diffuse emission. A&A 526:A145.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201014492, arXiv:1003.4450 [astro-ph.CO]
Fermi E (1949) On the Origin of the Cosmic Radiation. Physical Review 75(8):1169–
1174. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.75.1169
Ferri` ere K (2011) Magnetic Fields in the Galactic Center. In: Morris MR, Wang QD,
Yuan F (eds) The Galactic Center: a Window to the Nuclear Environment of Disk
Galaxies, p 39
Ferri` ere K (2020) Plasma turbulence in the interstellar medium. Plasma Physics
and Controlled Fusion 62(1):014014. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6587/ab49eb,
arXiv:1912.08237 [astro-ph.GA]
Ferri` ere K, Schmitt D (2000) Numerical models of the galactic dynamo driven by
supernovae and superbubbles. A&A 358:125–143
Ferri` ere K, Terral P (2014) Analytical models of X-shape magnetic fields in
galactic halos. A&A 561:A100. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201322966,
arXiv:1312.1974 [astro-ph.GA]
Ferri` ere K, Montier L, Carri` ere JS (2026) A three-dimensional reconstruction of the
interstellar magnetic field toward a star-forming region. A&A 705:A26. https://doi.
org/10.1051/0004-6361/202451034, arXiv:2510.25879 [astro-ph.GA]
Ferri` ere KM (2001) The interstellar environment of our galaxy. Reviews of
Modern Physics 73(4):1031–1066. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.73.1031,
arXiv:astro-ph/0106359 [astro-ph]
Ferri` ere KM (2015) Theoretical understanding of Galactic magnetic fields. Highlights
of Astronomy 16:396–396. https://doi.org/10.1017/S174392131401165X
Fitzgerald MP (1968) The Distribution of Interstellar Reddening Material. AJ 73:983.
https://doi.org/10.1086/110757
Fosalba P, Lazarian A, Prunet S, et al (2002) Statistical Properties of Galac-
tic Starlight Polarization. ApJ 564(2):762–772. https://doi.org/10.1086/324297,
arXiv:astro-ph/0105023 [astro-ph]
Frick P, Sokoloff D, Stepanov R, et al (2010) Wavelet-based Faraday rotation mea-
sure synthesis. MNRAS 401(1):L24–L28. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-3933.2009.
00778.x, arXiv:0911.0261 [astro-ph.GA]
Frick P, Sokoloff D, Stepanov R, et al (2011) Faraday rotation measure synthesis for
magnetic fields of galaxies. MNRAS 414(3):2540–2549. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1365-2966.2011.18571.x, arXiv:1102.4316 [astro-ph.GA]
52

Frisch PC (2007) The Local Bubble and Interstellar Material Near the Sun.
Space Sci. Rev. 130(1-4):355–365. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-007-9209-z,
arXiv:astro-ph/0702596 [astro-ph]
Gaensler BM, Dickey JM, McClure-Griffiths NM, et al (2001) Radio Polarization from
the Inner Galaxy at Arcminute Resolution. ApJ 549(2):959–978. https://doi.org/
10.1086/319468, arXiv:astro-ph/0010518 [astro-ph]
Gaensler BM, Haverkorn M, Burkhart B, et al (2011) Low-Mach-number turbulence in
interstellar gas revealed by radio polarization gradients. Nature 478(7368):214–217.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10446, arXiv:1110.2896 [astro-ph.GA]
Gaia Collaboration, Prusti T, de Bruijne JHJ, et al (2016) The Gaia mission. A&A
595:A1. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201629272, arXiv:1609.04153 [astro-
ph.IM]
Girart JM, Crutcher RM, Rao R (1999) Detection of Polarized CO Emission from the
Molecular Outflow in NGC 1333 IRAS 4A. ApJ 525(2):L109–L112. https://doi.org/
10.1086/312345
Girart JM, Rao R, Marrone DP (2006) Magnetic Fields in the Formation of Sun-
Like Stars. Science 313(5788):812–814. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1129093,
arXiv:astro-ph/0609177 [astro-ph]
Goldreich P, Kylafis ND (1981) On mapping the magnetic field direction in molecular
clouds by polarization measurements. ApJ 243:L75–L78. https://doi.org/10.1086/
183446
Goldreich P, Kylafis ND (1982) Linear polarization of radio frequency lines in molecu-
lar clouds and circumstellar envelopes. ApJ 253:606–621. https://doi.org/10.1086/
159663
Goldreich P, Sridhar S (1995) Toward a Theory of Interstellar Turbulence. II. Strong
Alfvenic Turbulence. ApJ 438:763. https://doi.org/10.1086/175121
G´ omez GC, Cox DP (2002) Three-dimensional Magnetohydrodynamic Modeling of the
Gaseous Structure of the Galaxy: Setup and Initial Results. ApJ 580(1):235–252.
https://doi.org/10.1086/343129, arXiv:astro-ph/0207634 [astro-ph]
Gontcharov GA, Mosenkov AV (2019) Interstellar polarization and extinction in the
Local Bubble and the Gould Belt. MNRAS 483(1):299–314. https://doi.org/10.
1093/mnras/sty2978, arXiv:1811.01411 [astro-ph.GA]
Gonz´ alez-Casanova DF, Lazarian A (2017) Velocity Gradients as a Tracer for
Magnetic Fields. ApJ 835(1):41. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/835/1/41,
arXiv:1608.06867 [astro-ph.GA]
53

Gustafsson V, Br¨ uggen M, Tasse C, et al (2025) Direction-Dependent Faraday Synthe-
sis. arXiv e-prints arXiv:2504.00141. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.00141,
arXiv:2504.00141 [astro-ph.IM]
Hackstein S, Br¨ uggen M, Vazza F, et al (2020) Redshift estimates for fast radio bursts
and implications on intergalactic magnetic fields. MNRAS 498(4):4811–4829. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staa2572, arXiv:2008.10536 [astro-ph.CO]
Halal G, Clark SE, Cukierman A, et al (2024a) Filamentary Dust Polarization and
the Morphology of Neutral Hydrogen Structures. ApJ 961(1):29. https://doi.org/
10.3847/1538-4357/ad06aa, arXiv:2306.10107 [astro-ph.GA]
Halal G, Clark SE, Tahani M (2024b) Imprints of the Local Bubble and Dust Complex-
ity on Polarized Dust Emission. ApJ 973(1):54. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/
ad61e0, arXiv:2404.11009 [astro-ph.GA]
Hale GE (1908) The Zeeman Effect in the Sun. PASP 20(123):287. https://doi.org/
10.1086/121847
Hall JS (1949) Observations of the Polarized Light from Stars. Science 109(2825):166–
167. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.109.2825.166
Han JL (2017) Observing Interstellar and Intergalactic Magnetic Fields. ARA&A
55(1):111–157. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-astro-091916-055221
Han JL, Qiao GJ (1994) The magnetic field in the disk of our Galaxy. A&A 288:759–
772
Han JL, Manchester RN, Berkhuijsen EM, et al (1997) Antisymmetric rotation
measures in our Galaxy: evidence for an A0 dynamo. A&A 322:98–102
Han JL, Manchester RN, Lyne AG, et al (2006) Pulsar Rotation Measures and the
Large-Scale Structure of the Galactic Magnetic Field. ApJ 642(2):868–881. https:
//doi.org/10.1086/501444, arXiv:astro-ph/0601357 [astro-ph]
Han JL, Manchester RN, van Straten W, et al (2018) Pulsar Rotation Measures and
Large-scale Magnetic Field Reversals in the Galactic Disk. ApJS 234(1):11. https:
//doi.org/10.3847/1538-4365/aa9c45, arXiv:1712.01997 [astro-ph.GA]
Harvey-Smith L, Madsen GJ, Gaensler BM (2011) Magnetic Fields in Large-
diameter H II Regions Revealed by the Faraday Rotation of Compact Extragalac-
tic Radio Sources. ApJ 736(2):83. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/736/2/83,
arXiv:1106.0931 [astro-ph.GA]
Haverkorn M (2015) Magnetic Fields in the Milky Way. In: Lazarian A, de Gouveia
Dal Pino EM, Melioli C (eds) Magnetic Fields in Diffuse Media, Astrophysics and
Space Science Library, vol 407. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, p 483–506, https://doi.
54

org/10.1007/978-3-662-44625-6 17, arXiv:1406.0283
Haverkorn M, Gaensler BM, McClure-Griffiths NM, et al (2004) Magnetic Fields and
Ionized Gas in the Inner Galaxy: An Outer Scale for Turbulence and the Pos-
sible Role of H II Regions. ApJ 609(2):776–784. https://doi.org/10.1086/421341,
arXiv:astro-ph/0403655 [astro-ph]
Haverkorn M, Gaensler BM, Brown JC, et al (2006) Enhanced Small-Scale Fara-
day Rotation in the Galactic Spiral Arms. ApJ 637(1):L33–L35. https://doi.org/10.
1086/500543, arXiv:astro-ph/0512456 [astro-ph]
Haverkorn M, Brown JC, Gaensler BM, et al (2008) The Outer Scale of Turbulence
in the Magnetoionized Galactic Interstellar Medium. ApJ 680(1):362–370. https:
//doi.org/10.1086/587165, arXiv:0802.2740 [astro-ph]
Heald G (2009) The Faraday rotation measure synthesis technique. In: Strassmeier
KG, Kosovichev AG, Beckman JE (eds) Cosmic Magnetic Fields: From Planets, to
Stars and Galaxies, pp 591–602, https://doi.org/10.1017/S1743921309031421
Heald G, Mao SA, Vacca V, et al (2020) Magnetism Science with the Square
Kilometre Array. Galaxies 8(3):53. https://doi.org/10.3390/galaxies8030053,
arXiv:2006.03172 [astro-ph.GA]
Heiles C (1996) The Local Direction and Curvature of the Galactic Magnetic Field
Derived from Starlight Polarization. ApJ 462:316. https://doi.org/10.1086/177153
Heiles C (1998) The Magnetic Field Near the Local Bubble. In: Breitschwerdt D,
Freyberg MJ, Tr¨ umper J (eds) The Local Bubble and Beyond: Lyman-Spitzer-
Colloquium (Proc IAU Colloq 166), Lecture Notes in Physics, vol 506. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, p 229–238, https://doi.org/doi.org/10.1007/BFb0104725
Heiles C, Haverkorn M (2012) Magnetic Fields in the Multiphase Interstellar Medium.
Space Sci. Rev. 166(1-4):293–305. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-012-9866-4
Heitsch F, Zweibel EG, Mac Low MM, et al (2001) Magnetic Field Diagnostics Based
on Far-Infrared Polarimetry: Tests Using Numerical Simulations. ApJ 561(2):800–
814. https://doi.org/10.1086/323489, arXiv:astro-ph/0103286 [astro-ph]
Hennebelle P, Inutsuka Si (2019) The role of magnetic field in molecular cloud forma-
tion and evolution. Front Astron Space Sci 6:5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fspas.2019.
00005, arXiv:1902.00798 [astro-ph.GA]
Henriksen RN (2022) Galactic magnetic X fields. A&A 658:A101. https://doi.org/10.
1051/0004-6361/202142330, arXiv:2112.09023 [astro-ph.GA]
Hildebrand RH, Kirby L, Dotson JL, et al (2009) Dispersion of Magnetic Fields in
Molecular Clouds. I. ApJ 696(1):567–573. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/696/
55

1/567, arXiv:0811.0813 [astro-ph]
Hill AS (2018) Is There a Polarization Horizon? Galaxies 6(4):129. https://doi.org/
10.3390/galaxies6040129, arXiv:1810.12008 [astro-ph.GA]
Hiltner WA (1949) Polarization of Light from Distant Stars by Interstellar Medium.
Science 109(2825):165. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.109.2825.165
Ho KW, Lazarian A (2023) Tracing of magnetic fields with gradients: subsonic
turbulence. MNRAS 520(3):3857–3866. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stad186,
arXiv:2301.13458 [astro-ph.GA]
Ho KW, Yuen KH, Leung PK, et al (2019) A Comparison between Faraday Tomog-
raphy and Synchrotron Polarization Gradients. ApJ 887(2):258. https://doi.org/10.
3847/1538-4357/ab578c, arXiv:1901.07731 [astro-ph.GA]
Hogan CJ (1983) Magnetohydrodynamic Effects of a First-Order Cosmological
Phase Transition. Phys. Rev. Lett. 51(16):1488–1491. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.51.1488
H¨ ogbom JA (1974) Aperture Synthesis with a Non-Regular Distribution of Interfer-
ometer Baselines. A&AS 15:417
Hollins JF, Sarson GR, Shukurov A, et al (2017) Supernova-regulated ISM. V. Space
and Time Correlations. ApJ 850(1):4. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aa93e7,
arXiv:1703.05187 [astro-ph.GA]
Hou LG, Han JL (2014) The observed spiral structure of the Milky Way. A&A
569:A125. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201424039, arXiv:1407.7331 [astro-
ph.GA]
Houde M, Bastien P, Peng R, et al (2000a) Probing the Magnetic Field with Molecular
Ion Spectra. ApJ 536(2):857–864. https://doi.org/10.1086/308980, arXiv:astro-
ph/0311335 [astro-ph]
Houde M, Bastien P, Peng R, et al (2000b) Probing the Magnetic Field with Molecular
Ion Spectra. ApJ 536(2):857–864. https://doi.org/10.1086/308980, arXiv:astro-
ph/0311335 [astro-ph]
Houde M, Vaillancourt JE, Hildebrand RH, et al (2009) Dispersion of Magnetic
Fields in Molecular Clouds. II. ApJ 706(2):1504–1516. https://doi.org/10.1088/
0004-637X/706/2/1504, arXiv:0909.5227 [astro-ph.GA]
Houde M, Hull CLH, Plambeck RL, et al (2016) Dispersion of Magnetic Fields in
Molecular Clouds. IV. Analysis of Interferometry Data. ApJ 820(1):38. https://doi.
org/10.3847/0004-637X/820/1/38, arXiv:1602.01873 [astro-ph.GA]
56

Hu Y, Yuen KH, Lazarian A (2019) Intensity Gradients Technique: Synergy with
Velocity Gradients and Polarization Studies. ApJ 886(1):17. https://doi.org/10.
3847/1538-4357/ab4b5e, arXiv:1908.09488 [astro-ph.GA]
Hutschenreuter S, Enßlin TA (2020) The Galactic Faraday depth sky revisited. A&A
633:A150. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201935479, arXiv:1903.06735 [astro-
ph.GA]
Hutschenreuter S, Anderson CS, Betti S, et al (2022) The Galactic Faraday
rotation sky 2020. A&A 657:A43. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202140486,
arXiv:2102.01709 [astro-ph.GA]
Iacobelli M, Haverkorn M, Orr´ u E, et al (2013) Studying Galactic interstellar tur-
bulence through fluctuations in synchrotron emission. First LOFAR Galactic fore-
ground detection. A&A 558:A72. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201322013,
arXiv:1308.2804 [astro-ph.GA]
Ideguchi S, Takahashi K, Akahori T, et al (2014) Fisher analysis on wide-band
polarimetry for probing the intergalactic magnetic field. PASJ 66(1):5. https://doi.
org/10.1093/pasj/pst007, arXiv:1308.5696 [astro-ph.CO]
Ideguchi S, Miyashita Y, Heald G (2018) Faraday Tomography Tutorial. Galaxies
6(4):140. https://doi.org/10.3390/galaxies6040140
Jaffe TR (2019) Practical Modeling of Large-Scale Galactic Magnetic Fields:
Status and Prospects. Galaxies 7(2):52. https://doi.org/10.3390/galaxies7020052,
arXiv:1904.12689 [astro-ph.GA]
Jaffe TR, Leahy JP, Banday AJ, et al (2010) Modelling the Galactic magnetic field on
the plane in two dimensions. MNRAS 401(2):1013–1028. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1365-2966.2009.15745.x, arXiv:0907.3994 [astro-ph.GA]
Jaffe TR, Ferri` ere KM, Banday AJ, et al (2013) Comparing polarized synchrotron
and thermal dust emission in the Galactic plane. MNRAS 431(1):683–694. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stt200, arXiv:1302.0143 [astro-ph.GA]
Jansson R, Farrar GR (2012a) A New Model of the Galactic Magnetic Field. ApJ
757(1):14. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/757/1/14, arXiv:1204.3662 [astro-
ph.GA]
Jansson R, Farrar GR (2012b) A New Model of the Galactic Magnetic Field. ApJ
757(1):14. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/757/1/14, arXiv:1204.3662 [astro-
ph.GA]
Jeli´ c V, de Bruyn AG, Pandey VN, et al (2015) Linear polarization structures in
LOFAR observations of the interstellar medium in the 3C 196 field. A&A 583:A137.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201526638, arXiv:1508.06650 [astro-ph.GA]
57

Jeli´ c V, Prelogovi´ c D, Haverkorn M, et al (2018) Magnetically aligned straight depo-
larization canals and the rolling Hough transform. A&A 615:L3. https://doi.org/
10.1051/0004-6361/201833291, arXiv:1806.06634 [astro-ph.GA]
Jiang H, Li Hb, Fan X (2020) Bayesian Revisit of the Relationship between the Total
Field Strength and the Volume Density of Interstellar Clouds. ApJ 890(2):153. https:
//doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab672b
Johnston-Hollitt M, Ekers RD (2004) Faraday Rotation Measures through the Cores
of Southern Galaxy Clusters. arXiv e-prints astro-ph/0411045. https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0411045, arXiv:astro-ph/0411045 [astro-ph]
Jones TJ (1996) Observational Constraints on Grain Alignment Mechanisms. In:
Roberge WG, Whittet DCB (eds) Polarimetry of the Interstellar Medium, p 381
Kaczmarek JF, Purcell CR, Gaensler BM, et al (2017) Detection of a Coherent
Magnetic Field in the Magellanic Bridge through Faraday Rotation. MNRAS
467(2):1776–1794. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stx206, arXiv:1701.05962 [astro-
ph.GA]
Kalberla PMW, Haud U (2023) Aspect ratios of far-infrared and H I filaments in
the diffuse interstellar medium at high Galactic latitudes. A&A 673:A101. https:
//doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202245200, arXiv:2303.16183 [astro-ph.GA]
Kalberla PMW, Kerp J (2016) Anisotropies in the HI gas distribution toward 3C 196.
A&A 595:A37. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201629113, arXiv:1608.05369
[astro-ph.GA]
Kalberla PMW, Kerp J, Haud U, et al (2017) H I anisotropies associated with radio-
polarimetric filaments . Steep power spectra associated with cold gas. A&A 607:A15.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201629627, arXiv:1707.05672 [astro-ph.GA]
Kandel D, Lazarian A, Pogosyan D (2017) Study of velocity centroids based on the the-
ory of fluctuations in position-position-velocity space. MNRAS 464(3):3617–3635.
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stw2512, arXiv:1607.04316 [astro-ph.GA]
Kandus A, Kunze KE, Tsagas CG (2011) Primordial magnetogenesis. Phys. Rep.
505(1):1–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2011.03.001, arXiv:1007.3891 [astro-
ph.CO]
Kazantsev AP (1968) Enhancement of a Magnetic Field by a Conducting Fluid. Soviet
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics 26:1031
Kim SH, Martin PG (1995) The Size Distribution of Interstellar Dust Particles as
Determined from Polarization: Spheroids. ApJ 444:293. https://doi.org/10.1086/
175604
58

Kim WT, Ostriker EC (2002) Formation and Fragmentation of Gaseous Spurs in
Spiral Galaxies. ApJ 570(1):132–151. https://doi.org/10.1086/339352, arXiv:astro-
ph/0111398 [astro-ph]
Koch PM, Tang YW, Ho PTP (2012) Magnetic Field Strength Maps for Molecular
Clouds: A New Method Based on a Polarization-Intensity Gradient Relation. ApJ
747(1):79. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/747/1/79, arXiv:1201.4263 [astro-
ph.GA]
Kolmogorov A (1941) The Local Structure of Turbulence in Incompressible Viscous
Fluid for Very Large Reynolds’ Numbers. Akademiia Nauk SSSR Doklady 30:301–
305
Korochkin A, Semikoz D, Tinyakov P (2025) The coherent magnetic field of the Milky
Way halo, the Local Bubble, and the Fan region. A&A 693:A284. https://doi.org/
10.1051/0004-6361/202451440, arXiv:2407.02148 [astro-ph.GA]
Krumholz MR, Federrath C (2019) The Role of Magnetic Fields in Setting the Star
Formation Rate and the Initial Mass Function. Front Astron Space Sci 6:7. https:
//doi.org/10.3389/fspas.2019.00007, arXiv:1902.02557 [astro-ph.GA]
Kudoh T, Basu S (2003) Nonlinear Hydromagnetic Wave Support of a Stratified Molec-
ular Cloud. ApJ 595(2):842–857. https://doi.org/10.1086/377495, arXiv:astro-
ph/0306473 [astro-ph]
Kulsrud R, Pearce WP (1969) The Effect of Wave-Particle Interactions on the
Propagation of Cosmic Rays. ApJ 156:445. https://doi.org/10.1086/149981
Lacy M, Baum SA, Chandler CJ, et al (2020) The Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array
Sky Survey (VLASS). Science Case and Survey Design. PASP 132(1009):035001.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1538-3873/ab63eb, arXiv:1907.01981 [astro-ph.IM]
Lallement R, Welsh BY, Vergely JL, et al (2003) 3D mapping of the dense inter-
stellar gas around the Local Bubble. A&A 411:447–464. https://doi.org/10.1051/
0004-6361:20031214
Lallement R, Babusiaux C, Vergely JL, et al (2019) Gaia-2MASS 3D maps of Galactic
interstellar dust within 3 kpc. A&A 625:A135. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/
201834695, arXiv:1902.04116 [astro-ph.GA]
Landecker TL (2012) The Role of Magnetic Fields in the Interstellar Medium of the
Milky Way. Evidence from the Diffuse Polarized Radio Emission. Space Sci. Rev.
166(1-4):263–280. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-011-9796-6
Lazarian A (2014) Reconnection Diffusion in Turbulent Fluids and Its Implica-
tions for Star Formation. Space Sci. Rev. 181(1-4):1–59. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11214-013-0031-5
59

Lazarian A, Hoang T (2007) Radiative torques: analytical model and basic prop-
erties. MNRAS 378(3):910–946. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.11817.x,
arXiv:0707.0886 [astro-ph]
Lazarian A, Pogosyan D (2012) Statistical Description of Synchrotron Intensity
Fluctuations: Studies of Astrophysical Magnetic Turbulence. ApJ 747(1):5. https:
//doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/747/1/5, arXiv:1105.4617 [astro-ph.GA]
Lazarian A, Yuen KH (2018) Gradients of Synchrotron Polarization: Tracing 3D Dis-
tribution of Magnetic Fields. ApJ 865(1):59. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/
aad3ca, arXiv:1802.00028 [astro-ph.GA]
Lazarian A, Yuen KH, Lee H, et al (2017) Synchrotron Intensity Gradients as Tracers
of Interstellar Magnetic Fields. ApJ 842(1):30. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/
aa74c6
Lazarian A, Yuen KH, Ho KW, et al (2018) Distribution of Velocity Gradient Orienta-
tions: Mapping Magnetization with the Velocity Gradient Technique. ApJ 865(1):46.
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aad7ff, arXiv:1802.02984 [astro-ph.GA]
Lazarian A, Yuen KH, Pogosyan D (2022) Magnetic Field Strength from Turbulence
Theory. I. Using Differential Measure Approach. ApJ 935(2):77. https://doi.org/10.
3847/1538-4357/ac6877, arXiv:2204.09731 [astro-ph.GA]
Lei M, Clark SE (2024) A New Constraint on the Relative Disorder of Magnetic Fields
between Neutral Interstellar Medium Phases. ApJ 972(1):66. https://doi.org/10.
3847/1538-4357/ad5ade, arXiv:2312.03846 [astro-ph.GA]
Leike RH, Enßlin TA (2019) Charting nearby dust clouds using Gaia data only. A&A
631:A32. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201935093, arXiv:1901.05971 [astro-
ph.GA]
Leroy JL (1999) Interstellar dust and magnetic field at the boundaries of the Local
Bubble. Analysis of polarimetric data in the light of HIPPARCOS parallaxes. A&A
346:955–960
Li F, Brown S, Cornwell TJ, et al (2011) The application of compressive sampling
to radio astronomy. II. Faraday rotation measure synthesis. A&A 531:A126. https:
//doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201015890, arXiv:1106.1709 [astro-ph.IM]
Li HB (2021) Magnetic Fields in Molecular Clouds—Observation and Interpreta-
tion. Galaxies 9(2):41. https://doi.org/10.3390/galaxies9020041, arXiv:2106.08172
[astro-ph.GA]
Li Hb, Houde M (2008) Probing the Turbulence Dissipation Range and Magnetic
Field Strengths in Molecular Clouds. ApJ 677(2):1151–1156. https://doi.org/10.
1086/529581, arXiv:0801.2757 [astro-ph]
60

Li PS, Lopez-Rodriguez E, Ajeddig H, et al (2022) Mapping the magnetic field in
the Taurus/B211 filamentary cloud with SOFIA HAWC + and comparing with
simulation. MNRAS 510(4):6085–6109. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stab3448,
arXiv:2111.12864 [astro-ph.GA]
Liu J, Zhang Q, Commer¸ con B, et al (2021) Calibrating the Davis-Chandrasekhar-
Fermi Method with Numerical Simulations: Uncertainties in Estimating the Mag-
netic Field Strength from Statistics of Field Orientations. ApJ 919(2):79. https:
//doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac0cec, arXiv:2106.09934 [astro-ph.GA]
Livingston JD, McClure-Griffiths NM, Gaensler BM, et al (2021) Heightened Faraday
complexity in the inner 1 kpc of the galactic centre. MNRAS 502(3):3814–3828.
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stab253, arXiv:2102.01139 [astro-ph.GA]
Lorimer DR, Bailes M, McLaughlin MA, et al (2007) A Bright Millisecond Radio Burst
of Extragalactic Origin. Science 318(5851):777. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
1147532, arXiv:0709.4301 [astro-ph]
Ma YK, Mao SA, Ordog A, et al (2020) The complex large-scale magnetic
fields in the first Galactic quadrant as revealed by the Faraday depth pro-
file disparity. MNRAS 497(3):3097–3117. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staa2105,
arXiv:2007.07893 [astro-ph.GA]
Mac Low MM, Klessen RS (2004) Control of star formation by supersonic turbulence.
Reviews of Modern Physics 76(1):125–194. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.
76.125, arXiv:astro-ph/0301093 [astro-ph]
MacLow MM (2004) Turbulence in the Interstellar Medium. Ap&SS 289(3):323–331.
https://doi.org/10.1023/B:ASTR.0000014961.72318.7c
Maconi E, Soler JD, Reissl S, et al (2023) Modelling Local Bubble analogs: syn-
thetic dust polarization maps. MNRAS 523(4):5995–6010. https://doi.org/10.1093/
mnras/stad1854, arXiv:2212.06598 [astro-ph.GA]
Magalh˜ aes AM, Pereyra A, Melgarejo R, et al (2005) A Southern Optical/Infrared
Survey of Interstellar Polarization. In: Adamson A, Aspin C, Davis C, et al (eds)
Astronomical Polarimetry: Current Status and Future Directions, p 305
Manchester RN, Hobbs GB, Teoh A, et al (2005) The Australia Telescope National
Facility Pulsar Catalogue. AJ 129(4):1993–2006. https://doi.org/10.1086/428488,
arXiv:astro-ph/0412641 [astro-ph]
Mao SA, Gaensler BM, Haverkorn M, et al (2010) A Survey of Extragalactic Fara-
day Rotation at High Galactic Latitude: The Vertical Magnetic Field of the Milky
Way Toward the Galactic Poles. ApJ 714(2):1170–1186. https://doi.org/10.1088/
0004-637X/714/2/1170, arXiv:1003.4519 [astro-ph.GA]
61

Mathis JS (1986) The Alignment of Interstellar Grains. ApJ 308:281. https://doi.org/
10.1086/164499
McCallum L, Frank P, Hutschenreuter S, et al (2026) The radial component of the
local Galactic magnetic field in 3D. MNRAS 548(2):stag640. https://doi.org/10.
1093/mnras/stag640, arXiv:2604.01093 [astro-ph.GA]
McKee CF, Ostriker EC (2007) Theory of Star Formation. ARA&A 45(1):565–687.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.astro.45.051806.110602, arXiv:0707.3514 [astro-
ph]
Medan I, Andersson BG (2019) Magnetic Field Strengths and Variations in Grain
Alignment in the Local Bubble Wall. ApJ 873(1):87. https://doi.org/10.3847/
1538-4357/ab063c, arXiv:1901.07692 [astro-ph.GA]
Mestel L, Spitzer JL. (1956) Star formation in magnetic dust clouds. MNRAS 116:503.
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/116.5.503
Minter AH, Spangler SR (1996) Observation of Turbulent Fluctuations in the Inter-
stellar Plasma Density and Magnetic Field on Spatial Scales of 0.01 to 100 Parsecs.
ApJ 458:194. https://doi.org/10.1086/176803
Mitra D, Wielebinski R, Kramer M, et al (2003) The effect of HII regions on rota-
tion measure of pulsars. A&A 398:993–1005. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:
20021702
Miville-Deschˆ enes MA, Ysard N, Lavabre A, et al (2008) Separation of anomalous
and synchrotron emissions using WMAP polarization data. A&A 490(3):1093–1102.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:200809484, arXiv:0802.3345 [astro-ph]
Miyashita Y, Ideguchi S, Nakagawa S, et al (2019) Performance test of QU-fitting
in cosmic magnetism study. MNRAS 482(2):2739–2749. https://doi.org/10.1093/
mnras/sty2862, arXiv:1710.01485 [astro-ph.IM]
Mollerach S, Roulet E (2018) Progress in high-energy cosmic ray physics. Progress
in Particle and Nuclear Physics 98:85–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ppnp.2017.10.
002, arXiv:1710.11155 [astro-ph.HE]
Moss D, Sokoloff D (2008) The coexistence of odd and even parity magnetic fields in
disc galaxies. A&A 487(1):197–203. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:200809808
Mouschovias TC (1976) Nonhomologous contraction and equilibria of self-gravitating,
magnetic interstellar clouds embedded in an intercloud medium: star formation. II.
Results. ApJ 207:141–158. https://doi.org/10.1086/154478
Myers PC, Goodman AA (1991) On the Dispersion in Direction of Interstellar
Polarization. ApJ 373:509. https://doi.org/10.1086/170070
62

Myserlis I, Contopoulos I (2021) An underlying universal pattern in galaxy
halo magnetic fields. A&A 649:A94. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202039622,
arXiv:2101.05291 [astro-ph.GA]
Naab T, Ostriker JP (2017) Theoretical Challenges in Galaxy Formation.
ARA&A 55(1):59–109. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-astro-081913-040019,
arXiv:1612.06891 [astro-ph.GA]
Ng C, Pandhi A, Naidu A, et al (2020) Faraday rotation measures of Northern hemi-
sphere pulsars using CHIME/Pulsar. MNRAS 496(3):2836–2848. https://doi.org/
10.1093/mnras/staa1658, arXiv:2006.06538 [astro-ph.IM]
Noutsos A (2012) The Magnetic Field of the Milky Way from Faraday Rotation of
Pulsars and Extragalactic Sources. Space Sci. Rev. 166(1-4):307–324. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11214-011-9860-2
Noutsos A, Johnston S, Kramer M, et al (2008) New pulsar rotation measures and
the Galactic magnetic field. MNRAS 386(4):1881–1896. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1365-2966.2008.13188.x, arXiv:0803.0677 [astro-ph]
Ntormousi E, Dawson JR, Hennebelle P, et al (2017) The role of magnetic fields in the
structure and interaction of supershells. A&A 599:A94. https://doi.org/10.1051/
0004-6361/201629268, arXiv:1701.03696 [astro-ph.GA]
Ntormousi E, Tassis K, Del Sordo F, et al (2020) A dynamo amplifying the mag-
netic field of a Milky-Way-like galaxy. A&A 641:A165. https://doi.org/10.1051/
0004-6361/202037835, arXiv:2006.12574 [astro-ph.GA]
Ohno H, Shibata S (1993) The random magnetic field in the Galaxy. MNRAS
262(4):953–962. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/262.4.953
O’Neill TJ, Zucker C, Goodman AA, et al (2024) The Local Bubble Is a Local Chim-
ney: A New Model from 3D Dust Mapping. ApJ 973(2):136. https://doi.org/10.
3847/1538-4357/ad61de, arXiv:2403.04961 [astro-ph.GA]
Oppermann N, Junklewitz H, Robbers G, et al (2012) An improved map of the Galac-
tic Faraday sky. A&A 542:A93. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201118526,
arXiv:1111.6186 [astro-ph.GA]
Oppermann N, Junklewitz H, Greiner M, et al (2015) Estimating extragalactic
Faraday rotation. A&A 575:A118. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201423995,
arXiv:1404.3701 [astro-ph.IM]
Ordog A, Brown JC, Kothes R, et al (2017) Three-dimensional structure of the mag-
netic field in the disk of the Milky Way. A&A 603:A15. https://doi.org/10.1051/
0004-6361/201730740, arXiv:1704.08663 [astro-ph.GA]
63

Ordog A, Booth RA, Landecker TL, et al (2026) GMIMS-DRAGONS: A Faraday
Depth Survey of the Northern Sky Covering 350–1030 MHz. ApJS 282(2):53. https:
//doi.org/10.3847/1538-4365/ae2471, arXiv:2510.09759 [astro-ph.IM]
Orkisz JH, Pety J, Gerin M, et al (2017) Turbulence and star formation efficiency in
molecular clouds: solenoidal versus compressive motions in Orion B. A&A 599:A99.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201629220, arXiv:1701.00962 [astro-ph.GA]
Orlando E, Strong A (2013) Galactic synchrotron emission with cosmic ray propa-
gation models. MNRAS 436(3):2127–2142. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stt1718,
arXiv:1309.2947 [astro-ph.GA]
Ostriker EC, Stone JM, Gammie CF (2001) Density, Velocity, and Magnetic Field
Structure in Turbulent Molecular Cloud Models. ApJ 546(2):980–1005. https://doi.
org/10.1086/318290, arXiv:astro-ph/0008454 [astro-ph]
O’Sullivan SP, Brown S, Robishaw T, et al (2012) Complex Faraday depth
structure of active galactic nuclei as revealed by broad-band radio polarime-
try. MNRAS 421(4):3300–3315. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20554.x,
arXiv:1201.3161 [astro-ph.CO]
O’Sullivan SP, Shimwell TW, Hardcastle MJ, et al (2023) The Fara-
day Rotation Measure Grid of the LOFAR Two-metre Sky Survey: Data
Release 2. MNRAS 519(4):5723–5742. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stac3820,
arXiv:2301.07697 [astro-ph.CO]
Oswald LS, Weltevrede P, Posselt B, et al (2025) The Thousand-Pulsar-Array pro-
gramme on MeerKAT - XVI. Mapping the Galactic magnetic field with pulsar
observations. MNRAS https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staf645, arXiv:2504.09722
[astro-ph.GA]
Ozawa T, Nakanishi H, Akahori T, et al (2015) JVLA S- and X-band polarimetry of the
merging cluster Abell 2256. PASJ 67(6):110. https://doi.org/10.1093/pasj/psv082,
arXiv:1508.01317 [astro-ph.CO]
Padmanabh PV, Barr ED, Sridhar SS, et al (2023) The MPIfR-MeerKAT Galactic
Plane Survey - I. System set-up and early results. MNRAS 524(1):1291–1315. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stad1900, arXiv:2303.09231 [astro-ph.HE]
Padoan P, Goodman A, Draine BT, et al (2001) Theoretical Models of Polarized Dust
Emission from Protostellar Cores. ApJ 559(2):1005–1018. https://doi.org/10.1086/
322504, arXiv:astro-ph/0104231 [astro-ph]
Padovani M, Bracco A, Jeli´ c V, et al (2021) Spectral index of synchrotron emission:
insights from the diffuse and magnetised interstellar medium. A&A 651:A116. https:
//doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202140799, arXiv:2106.10929 [astro-ph.HE]
64

Pakmor R, G´ omez FA, Grand RJJ, et al (2017) Magnetic field formation in the Milky
Way like disc galaxies of the Auriga project. MNRAS 469(3):3185–3199. https://
doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stx1074, arXiv:1701.07028 [astro-ph.GA]
Pakmor R, Guillet T, Pfrommer C, et al (2018) Faraday rotation maps of
disc galaxies. MNRAS 481(4):4410–4418. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/sty2601,
arXiv:1807.02113 [astro-ph.GA]
Pandhi A, Hutschenreuter S, West JL, et al (2022) A method for reconstructing
the Galactic magnetic field using dispersion of fast radio bursts and Faraday rota-
tion of radio galaxies. MNRAS 516(4):4739–4759. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/
stac2314, arXiv:2208.06417 [astro-ph.GA]
Panopoulou GV, Tassis K, Skalidis R, et al (2019) Demonstration of Magnetic
Field Tomography with Starlight Polarization toward a Diffuse Sightline of the
ISM. ApJ 872(1):56. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aafdb2, arXiv:1809.09804
[astro-ph.GA]
Panopoulou GV, Markopoulioti L, Bouzelou F, et al (2025) A Compilation of
Optical Starlight Polarization Catalogs. ApJS 276(1):15. https://doi.org/10.3847/
1538-4365/ad8b21, arXiv:2307.05752 [astro-ph.GA]
Parker EN (1955) Hydromagnetic Dynamo Models. ApJ 122:293. https://doi.org/10.
1086/146087
Parker EN (1971) The Generation of Magnetic Fields in Astrophysical Bodies. II. The
Galactic Field. ApJ 163:255. https://doi.org/10.1086/150765
Parker EN (1992) Fast Dynamos, Cosmic Rays, and the Galactic Magnetic Field. ApJ
401:137. https://doi.org/10.1086/172046
Patrikeev I, Fletcher A, Stepanov R, et al (2006) Analysis of spiral arms using
anisotropic wavelets: gas, dust and magnetic fields in M 51. A&A 458(2):441–452.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20065225, arXiv:astro-ph/0609787 [astro-ph]
Pattle K, Ward-Thompson D, Berry D, et al (2017) The JCMT BISTRO Survey: The
Magnetic Field Strength in the Orion A Filament. ApJ 846(2):122. https://doi.org/
10.3847/1538-4357/aa80e5, arXiv:1707.05269 [astro-ph.GA]
Pavel MD, Clemens DP, Pinnick AF (2012) Testing Galactic Magnetic Field
Models Using Near-infrared Polarimetry. ApJ 749(1):71. https://doi.org/10.1088/
0004-637X/749/1/71, arXiv:1202.1020 [astro-ph.GA]
Pelgrims V, Ferri` ere K, Boulanger F, et al (2020) Modeling the magnetized Local Bub-
ble from dust data. A&A 636:A17. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201937157,
arXiv:1911.09691 [astro-ph.GA]
65

Pelgrims V, Panopoulou GV, Tassis K, et al (2023) Starlight-polarization-based
tomography of the magnetized ISM: PASIPHAE’s line-of-sight inversion method.
A&A 670:A164. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202244625, arXiv:2208.02278
[astro-ph.GA]
Pillai T, Kauffmann J, Tan JC, et al (2015) Magnetic Fields in High-mass
Infrared Dark Clouds. ApJ 799(1):74. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/799/1/
74, arXiv:1410.7390 [astro-ph.GA]
Piontek RA, Ostriker EC (2007) Models of Vertically Stratified Two-Phase ISM
Disks with MRI-Driven Turbulence. ApJ 663(1):183–203. https://doi.org/10.1086/
518103, arXiv:astro-ph/0703648 [astro-ph]
Planck Collaboration, Ade PAR, Aghanim N, et al (2015) Planck intermediate results.
XIX. An overview of the polarized thermal emission from Galactic dust. A&A
576:A104. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201424082, arXiv:1405.0871 [astro-
ph.GA]
Planck Collaboration, Adam R, Ade PAR, et al (2016a) Planck intermediate results.
XXXII. The relative orientation between the magnetic field and structures traced
by interstellar dust. A&A 586:A135. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201425044,
arXiv:1409.6728 [astro-ph.GA]
Planck Collaboration, Adam R, Ade PAR, et al (2016b) Planck intermediate results.
XLII. Large-scale Galactic magnetic fields. A&A 596:A103. https://doi.org/10.
1051/0004-6361/201528033, arXiv:1601.00546 [astro-ph.GA]
Planck Collaboration, Ade PAR, Aghanim N, et al (2016c) Planck intermediate results.
XXXV. Probing the role of the magnetic field in the formation of structure in
molecular clouds. A&A 586:A138. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201525896,
arXiv:1502.04123 [astro-ph.GA]
Planck Collaboration, Akrami Y, Ashdown M, et al (2020) Planck 2018 results.
XI. Polarized dust foregrounds. A&A 641:A11. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/
201832618, arXiv:1801.04945 [astro-ph.GA]
Polderman IM, Haverkorn M, Jaffe TR, et al (2019) Low-frequency measurements of
synchrotron absorbing HII regions and modeling of observed synchrotron emissivity.
A&A 621:A127. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201834405, arXiv:1811.10310
[astro-ph.GA]
Polderman IM, Haverkorn M, Jaffe TR (2020) A more detailed look at Galactic
magnetic field models: using free-free absorption in HII regions. A&A 636:A2.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201937042, arXiv:2002.09204 [astro-ph.GA]
Prouza M, ˇSm´ ıda R (2003) The Galactic magnetic field and propagation of ultra-high
energy cosmic rays. A&A 410:1–10. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20031281,
66

arXiv:astro-ph/0307165 [astro-ph]
Pshirkov MS, Tinyakov PG, Kronberg PP, et al (2011) Deriving the Global Struc-
ture of the Galactic Magnetic Field from Faraday Rotation Measures of Extra-
galactic Sources. ApJ 738(2):192. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/738/2/192,
arXiv:1103.0814 [astro-ph.GA]
Purcell EM (1975) Interstellar grains as pinwheels. In: Field GB, Cameron AGW (eds)
The Dusty Universe. Neale Watson Academic, New York, p 155–167
Qazi Y, Shukurov A, Tharakkal D, et al (2025) Non-linear magnetic buoyancy instabil-
ity and galactic dynamos. MNRAS 540(1):532–544. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/
staf766, arXiv:2412.05086 [astro-ph.GA]
Rae KM, Brown JC (2010) Constraints on the Galactic Magnetic Field from the
Canadian Galactic Plane Survey. In: Kothes R, Landecker TL, Willis AG (eds)
The Dynamic Interstellar Medium: A Celebration of the Canadian Galactic Plane
Survey, p 229, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1012.2934, arXiv:1012.2934
Rand RJ, Kulkarni SR (1989) The Local Galactic Magnetic Field. ApJ 343:760. https:
//doi.org/10.1086/167747
Rand RJ, Lyne AG (1994) New Rotation Measures of Distant Pulsars in the Inner
Galaxy and Magnetic Field Reversals. MNRAS 268:497. https://doi.org/10.1093/
mnras/268.2.497
Rao R, Crutcher RM, Plambeck RL, et al (1998) High-Resolution Millimeter-
Wave Mapping of Linearly Polarized Dust Emission: Magnetic Field Struc-
ture in Orion. ApJ 502(1):L75–L78. https://doi.org/10.1086/311485, arXiv:astro-
ph/9805288 [astro-ph]
Raycheva N, Haverkorn M, Ideguchi S, et al (2025) Faraday moments of the Southern
Twenty-centimeter All-sky Polarization Survey (STAPS). A&A 695:A101. https:
//doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202449556, arXiv:2406.06166 [astro-ph.GA]
Raycheva NC, Haverkorn M, Ideguchi S, et al (2022) Turbulent magnetic field in the H
II region Sh 2-27. A&A 663:A170. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202039474,
arXiv:2206.01787 [astro-ph.GA]
Raymond JC (1992) Microflare Heating of the Galactic Halo. ApJ 384:502. https:
//doi.org/10.1086/170892
Reid MJ, Menten KM, Brunthaler A, et al (2019) Trigonometric Parallaxes of High-
mass Star-forming Regions: Our View of the Milky Way. ApJ 885(2):131. https:
//doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab4a11, arXiv:1910.03357 [astro-ph.GA]
67

Reissl S, Klessen RS, Pellegrini EW, et al (2023) A reproduction of the
Milky Way’s Faraday rotation measure map in galaxy simulations from
global to local scales. Nature Astronomy 7:1295–1300. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41550-023-02053-2, arXiv:2307.05452 [astro-ph.GA]
Reynolds SP, Gaensler BM, Bocchino F (2012) Magnetic Fields in Supernova Rem-
nants and Pulsar-Wind Nebulae. Space Sci. Rev. 166(1-4):231–261. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11214-011-9775-y, arXiv:1104.4047 [astro-ph.GA]
Rezaei Kh. S, Bailer-Jones CAL, Hanson RJ, et al (2017) Inferring the three-
dimensional distribution of dust in the Galaxy with a non-parametric method .
Preparing for Gaia. A&A 598:A125. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201628885,
arXiv:1609.08917 [astro-ph.GA]
Riseley CJ, Galvin TJ, Sobey C, et al (2020) The POlarised GLEAM Survey
(POGS) II: Results from an all-sky rotation measure synthesis survey at long wave-
lengths. PASA 37:e029. https://doi.org/10.1017/pasa.2020.20, arXiv:2005.09266
[astro-ph.GA]
Rosolowsky EW, Pineda JE, Kauffmann J, et al (2008) Structural Analysis of Molec-
ular Clouds: Dendrograms. ApJ 679(2):1338–1351. https://doi.org/10.1086/587685,
arXiv:0802.2944 [astro-ph]
Roy S, Pramesh Rao A, Subrahmanyan R (2008) Magnetic field near the central
region of the Galaxy: rotation measure of extragalactic sources. A&A 478(2):435–
442. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20066470, arXiv:0712.0269 [astro-ph]
Ruzmaikin AA, Sokolov DD, Shukurov AM (1985) Magnetic field distribution in spiral
galaxies. A&A 148:335–343
Sabin L, Zijlstra AA, Greaves JS (2007) Magnetic fields in planetary nebulae and
post-AGB nebulae. MNRAS 376(1):378–386. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.
2007.11445.x, arXiv:astro-ph/0701054 [astro-ph]
Sakemi H, Machida M, Ohmura T, et al (2018) Faraday Tomography of the SS433 Jet
Termination Region. Galaxies 6(4):137. https://doi.org/10.3390/galaxies6040137
Santos-Lima R, Guerrero G, de Gouveia Dal Pino EM, et al (2021) Diffusion of large-
scale magnetic fields by reconnection in MHD turbulence. MNRAS 503(1):1290–
1309. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stab470, arXiv:2005.07775 [astro-ph.SR]
Schnitzeler DHFM, Katgert P, de Bruyn AG (2007) WSRT Faraday tomog-
raphy of the Galactic ISM atλ∼0.86 m. First results for a field at
(l, b) ˜=˜(181°,20°). A&A 471(2):L21–L24. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:
20077635, arXiv:0706.2548 [astro-ph]
68

Seta A, Beck R (2019) Revisiting the Equipartition Assumption in Star-
Forming Galaxies. Galaxies 7(2):45. https://doi.org/10.3390/galaxies7020045,
arXiv:1903.11856 [astro-ph.GA]
Seta A, Federrath C (2021) Magnetic fields in the Milky Way from pulsar
observations: effect of the correlation between thermal electrons and mag-
netic fields. MNRAS 502(2):2220–2237. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stab128,
arXiv:2101.05384 [astro-ph.GA]
Seta A, McClure-Griffiths NM (2025) Magnetic fields in the multiphase inter-
stellar medium of the Milky Way: turbulent kinetic and magnetic energy den-
sity relation. MNRAS 539(2):1024–1039. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staf520,
arXiv:2503.23634 [astro-ph.GA]
Seta A, Federrath C, Livingston JD, et al (2023) Rotation measure structure functions
with higher-order stencils as a probe of small-scale magnetic fluctuations and its
application to the Small and Large Magellanic Clouds. MNRAS 518(1):919–944.
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stac2972, arXiv:2206.13798 [astro-ph.GA]
Shanahan R, Lemmer SJ, Stil JM, et al (2019) Strong Excess Faraday Rotation on
the Inside of the Sagittarius Spiral Arm. ApJ 887(1):L7. https://doi.org/10.3847/
2041-8213/ab58d4, arXiv:1911.08536 [astro-ph.GA]
Shimwell TW, Hardcastle MJ, Tasse C, et al (2026) The LOFAR Two-metre Sky Sur-
vey: VII. Third Data Release. A&A 707:A198. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/
202557749, arXiv:2602.15949 [astro-ph.GA]
Short MB, Higdon DM, Kronberg PP. (2007) Estimation of Faraday Rotation Mea-
sures of the Near Galactic Sky Using Gaussian Process Models. Bayesian Analysis
2(4):665–680. https://doi.org/10.1214/07-BA226
Shukurov A (2004) Introduction to galactic dynamos. arXiv e-prints astro-ph/0411739.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0411739, arXiv:astro-ph/0411739 [astro-
ph]
Shukurov A, Rodrigues LFS, Bushby PJ, et al (2019) A physical approach to mod-
elling large-scale galactic magnetic fields. A&A 623:A113. https://doi.org/10.1051/
0004-6361/201834642, arXiv:1809.03595 [astro-ph.GA]
Shukurov AM, Subramanian K (2021) Astrophysical Magnetic Fields: From Galax-
ies to the Early Universe. Cambridge University Press, https://doi.org/10.1017/
9781139046657
Simard-Normandin M, Kronberg PP (1980) Rotation measures and the galactic
magnetic field. ApJ 242:74–94. https://doi.org/10.1086/158445
69

Simonetti JH, Cordes JM, Spangler SR (1984) Small-scale variations in the galac-
tic magnetic field : the rotation measure structure function and birefringence in
interstellar scintillations. ApJ 284:126–134. https://doi.org/10.1086/162391
Skalidis R, Pelgrims V (2019) Local Bubble contribution to the 353-GHz dust
polarized emission. A&A 631:L11. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201936547,
arXiv:1908.08706 [astro-ph.GA]
Skalidis R, Tassis K (2021) High-accuracy estimation of magnetic field strength in
the interstellar medium from dust polarization. A&A 647:A186. https://doi.org/10.
1051/0004-6361/202039779, arXiv:2010.15141 [astro-ph.GA]
Slavin JD, Cox DP (1992) Completing the Evolution of Supernova Remnants and
Their Bubbles. ApJ 392:131. https://doi.org/10.1086/171412
Smith FG (1968) Measurement of the Interstellar Magnetic Field. Nature
218(5139):325–326. https://doi.org/10.1038/218325a0
Sobey C, Bilous AV, Grießmeier JM, et al (2019) Low-frequency Faraday rota-
tion measures towards pulsars using LOFAR: probing the 3D Galactic halo
magnetic field. MNRAS 484(3):3646–3664. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stz214,
arXiv:1901.07738 [astro-ph.GA]
Sokoloff D, Shukurov A (1990) Regular magnetic fields in coronae of spiral galaxies.
Nature 347(6288):51–53. https://doi.org/10.1038/347051a0
Soler JD, Hennebelle P, Martin PG, et al (2013) An Imprint of Molecular Cloud
Magnetization in the Morphology of the Dust Polarized Emission. ApJ 774(2):128.
https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/774/2/128, arXiv:1303.1830 [astro-ph.GA]
Soler JD, Beuther H, Rugel M, et al (2019) Histogram of oriented gradients: a tech-
nique for the study of molecular cloud formation. A&A 622:A166. https://doi.org/
10.1051/0004-6361/201834300, arXiv:1809.08338 [astro-ph.GA]
Stein W (1966) Infrared Radiation from Interstellar Grains. ApJ 144:318. https://doi.
org/10.1086/148606
Steininger T, Enßlin TA, Greiner M, et al (2018) Inferring Galactic magnetic
field model parameters using IMAGINE - An Interstellar MAGnetic field INfer-
ence Engine. arXiv e-prints arXiv:1801.04341. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1801.
04341, arXiv:1801.04341 [astro-ph.IM]
Stil J, Wityk N, Ouyed R, et al (2009) Three-dimensional Simulations of Magne-
tized Superbubbles: New Insights into the Importance of MHD Effects on Observed
Quantities. ApJ 701(1):330–347. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/701/1/330,
arXiv:0807.0057 [astro-ph]
70

Stil JM, Taylor AR, Dickey JM, et al (2006) The VLA Galactic Plane Survey. AJ
132(3):1158–1176. https://doi.org/10.1086/505940, arXiv:astro-ph/0605422 [astro-
ph]
Stil JM, Taylor AR, Sunstrum C (2011) Structure in the Rotation Measure Sky.
ApJ 726(1):4. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/726/1/4, arXiv:1010.5299 [astro-
ph.GA]
Stix M (1975) The galactic dynamo. A&A 42(1):85–89
Strong AW, Moskalenko IV, Ptuskin VS (2007) Cosmic-Ray Propagation and Inter-
actions in the Galaxy. Annu Rev Nucl Part Sci 57(1):285–327. https://doi.org/10.
1146/annurev.nucl.57.090506.123011, arXiv:astro-ph/0701517 [astro-ph]
Subramanian K (2016) The origin, evolution and signatures of primordial mag-
netic fields. Rep Prog Phys 79(7):076901. https://doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/79/7/
076901, arXiv:1504.02311 [astro-ph.CO]
Subramanian K (2019) From Primordial Seed Magnetic Fields to the Galac-
tic Dynamo. Galaxies 7(2):47. https://doi.org/10.3390/galaxies7020047,
arXiv:1903.03744 [astro-ph.CO]
Sun X, Haverkorn M, Carretti E, et al (2025) The Southern Twenty-centimetre All-
sky Polarization Survey (STAPS): Survey description and maps. A&A 694:A169.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202453326, arXiv:2501.14203 [astro-ph.GA]
Sun XH, Reich W, Waelkens A, et al (2008) Radio observational constraints on Galac-
tic 3D-emission models. A&A 477(2):573–592. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:
20078671, arXiv:0711.1572 [astro-ph]
Sun XH, Rudnick L, Akahori T, et al (2015) Comparison of Algorithms for Determina-
tion of Rotation Measure and Faraday Structure. I. 1100-1400 MHz. AJ 149(2):60.
https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-6256/149/2/60, arXiv:1409.4151 [astro-ph.IM]
Tassis K, Ramaprakash AN, Readhead ACS, et al (2018) PASIPHAE: A high-Galactic-
latitude, high-accuracy optopolarimetric survey. arXiv e-prints arXiv:1810.05652.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1810.05652, arXiv:1810.05652 [astro-ph.IM]
Taylor AR, Stil JM, Sunstrum C (2009) A Rotation Measure Image of the Sky. ApJ
702(2):1230–1236. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/702/2/1230
Terral P, Ferri` ere K (2017) Constraints from Faraday rotation on the magnetic field
structure in the Galactic halo. A&A 600:A29. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/
201629572, arXiv:1611.10222 [astro-ph.GA]
71

Thomson AJM, Galvin TJ, Duchesne SW, et al (2026) The Rapid ASKAP
Continuum Survey VII: Spectra and Polarisation In Cutouts of Extragalac-
tic Sources (SPICE-RACS) Second Data Release – Unveiling the Magnetised
Sky. arXiv e-prints arXiv:2605.16917. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2605.16917,
arXiv:2605.16917 [astro-ph.GA]
Thomson RC, Nelson AH (1980) The interpretation of pulsar rotation measures and
the magnetic field of the galaxy. MNRAS 191:863–870. https://doi.org/10.1093/
mnras/191.4.863
Tritsis A, Panopoulou GV, Mouschovias TC, et al (2015) Magnetic field-gas density
relation and observational implications revisited. MNRAS 451(4):4384–4396. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stv1133, arXiv:1505.05508 [astro-ph.GA]
Tsouros A, Edenhofer G, Enßlin T, et al (2024) Reconstructing Galactic magnetic
fields from local measurements for backtracking ultra-high-energy cosmic rays. A&A
681:A111. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202346423, arXiv:2303.10099 [astro-
ph.HE]
Turi´ c L, Jeli´ c V, Jaspers R, et al (2021) Multi-tracer analysis of straight depolarisation
canals in the surroundings of the 3C 196 field. A&A 654:A5. https://doi.org/10.
1051/0004-6361/202141071, arXiv:2108.10679 [astro-ph.GA]
Turner MS, Widrow LM (1988) Inflation-produced, large-scale magnetic fields.
Phys. Rev. D 37(10):2743–2754. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.37.2743
Unger M, Farrar GR (2023) The Coherent Magnetic Field of the Milky
Way. arXiv e-prints arXiv:2311.12120. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2311.12120,
arXiv:2311.12120 [astro-ph.GA]
Uppal N, Ganesh S, Pelgrims V, et al (2024) Linear polarization study of open clusters
in the anticenter direction: Signature of the spiral arms. A&A 690:A49. https://doi.
org/10.1051/0004-6361/202449537, arXiv:2408.05603 [astro-ph.GA]
Uppal N, Tassis K, Pavlidou V, et al (2026) TRIShUL: Technique for Reconstructing
magnetic Interstellar Structure Using starLight polarization. A&A 705:A63. https:
//doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202556774, arXiv:2510.25911 [astro-ph.GA]
Vachaspati T (2021) Progress on cosmological magnetic fields. Rep Prog Phys
84(7):074901. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6633/ac03a9, arXiv:2010.10525 [astro-
ph.CO]
Vainshtein SI, Ruzmaikin AA (1971) Generation of the Large-Scale Galactic Magnetic
Field. AZh 48:902
Van Eck CL, Brown JC, Stil JM, et al (2011) Modeling the Magnetic Field
in the Galactic Disk Using New Rotation Measure Observations from the
72

Very Large Array. ApJ 728(2):97. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/728/2/97,
arXiv:1012.2938 [astro-ph.GA]
Van Eck CL, Haverkorn M, Alves MIR, et al (2017) Faraday tomography of the
local interstellar medium with LOFAR: Galactic foregrounds towards IC 342. A&A
597:A98. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201629707, arXiv:1612.00710 [astro-
ph.GA]
Van Eck CL, Haverkorn M, Alves MIR, et al (2019) Diffuse polarized emission in the
LOFAR Two-meter Sky Survey. A&A 623:A71. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/
201834777, arXiv:1902.00531 [astro-ph.GA]
van Loo S, Hartquist TW, Falle SAEG (2012) Magnetic fields and star formation.
Astronomy and Geophysics 53(5):5.31–5.36. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-4004.
2012.53531.x, arXiv:1207.7343 [astro-ph.GA]
Vanderwoude S, West JL, Gaensler BM, et al (2024) Prototype Faraday Rotation
Measure Catalogs from the Polarisation Sky Survey of the Universe’s Magnetism
(POSSUM) Pilot Observations. AJ 167(5):226. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/
ad2fc8, arXiv:2403.15668 [astro-ph.GA]
Vergely JL, Valette B, Lallement R, et al (2010) Spatial distribution of interstellar dust
in the Sun’s vicinity. Comparison with neutral sodium-bearing gas. A&A 518:A31.
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/200913962, arXiv:1002.4578 [astro-ph.GA]
Versteeg MJF (2025) The Galactic magnetic field: Insights from Starlight Polarization.
PhD thesis, Radboud University Nijmegen, Netherlands
Versteeg MJF, Magalh˜ aes AM, Haverkorn M, et al (2023) Interstellar Polarization
Survey. II. General Interstellar Medium. AJ 165(3):87. https://doi.org/10.3847/
1538-3881/aca8fd, arXiv:2212.05985 [astro-ph.GA]
Versteeg MJF, Angarita Y, Magalh˜ aes AM, et al (2024) Magnetic Fields in the
Southern Coalsack and Beyond. AJ 167(4):177. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/
ad2e08, arXiv:2402.17313 [astro-ph.GA]
Weibel ES (1959) Spontaneously growing transverse waves in a plasma due to an
anisotropic velocity distribution. Phys Rev Lett 2:83–84. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.2.83
West JL, Safi-Harb S, Jaffe T, et al (2016) The connection between supernova
remnants and the Galactic magnetic field: A global radio study of the axisym-
metric sample. A&A 587:A148. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201527001,
arXiv:1510.08536 [astro-ph.GA]
Wilkin SL, Barenghi CF, Shukurov A (2007) Magnetic Structures Produced by
the Small-Scale Dynamo. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99(13):134501. https://doi.org/10.1103/
73

PhysRevLett.99.134501, arXiv:astro-ph/0702261 [astro-ph]
Wolleben M, Fletcher A, Landecker TL, et al (2010) Antisymmetry in the Faraday
Rotation Sky Caused by a Nearby Magnetized Bubble. ApJ 724(1):L48–L52. https:
//doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/724/1/L48, arXiv:1011.0341 [astro-ph.GA]
Wolleben M, Landecker TL, Carretti E, et al (2019) The Global Magneto-Ionic
Medium Survey: Polarimetry of the Southern Sky from 300 to 480 MHz.
AJ 158(1):44. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ab22b0, arXiv:1905.12685 [astro-
ph.GA]
Wolleben M, Landecker TL, Douglas KA, et al (2021) The Global Magneto-ionic
Medium Survey: A Faraday Depth Survey of the Northern Sky Covering 1280-1750
MHz. AJ 162(1):35. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/abf7c1, arXiv:2106.00945
[astro-ph.GA]
Xu J, Han JL (2014) A compiled catalog of rotation measures of radio point sources.
Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics 14(8):942-958. https://doi.org/10.1088/
1674-4527/14/8/005, arXiv:1405.1920 [astro-ph.GA]
Xu J, Han JL (2019) Magnetic fields in the solar vicinity and in the Galactic halo.
MNRAS 486(3):4275–4289. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stz1060
Xu J, Han JL (2024) The huge magnetic toroids in the Milky Way halo. arXiv e-prints
arXiv:2404.02038. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.02038, arXiv:2404.02038
[astro-ph.GA]
Xu J, Han J, Wang P, et al (2022) Peering into the Milky Way by FAST: III. Magnetic
fields in the Galactic halo and farther spiral arms revealed by the Faraday effect of
faint pulsars. Sci China Phys Mech Astron 65(12):129704. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11433-022-2033-2, arXiv:2211.11302 [astro-ph.GA]
Xu S, Zhang B (2016) Interpretation of the Structure Function of Rotation Measure in
the Interstellar Medium. ApJ 824(2):113. https://doi.org/10.3847/0004-637X/824/
2/113, arXiv:1604.05445 [astro-ph.GA]
Yan H, Lazarian A (2006) Polarization of Absorption Lines as a Diagnostics of Circum-
stellar, Interstellar, and Intergalactic Magnetic Fields: Fine-Structure Atoms. ApJ
653(2):1292–1313. https://doi.org/10.1086/508704, arXiv:astro-ph/0611281 [astro-
ph]
Yang Y, Yan H, Wang L, et al (2022) Spectropolarimetry of the Thermonuclear
Supernova SN 2021rhu: High Calcium Polarization 79 Days after Peak Luminos-
ity. ApJ 939(1):18. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac8d5f, arXiv:2208.12862
[astro-ph.HE]
74

Yuen KH, Lazarian A (2017) Tracing Interstellar Magnetic Field Using Velocity Gra-
dient Technique: Application to Atomic Hydrogen Data. ApJ 837(2):L24. https:
//doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/aa6255, arXiv:1701.07944 [astro-ph.GA]
Zaroubi S, Jelic V, de Bruyn AG, et al (2015) Galactic interstellar filaments as probed
by LOFAR and Planck. MNRAS 454:L46–L50. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnrasl/
slv123, arXiv:1508.06652 [astro-ph.GA]
Zeeman P (1897) On the Influence of Magnetism on the Nature of the Light Emitted
by a Substance. ApJ 5:332. https://doi.org/10.1086/140355
Zenko T, Nagata T, Kurita M, et al (2020) Magnetic field structure of the Galactic
plane from differential analysis of interstellar polarization. PASJ 72(2):27. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/pasj/psaa001, arXiv:2003.03059 [astro-ph.GA]
Zhang B (2020) The physical mechanisms of fast radio bursts. Nature 587(7832):45–53.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2828-1, arXiv:2011.03500 [astro-ph.HE]
Zhang H, Gangi M, Leone F, et al (2020) Discovery of Ground-state Absorption Line
Polarization and Sub-Gauss Magnetic Field in the Post-AGB Binary System 89
Her. ApJ 902(1):L7. https://doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/abb8e1, arXiv:1903.08675
[astro-ph.GA]
Zhang J, Liu Z (2025) Revealing the spectral properties of magnetic turbulence by
synchrotron polarization gradients. arXiv e-prints arXiv:2505.04017. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.04017, arXiv:2505.04017 [astro-ph.HE]
Zhang JF, Wang RY (2022) Measurement of MHD Turbulence Properties by Syn-
chrotron Radiation Techniques. Front Astron Space Sci 9:869370. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fspas.2022.869370, arXiv:2203.09154 [astro-ph.HE]
Zucker C, Goodman AA, Alves J, et al (2022) Star formation near the Sun is driven
by expansion of the Local Bubble. Nature 601(7893):334–337. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41586-021-04286-5, arXiv:2201.05124 [astro-ph.GA]
Zucker C, Redfield S, Starecheski S, et al (2025) The Origin of the Cluster of Local
Interstellar Clouds. arXiv e-prints arXiv:2504.00093. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2504.00093, arXiv:2504.00093 [astro-ph.GA]
Zweibel EG (1990) Magnetic Field Line Tangling and Polarization Measurements in
Clumpy Molecular Gas. ApJ 362:545. https://doi.org/10.1086/169291
Zweibel EG (1996) Polarimetry and the Theory of the Galactic Magnetic Field. In:
Roberge WG, Whittet DCB (eds) Polarimetry of the Interstellar Medium, ASP
Conference Series, vol 97. Astronomical Society of the Pacific, San Francisco, p 486
75

Zweibel EG (2015) Ambipolar Diffusion. In: Lazarian A, de Gouveia Dal Pino EM,
Melioli C (eds) Magnetic Fields in Diffuse Media, Astrophysics and Space Science
Library, vol 407. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, p 285–309, https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-662-44625-6 11
76