Title: GraphShed: a parameter-free Graph-based waterShed group finder
Authors: P. Ghafour, S. Ansarifard, M. H. Jalali Kanafi, S. M. S. Movahed
Published: 2026-06-02
Categories: astro-ph.CO, astro-ph.IM, physics.comp-ph

GraphShed: a parameter-free Graph-based waterShed group finder
P. Ghafour,1 S. Ansarifard,2 M. H. Jalali Kanafi, 1, 2 and S. M. S. Movahed ∗1, 3, 4
1Department of Physics, Shahid Beheshti University, 1983969411, Tehran, Iran ∗
2School of Physics, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), P. O. Box 19395-5531, Tehran, Iran
3School of Astronomy, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), P. O. Box 19395-5531, Tehran, Iran
4Department of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Lahore,
1-KM Defence Road, Lahore 54000, Pakistan †
(Dated: June 3, 2026)
In this study, a parameter-free group-finding method named GraphShed is introduced and evalu-
ated using the IllustrisTNG100-1 simulation. The method utilizes top-down watershed segmentation
applied to the set of separated Voronoi-induced graphs, facilitating the recognition of aggregations
directly from the density field without tunable parameters or density thresholds. A galaxy group
catalog constructed with GraphShed is compared with a Friends-of-Friends catalog generated from
the same dataset. The M200 distributions of the two catalogs are statistically consistent; neverthe-
less, other structural properties, including R200, sphericity, compactness, spin, and centroid shift
show significant differences, suggesting that GraphShed could improve several internal characteris-
tics of the identified systems. Conversely, the two-point correlation function and the mass function
of the identified galaxy systems, derived from the aforementioned methods, show consistency. A
velocity-based classification of interacting pairs indicates that GraphShed provides improved sepa-
ration of nearby over-densities which might otherwise be considered as components of a single larger
system in position-only methods due to their positional proximity. These results demonstrate that
GraphShed effectively preserves cosmological statistics while offering a more refined detection of
galaxy systems and their dynamical interactions.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cosmic structure originates from primordial quan-
tum fluctuations ([ 58]), which seeded density per-
turbations in the early Universe ([ 12, 44]). Under
gravitational instability, these perturbations grow
and evolve into the non-linear matter distribution
([78, 89]). Dark matter halos form within this evolv-
ing density field, and galaxies, as luminous tracers
residing in those halos, provide a biased tracer to the
underlying matter distribution and the cosmological
information encoded in it ([69]).
The spatial distribution of galaxies in the Universe
is not uniform. Instead, galaxies are placed in a com-
plex and interconnected network known as the cos-
mic web ([18, 29]). This intuition has emerged from
extensive observational efforts that have mapped
the three-dimensional distribution of galaxies with
increasing precision. Major surveys, including the
2dFGRS ([25]), SDSS ([ 86]), and more recent and
ongoing programs such as the DESI ([ 24]), Euclid
([15]), and the LSST ([60]), have provided rich mul-
tidimensional datasets that clearly reveal the web-
like and hierarchical nature of cosmic structure.
∗ P.Ghafour@outlook.com ansarifard@ipm.ir
m_jalalikanafi@sbu.ac.ir m.s.movahed@ipm.ir
† Corresponding author
In addition, this cosmic-web is also evident in
datasets from large cosmological simulations em-
ploying different sets of cosmological parameters in-
ferred from COBE ([80]), WMAP ([82]), and Planck
([2]) collaborations. Prominent examples include
the Magneticum simulations ([17, 30]), Millennium
series (MS: [ 84]; MS-II: [ 19]; MS-TNG: [ 66]) and
the Illustris suite ([ 64]; TNG: [ 65]). These simu-
lations have contributed significantly to identifying
and characterizing the large-scale structure by re-
producing the emergence of web-like matter distri-
butions within the framework of gravitational struc-
ture formation.
These observational and numerical studies consis-
tently demonstrate that the intricate cosmic network
is composed of dense knots associated with galaxy
groups and clusters, elongated filaments connecting
these nodes, and vast under-dense regions known as
cosmic voids ([57, 69]).
Despite their broad applications, there is no con-
sensus on the formal definition of the cosmic web
structures, and different methods exist that apply
distinct identification criteria to these datasets (e.g.,
[43, 70, 87]).
A broad class of methods aims to classify the
cosmic web as a whole. Among these, physically
motivated approaches rely on dynamical, geometric
and topological properties of the underlying density
field, which can be constructed using various phys-
arXiv:2606.03790v1  [astro-ph.CO]  2 Jun 2026

ical proxies and observables such as mass, luminos-
ity, etc. For instance, tensor-based methods such
as the tidal tensor formalism (T-web; [ 45]) and the
velocity shear tensor formalism (V-web; [ 73]) clas-
sify regions according to the eigenvalues of the cor-
responding tensors, typically relative to predefined
thresholds, thereby separating the distribution into
nodes, filaments, sheets, and voids. Also, topolog-
ical frameworks quantify the global morphology of
the cosmic web using persistent homology and inte-
gral geometry. Key descriptors, such as Betti num-
bers, Euler characteristics, and Minkowski function-
als (e.g., [ 76]), have been characterized for Gaus-
sian random fields, relating their expected values
to critical point statistics and persistence diagrams
(e.g., [ 75]). In contrast, graph-based approaches
construct networks from the galaxy distribution and
identify structures using network statistics such as
node centrality, connectivity, and related topolog-
ical features, often combined with threshold crite-
ria on these properties to distinguish different cos-
mic web morphologies (e.g., [ 47, 48]). Alternative
methods include multi-scale morphology-based ap-
proaches (e.g., [6, 21]), which classify structures us-
ing the hierarchical features of the density field but
remain explicitly dependent on smoothing scales and
eigenvalue thresholds; and phase-space dynamical
approaches (e.g., [36]), which detect shell-crossings
and are largely free of density thresholds.
In addition, several methods have been developed
to specifically identify individual structures within
the cosmic web. For instance, cosmic voids could be
detected by approaches that incorporate watershed-
based transforms (e.g., [72]) and genetic algorithms
(e.g., [41]), which operate on the density field with
multiple parameters. Cosmic filaments can also be
extracted using methods, such as topological persis-
tence ([81]), which traces elongated structures in the
density field and depends on significance thresholds
to filter topological features; or graph-based strate-
gies (e.g., [ 40]), which employ techniques such as
minimum spanning trees and the local field of the
dataset while operating in a parameter-free manner.
Beyond the methods noted earlier, several ap-
proaches have been developed to construct group
catalogs which have been employed in various stud-
ies, ranging from galaxy evolution in dense envi-
ronments (e.g., [33]), dwarf satellite statistics (e.g.,
[88]), halo assembly bias (e.g., [27]), the calibration
of halo occupation statistics (e.g., [ 93]) and test-
ing galaxy-halo connection models (e.g., [ 32]), to
constraints on cosmological parameters (e.g., [ 7]).
These include graph-based methods such as employ-
ing the Minimum Spanning Tree (e.g., [ 10]), where
galaxies are connected through a tree that mini-
mizes the total edge length and groups are defined
by removing edges longer than a prescribed link-
ing length. Other approaches rely on the concept
of shared nearest neighbors (SNN), in which galax-
ies are associated based on the overlap of their k-
nearest neighbor (e.g., [34, 50]), introducing param-
eters such as the number of neighbors and similarity
thresholds. Solely position-based methods, such as
the DBSCAN ([35]) and its special case, the tradi-
tional Friends-of-Friends (FoF; [28]) algorithm, iden-
tify groups through spatial proximity criteria de-
fined by linking lengths or neighborhood radii. As
a result, their ability to capture the full physical
complexity of cosmic structures is limited. They
might combine nearby over-densities; or connect
marginally aligned, filamentary bridges of galaxies,
causing these structures to be linked as a single ob-
ject ([42]). This can result in identifying an extended
system with a dynamically complex configuration.
In this context, irregular clusters are a well-known
example that are out of hydrostatic equilibrium and
influenced by non‑thermal pressure. Such systems
complicate the extraction of reliable physical prop-
erties and introduce challenges for both cosmological
and astrophysical inference ([ 4]). In addition, the
performance of position-based methods remains in-
herently sensitive to the adopted parameter values.
A comprehensive review of group-finder algorithms
used in galaxy simulations is provided by [54].
As discussed above, the majority of existing
group-finder methods rely on one or more free pa-
rameters or threshold values. These parameters
must either be predefined or determined through ad-
ditional calibration procedures, which can increase
computational complexity and resource demands.
Although some efforts have been made to adapt pa-
rameter choices to the redshift of the dataset (e.g.,
[49]), the resulting group catalogs remain sensitive
to these selections. Consequently, the dependence of
the identified structures on tunable thresholds intro-
duces uncertainties and could affect the robustness
of the inferred physical properties.
These limitations highlight the need for an al-
gorithm that operates directly on the density field
of the dataset, enabling it to capture the intrinsic
features and complexities of the galaxy distribution
through its sensitivity to variations in the underlying
density field. Such a method should be independent
of arbitrary thresholds and free of tunable parame-
ters, minimizing the uncertainties introduced by pa-
rameter choices. In addition, it should be straight-
forward, easy to implement and computationally ef-
ficient, enabling its application to large cosmological
2

datasets. An approach with these properties would
provide a more robust framework for group identifi-
cation and could potentially reveal additional physi-
cal insights from the resulting group catalogs that
remain inaccessible to traditional and parameter-
dependent methods.
In the presented study, motivated by the consider-
ations outlined above, a parameter‑free, graph‑based
watershed approach named GraphShed, is intro-
duced and detailed in Section III. Utilizing this
method, the group catalog produced by GraphShed
is compared with that obtained from the traditional
position‑based FoF approach, in order to probe sev-
eral aspects of the resulting group catalogs:
(I) How the structural properties of groups detected
by the density‑field–based GraphShed method com-
pare with those from a position‑only approach, is as-
sessed through several structural diagnostics of both
group catalogs (Section IV A).
(II) How the adoption of GraphShed as the group
finder influences large‑scale statistical measures of
the group distribution is examined through com-
parisons of the mass function and the unweighted
two‑point correlation function derived from the two
catalogs (Section IV B).
(III) How the sensitivity of GraphShed to varia-
tions in the underlying density field reveals a differ-
ent population of dynamical interactions including
mergers, accretions, and flybys, is determined us-
ing a velocity-based classification approach, which
is introduced and applied to both catalogs (Section
IV C).
The dataset used in this work is described in Sec-
tion II, and the main findings and conclusions are
summarized in Section V.
II. SAMPLE SELECTION:
ILLUSTRISTNG100-1
The dataset employed in this study is drawn from
the gravo-magnetohydrodynamical IllustrisTNG
simulation ([ 65]), which follows the coupled evo-
lution of dark matter, gas, stars, and black holes
across cosmic time, from redshift z = 127 to z = 0.
The simulation is executed using the Arepo moving-
mesh framework ([ 83]) and adopts cosmological
parameters consistent with the Planck results ([1]).
These parameters include density values of Ωm =
0.3089 for matter, Ωb = 0.0486 for baryons, and ΩΛ
= 0.6911 for the cosmological constant, along with
a scalar spectral index ns = 0 .9667, the amplitude
of matter fluctuations σ8 = 0 .8159, and a Hubble
constant H = 100h (km/s/Mpc) with h = 0.6774.
The analysis is based on the highest-resolution re-
alization within the IllustrisTNG100-1 suite, which
spans a co-moving volume cube with a∼ 75 (Mpc/h)
side length and features the baryonic and dark mat-
ter mass resolutions of1.4×106M⊙ and 7.5×106M⊙,
respectively. This combination of spatial extent and
resolution provides a framework for both the robust
identification of galaxy groups and clusters and the
detailed examination of their diverse characteristics.
From the full IllustrisTNG100-1 galaxy catalog,
galaxies are selected based on three criteria: an r-
band magnitude brighter than approximately−16, a
stellar mass exceeding 108 M⊙ and a redshift of z =
0 (snapshot 99). Applying these thresholds yields a
final sample of roughly 41000 galaxies.
III. METHODOLOGY:
GRAPHSHED GROUP FINDER
In this section, the GraphShed group finder is in-
troduced as a parameter-free, easy to implement,
and computationally eﬀicient method. It operates
on a set of Voronoi-induced graphs and employs a
Watershed-based identification process without re-
quiring the adjustment or calibration of free pa-
rameters or threshold values. Owing to its struc-
tural simplicity, GraphShed can be applied to large
galaxy catalogs while requiring reasonable compu-
tational demands. The algorithm proceeds through
three main phases that are applied sequentially to
the input galaxy catalog. These phases are summa-
rized in Algorithm 1 and in the schematic diagram
shown in Figure1, and are described in detail below.
A. Grid points & Voronoi Tessellation
The initial phase of GraphShed consists of four
steps. In the first step, a grid of points is inserted
into the galaxy catalog. The characteristic spacing
between adjacent grid points along each spatial di-
rection is denoted by ℓ, which is determined by the
mean inter-particle separation, due to the effects of
shot noise:
ℓ ≡
3
√
VT
n (1)
where n denotes the total number of galaxies in
the input catalog and VT represents the total back-
ground volume of the dataset.
These grids are treated as massless points and
therefore do not contribute to the physical density
3

Algorithm 1: GraphShed group -f inder
Input: {xi, yi, zi, mi}N
i=1: coordinates and stellar
masses of N galaxies in the catalog.
Result: Group identifier Gi for each galaxy i.
# Grid points & Voronoi tessellation
1 Construct the set of galaxy positions Pi = (xi, yi, zi).
2 Calculate the characteristic grid spacing ℓ by
Equation(1 ).
3 Add a 3D grid with spacing ℓ to the input dataset.
4 Perform Voronoi tessellation on the set of galaxies and
grid points → Voronoi cells Cj for each point j with
vertices Xj .
5 foreach Voronoi cell Ci of galaxy i do
6 if ∃ χ ∈ Xi such that χ is outside the dataset
boundary or at infinity then
7 Discard Ci.
8 else
9 Vi ← Volume of Ci computed via
ConvexHull .
10 foreach Galaxy i do
11 Compute the associated mass density by
Equation(2 ).
# Graph Construction:
12 Compute the linking length L.
13 Initialize an un-directed graph G = (A, B).
14 foreach Pair of galaxies ( a, b) do
15 if |Xa ∩ Xb| ≥ 2 then
16 Compute distance Dab ←∥ P a − Pb ∥.
17 if Dab ≤ L then
18 Add edge (a, b) to graph G.
# Watershed Group Identification:
19 Sort galaxies in descending order of their
corresponding cell density ρi.
20 Initialize and mark the group identifier of all galaxies
as unassigned: Gi ← ∅.
21 foreach Galaxy k in sorted order do
22 if Gk is already assigned then
23 continue.
24 else
25 Initialize a new group Ξ = {k} with GΞ = ξ.
26 repeat
27 foreach Galaxy q ∈ Ξ do
28 N (q) ← {f | (f, q) ∈ G} .
29 foreach Galaxy f ∈ N (q) do
30 if Gf = ∅ then
31 if ρf ≤ ρq then
32 Add f to Ξ.
33 until No new galaxy is added to Ξ
34 foreach Galaxy ν ∈ Ξ do
35 Set Gν ← ξ.
36 Return group identifiers Gi for all galaxies.
field; however, their inclusion provides several ad-
vantages for the tessellation of the dataset space in
the subsequent step. First, it modifies the shape and
geometric properties of Voronoi cells by suppressing
FIG. 1. Schematic illustration of the main phases in-
volved in the GraphShed group finder. In the first panel
(top-left), grid points with characteristic spacing ℓ are
added to the galaxy distribution. Grid points and galax-
ies are shown as red and black dots, respectively. In the
second panel (top-right), the dataset space is partitioned
into distinct cells by applying the Voronoi tessellation to
the combined set of galaxies and grid points. The ver-
tices of the Voronoi cells are shown as blue dots. In the
third panel ( bottom-right), the set of Voronoi-induced
graphs are constructed using the shared-cell vertices and
the linking length L, with graph edges shown in red. In
the final panel (bottom-left), the Watershed approach is
illustrated. Arrows indicate the progression of the al-
gorithm as neighboring galaxies are incorporated into
groups. Each identified group is shown in a distinct color
and enclosed by dashed lines.
excessively large cells associated with a data point
and reducing irregular, sharply edged cell morpholo-
gies. This leads to a more reliable estimation of cell
volumes. Second, it increases the total number of
Voronoi cells, thereby enhancing the spatial coverage
and accessibility across the dataset space. Third, it
modifies boundary conditions by refining the shape
of marginal cells near the dataset edges. In par-
ticular, it reduces the occurrence of cells associated
with galaxies that contain vertices at infinity and
mitigates sharply edged peripheral cells, ultimately
minimizing the loss of usable volume in boundary
regions. These advantages are discussed in detail by
[41].
In the second step, GraphShed constructs the
Voronoi tessellation ([ 8]) of the combined set of
4

galaxies and inserted grid points. The tessellation
is performed in three-dimensional space using the
standard Euclidean metric. To accomplish this, the
Voronoi diagram of the distribution must be gen-
erated. A Voronoi diagram partitions the dataset
space into cells surrounding a specified set of objects
(in this case, the union of galaxies and grid points).
Each point is then associated with a unique Voronoi
cell Cj, defined by its corresponding vertices and en-
compassing all regions of the dataset space that are
closer to that point than to any other. These vertices
are shown in Figure 1 as blue dots.
Once the Voronoi cells and their corresponding
vertices have been identified, certain marginal cells
must be removed ([ 41]). GraphShed first discards
all cells containing one or more vertices at infin-
ity, as such cells would possess infinite volume when
computing individual cell volumes (step 3). Subse-
quently, any cell with vertices located outside the
dataset boundaries is excluded. These cells often
exhibit large or irregular shapes that could impact
their computed volumes and, consequently, the re-
sulting density estimates.
The third step focuses on computing the volumes
of the cells associated with the galaxies, excluding
those corresponding to the inserted grid points. To
perform these calculations, GraphShed employs the
Quickhull algorithm ([9]) to construct the Minimum
Convex Polygon, or convex hull, surrounding each
cell. This construction uses the coordinates of the
vertices identified during the Voronoi tessellation in
the previous step.
The convex hull of a set of points is defined as the
smallest convex polyhedron that fully encloses all
points in the set ([ 37]). To obtain the convex hull
of a cell, the convex set of its Voronoi-derived ver-
tices is first computed, after which the hull is defined
as the minimal convex polyhedron whose boundary
contains every vertex of the cell. Once the convex
hull is established, its volume is calculated by decom-
posing the polyhedron into tetrahedrons ([ 90]). A
random interior point is selected, and tetrahedrons
are formed by connecting this point to the vertices
of each face. Summing the volumes of these tetra-
hedrons yields the total cell volume Vi ([23]).
Then, GraphShed computes the mass density1 as-
sociated with each galaxy using the galaxy mass mi
1 The density field can be constructed using different physical
tracers, including dark matter mass, stellar mass (adopted
in this work), luminosity, etc., depending on the dataset
used.
and the volume of its corresponding Voronoi cellVi,
by:
ρi = mi
Vi
(2)
B. Graph Construction
In the second phase, GraphShed constructs the
set of separated graphs. To achieve this, the al-
gorithm first computes the linking length L. This
parameter is obtained by calculating the nearest-
neighbor distance for all galaxies and taking the
mean of those distances that are less than or equal
to the mean inter-particle separation (Equation (1)),
thereby mitigating the influence of galaxies located
in highly underdense regions.
There are two reasons for adopting this defini-
tion instead of the traditional approach, which se-
lects a fraction of the mean inter-particle separa-
tion (Equation (1); e.g., [11]). First, the traditional
method depends solely on the number density of the
dataset; thus, datasets with identical number densi-
ties but different clustering powers would yield the
same linking length. In contrast, the mean nearest-
neighbor distance inherently adapts to variations
in clustering: among datasets with similar num-
ber density, those exhibiting stronger clustering will
have shorter nearest-neighbor distances and there-
fore smaller linking lengths. Second, the traditional
approach requires tuning a free parameter, the mul-
tiplier applied to the mean inter-particle separation,
which is not intrinsically tied to the dataset’s spa-
tial distribution. Different choices of this multiplier
can alter the final results, whereas the mean nearest-
neighbor distance requires no such adjustable pa-
rameters.
Then, GraphShed uses the Voronoi cells corre-
sponding to the galaxies Ci to identify each galaxy’s
neighbors. The algorithm examines the vertices of
the Voronoi cells, and whenever two cells share two
or more common vertices (|Xa ∩ Xb| ≥ 2), the galax-
ies associated with those cells are considered neigh-
bors. If the distance between any two neighboring
galaxies is less than or equal to the linking length
(Dab <= L), GraphShed adds an edge between that
pair of galaxies to the set of separated graphs.
C. Watershed Group Identification
In the final phase, GraphShed applies the Water-
shed method ([14, 31]) to the set of separated graphs
5

to identify groups of galaxies. The procedure be-
gins with the galaxy that possesses the highest cell
density in the dataset, the global maximum. Using
the graph constructed in the previous phase, the al-
gorithm identifies its neighboring galaxies and adds
those with densities less than or equal to that of
the current galaxy, following a top-down progres-
sion. This approach enables groups to grow out-
ward from density maxima, thereby differentiating
distinct nearby peaks in a manner similar to some
physical density-based group and subhalo finders
(e.g.,[42, 85]), rather than spuriously merging ad-
jacent structures, as occurs in methods that operate
solely based on the positions of galaxies (e.g., [35]).
This process is repeated for each newly added galaxy
and continues until no additional galaxies satisfy the
density condition or remain connected to the grow-
ing structure.
Once the identification process of a group is com-
plete, the algorithm proceeds to the next unassigned
global maximum in the density field and applies the
same procedure to identify another group. This con-
tinues until no galaxies remain that possess at least
one connected edge and therefore the potential to
form a distinct group.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This section presents the resulting group catalog
obtained from applying the GraphShed group finder,
as detailed in SectionIII, to the dataset described in
Section II. For the specified dataset, the characteris-
tic grid spacing as defined by Equation (1) and the
corresponding linking length metrics, are calculated
by GraphShed as ∼ 2.16 Mpc/h and ∼ 0.44 Mpc/h,
respectively.
For comparison, a group catalog is also con-
structed using the Friends-of-Friends (FoF) algo-
rithm ([28]). The FoF method is selected for com-
parison due to its widespread use in constructing
galaxy group and cluster catalogs in previous stud-
ies (e.g., [56, 62, 71]). FoF’s reliance on a position-
only approach, makes it well suited for highlighting
the differences between catalogs identified using a
physical density-based method and those obtained
from purely positional algorithms. In contrast to
GraphShed, the FoF method does not incorporate
any physical field, relies solely on galaxy positions
and identifies groups using a linking length metric.
This metric is typically defined as a constant fraction
(b) of the mean inter-particle separation (Equation
(1)). For this comparison,b = 0.2 is adopted, consis-
tent with previous studies incorporating galaxy cat-
alogs at redshift z = 0 (e.g., [63, 94]). This choice
corresponds to a linking length of ∼ 0.43 Mpc/h for
the FoF method.
The close values of the linking lengths used by
GraphShed and FoF for this dataset, make the com-
parison largely insensitive to effects arising from dif-
ferences in the adopted linking lengths by the two
methods.
Initially, structural properties of the groups iden-
tified by GraphShed and FoF are compared (Section
IV A), including R200, M200, sphericity, compact-
ness, spin parameter and centroid shift.
Subsequently, the large-scale statistical proper-
ties of the resulting catalogs are analyzed at Sec-
tion IV B. In particular, the halo mass functions
and two-point correlation functions derived from the
GraphShed and FoF catalogs are compared. This
analysis allows an assessment of whether differences
in the internal structure of the groups and clusters
identified by the two methods propagate to statisti-
cal measures describing the large-scale distribution
of matter.
Finally, Section IV C presents a comparison of
mergers, flybys, and accretion events detected in
the two catalogs. These interactions are determined
using a velocity‑based merger identification proce-
dure, introduced and applied to the GraphShed and
FoF group catalogs; enabling a direct comparison
of the resulting merger classifications obtained from
the two methods.
A. Structural Properties
For a consistent comparison between the catalogs
produced by the GraphShed and FoF methods us-
ing the dataset described in SectionII, those groups
containing more than or equal to 5 members are
considered. This restriction is adopted to avoid po-
tential misinterpretations arising from very small
groups. Such a minimum group richness threshold is
commonly adopted in cosmological and astrophysi-
cal studies (e.g., [ 38, 59]). With this criterion, the
number of detected groups is 1067 for GraphShed
and 987 for the FoF method. The group richness
(N) in these catalogs spans from small systems with
5 members to massive galaxy clusters containing up
to 211 and 402 galaxies for GraphShed and FoF, re-
spectively.
The difference in the maximum richness captured
by the two methods arises from the position-only
approach of the FoF algorithm, which might com-
bine multiple nearby over-densities into a single
group ([ 42]). In contrast, the sensitivity of the
6

FIG. 2. The main panel illustrates the distribution of
the R200 radius with respect to the stellar massM200 for
groups identified by the GraphShed and FoF methods, in
dark green and orange, respectively. The corresponding
logarithmic histograms of the M200 and R200 distribu-
tions are presented using the same color scheme in the
upper and right panels, respectively.
GraphShed method to variations in the density field
of the dataset, combined with its top-down water-
shed segmentation approach, could separate such
over-densities into distinct systems.
The comparison begins with the R200 and M200
parameters. The R200 is defined as the radius from
the Center-Of-Mass (COM) of a group within which
the density is approximately 200 times the back-
ground density. Accordingly, M200 corresponds to
the total stellar mass of galaxies contained within
the R200 radius. The distribution of these pa-
rameters for the resulting galaxy group catalogs of
GraphShed and FoF are shown in Figure 2. The
R200 radii of the GraphShed groups extend up to
approximately 1.78 Mpc/h, whereas those of the
FoF groups reach about 2.11 Mpc/h. Similarly,
the M200 mass range of the GraphShed and FoF
groups extends to approximately 12.51 and 12.79
log10(M⊙/h), respectively. These results suggest
that the FoF method constructs some relatively large
and massive clusters, whereas GraphShed segments
multiple over-dense regions that are grouped to-
gether by FoF. Consequently, this leads to reduced
upper bounds in the R200 radius and M200 mass
distributions of the GraphShed-identified galaxy
groups and clusters.
In addition, the corresponding two‑sided
Kolmogorov–Smirnov (here after noted as KS)
([61]) test yields the p‑values listed in the first
and second rows of Table I. The p-value obtained
for the R200 distributions indicates a statistically
significant difference between the two catalogs. In
contrast, the resulting p-value for the M200 distri-
butions suggests that the overall mass distributions
of the galaxy groups identified by GraphShed and
FoF are statistically similar.
TABLE I.Two-sided KS p-values for the distributions of
the structural characteristics of the group catalogs iden-
tified by the GraphShed and FoF methods.
Parameter p-value
R200 4.26 × 10−7
M200 0.92
Sphericity 8.58 × 10−5
Compactness 5.71 × 10−15
Spin 3.97 × 10−7
Centroid Shift 1.72 × 10−2
For the comparison of the shapes of the result-
ing galaxy groups and clusters, the sphericity ( Θ;
Equation (3)) and compactness ( ζ; Equation ( 4))
parameters are measured. The sphericity parameter
is defined as:
Θ ≡ c
a (3)
where a and c denote the largest and smallest eigen-
values of the group’s moment of inertia tensor ([45]).
Higher values of Θ correspond to more spherical
group morphologies. The sphericity values of the
galaxy groups in the GraphShed and FoF catalogs
extend up to 0.592 and 0.53, respectively, and are
shown in the top row of Figure 3 with respect to
the groups’ R200 radius and M200 mass. As illus-
trated in these panels, the sphericity of the groups
generally increases with increasing R200 and M200.
In addition, the groups identified by GraphShed are
generally more spherical than those identified by the
FoF method. The FoF catalog also contains sev-
eral groups with large R200 and M200 values that
exhibit relatively low sphericity, a feature that is not
present in the GraphShed group catalog. Addition-
ally, a two-sided KS test applied to the Θ distribu-
tions yields the p-value presented in the third row of
2 Including outliers, this value reaches 0.72.
7

Table I, indicating that the sphericity distributions
of the galaxy groups identified by GraphShed and
FoF are statistically different.
The compactness parameter is then defined as the
mean radial distance of the group members normal-
ized to the R200:
ζ ≡ 1
R200 × N
N∑
i=1
||⃗ ri − ⃗ rCOM || (4)
where ⃗ ri and ⃗ rCOM represent the position vectors of
the group members and the center of mass, respec-
tively. Lower values of ζ indicate that the member
galaxies are located closer to the COM, correspond-
ing to a more compact system.
The resulting compactness of the groups identified
by GraphShed and FoF is illustrated in the middle
row of Figure3 with respect to the groups’R200 and
M200. As shown in these panels, the groups iden-
tified by GraphShed generally exhibit lower ζ val-
ues and therefore higher compactness, compared to
those identified by the FoF method. The compact-
ness values extend to approximately 0.89 and 2.463
for the GraphShed and FoF catalogs, respectively.
Overall, the ζ parameter decreases with increasing
R200 and M200, indicating that larger systems tend
to be more compact than smaller groups, which is ev-
ident from the group catalogs of both methods. Ad-
ditionally, the FoF catalog contains several groups
with low to intermediateR200 and M200 that exhibit
relatively low compactness, whereas the GraphShed
groups generally show moderate to high compact-
ness across the full range of R200 and M200. A two-
sided KS test applied to ζ distributions yields the
p-value presented in the fourth row of TableI, indi-
cating a statistically significant distinction between
the compactness distributions of the GraphShed and
FoF catalogs.
The comparison continues with the spin parame-
ter of the groups. As discussed in previous studies
(e.g., [45]), the spin parameter of a galaxy group is a
dimensionless quantity originally introduced by [68]
and later revised for improved computational appli-
cability by [ 20]. This parameter characterizes the
amount of ordered rotational motion relative to the
internal random motions of the system and is defined
as:
λ′ ≡ |J200|
√2GR200M 3/2
200
(5)
3 This value extends to 4.98 when outliers are considered.
where G denotes the Newtonian gravitational con-
stant, and J200 represents the angular momentum
of the group members located within the R200 ra-
dius. Higher values of λ′, generally indicate systems
possessing greater specific angular momentum which
can be associated with recent mergers or anisotropic
accretion (e.g., [46]), whereas lower values are more
typical of dynamically settled or rotationally stable
configurations (e.g., [13]).
The distribution of the spin parameter for the
groups identified by GraphShed and FoF is shown in
the lower panel of Figure3 with respect to theirR200
and M200. As illustrated in these panels, the groups
in both catalogs exhibit broadly similar trends in
this parameter. In general, systems with larger R200
and higher M200 tend to demonstrate higher spin
parameter values. However, the spin parameter of
the GraphShed-identified groups extends to about
13.02 in logarithmic scale, whereas the FoF groups
reach values of about 13.794. In addition, the FoF
catalog contains a subset of intermediate to large
R200 and M200 systems that exhibit elevated spin
values, a characteristic that is not evident in the
GraphShed catalog. The two-sided KS test is also
performed on λ′ distributions, yielding the p‑value
presented in fifth row of TableI and indicating a sta-
tistically difference between the spin distributions of
the GraphShed and FoF catalogs.
The next property examined is the centroid shift
∆C of the groups identified in the two catalogs. Al-
though centroid shift has been defined and employed
in different ways in previous studies (e.g., [5, 74]), in
this study it is defined as the distance between the
group center and the peak of the stellar mass density
field:
∆C ≡ || ⃗ rMMD − ⃗ rUM|| (6)
where, ⃗ rMMD and ⃗ rUM denote the position vectors
of the center of the Voronoi cell with the Maximum
Mass Density (MMD) within each group and the Un-
weighted Mean position (UM) of the member galax-
ies, respectively. These two positions are adopted to
quantify the degree of asymmetry in the spatial dis-
tribution of stellar mass within the group. As men-
tioned in prior studies (e.g., [55, 79]), the UM posi-
tion can be used as a proxy for the halo center when
satellite galaxies are not included. In the present
study, low-mass and low-luminosity satellite galax-
ies are excluded from the sample (see Section II),
4 Including outliers increases this value up to 14.29.
8

FIG. 3. The distributions of the sphericity ( Θ; U pper row), compactness (ζ; M iddle row) and spin parameter ( λ′;
Bottom row) of the groups identified by GraphShed and FoF methods are illustrated with respect to theirR200 radii
(Lef t column) and M200 stellar mass (M iddle column), respectively. The logarithmic histograms of these parameters
are shown in the right column of each row. In all panels, the GraphShed and FoF group catalogs are shown in dark
green and orange, respectively.
thereby reducing potential biases arising from nu-
merous faint satellites. In contrast, MMD position
traces the location of the peak of the stellar mass
density field within the group region. Considering
Equation (6), large values of ∆C correspond to sys-
tems in which the stellar mass density peak is signif-
icantly displaced from the group center, indicating
a more asymmetric mass distribution. Conversely,
small values of ∆C indicate systems in which the
stellar mass peak and the group center are closely
aligned, consistent with a more symmetric configu-
ration.
The distributions of ∆C for groups identified by
GraphShed and FoF are shown in Figure 4 with
respect to the compactness ( ζ) and sphericity ( Θ)
parameters. As seen in the figure, groups identi-
fied by GraphShed generally exhibit smaller cen-
troid shifts. The range of ∆C extends to about 0.79
for FoF groups, whereas for GraphShed groups it
reaches to about 0.51. The FoF catalog also con-
tains some galaxy groups with large centroid shifts
that are not present in the GraphShed catalog. In
addition, the two-sieded KS test applied to ∆C dis-
tributions yields the p‑value presented in the sixth
row of Table I, indicating a statistically significant
difference between the centroid shift distributions of
the GraphShed and FoF catalogs.
A positive correlation is observed between∆C and
the compactness parameter ζ, such that groups with
larger centroid shifts tend to have larger ζ values,
9

FIG. 4. The distribution of the centroid shift ( ∆C) with respect to the group compactness ( ζ; Lef t panel) and
sphericity (Θ; M iddle panel) is shown for the GraphShed and FoF group catalogs in dark green and orange, respec-
tively. The histogram of the centroid shift for these catalogs is presented in the Right panel using the same color
scheme.
corresponding to less compact systems. In addition,
∆C is related to the sphericity parameter Θ, with
systems exhibiting smaller centroid shifts generally
showing higher Θ values, indicative of more spherical
morphologies.
B. Large-Scale Statistics
Following the comparison of the physical and
morphological properties of the groups identified
by GraphShed and FoF, the next step examines
how these group-finding methods affect the large-
scale statistical properties derived from the resulting
group catalogs. For this purpose, the un-weighted
two-point correlation function (TPCF) and the mass
function (MF) of the catalogs are compared.
The TPCF is calculated using the Peebles–Hauser
estimator ([67, 69]) applied to the COM positions
of the identified groups, with separations measured
up to half of the simulation box length to minimize
boundary effects. The resulting correlation func-
tions are shown in the left panel of Figure 5. In
addition, the cumulative MF of the groups is pre-
sented in the right panel of Figure5 as a function of
the group M200.
As shown in Figure 5, the TPCFs of the
GraphShed and FoF catalogs exhibit a similar be-
havior at large separation distances, while at smaller
separations, the GraphShed catalog shows higher
correlation amplitudes. This enhanced small‑scale
signal originate from the density‑field–based nature
of the GraphShed approach (as discussed earlier
at Section III A). Unlike the position‑based FoF
method, GraphShed is more sensitive to variations
in the underlying density field and therefore sepa-
rate nearby over‑densities that FoF could merge into
a single system. The left column of Figure 6 illus-
trates this excess of COM pairs at small separations
for GraphShed relative to FoF.
In the case of the MF, the two catalogs show sim-
ilar trends at low and intermediate M200 values.
However, for high-mass systems with M200 ≳ 12
log10(M⊙/h), the FoF catalog contains higher num-
ber of groups than the GraphShed catalog. Consis-
tent with the results discussed previously, the FoF
catalog also includes some systems with high M200
values that are not present in the GraphShed cata-
log.
The similarities between the TPCFs and MFs ob-
tained from the GraphShed and FoF catalogs indi-
cate that the large‑scale statistical properties of the
identified groups remain largely consistent between
the two methods. Although some differences appear
at small separations in the correlation function and
at the high‑mass end of the mass function, the over-
all trends are in good agreement.
As discussed previously in SectionIV A, the M200
mass distributions of the GraphShed and FoF cata-
logs exhibit a high degree of statistical similarity.
Together with the strong similarity in the TPCF
and MF presented in this section, this suggests that
cosmological interpretations and inferences derived
from galaxy group catalogs (e.g., [ 16, 22]) are un-
likely to be significantly affected, and that the re-
sulting cosmological conclusions remain largely con-
sistent. The close agreement with the FoF results
further supports the use of GraphShed for studies
that employ galaxy group catalogs as probes for cos-
mological inferences (e.g., [77, 91]).
10

FIG. 5. The two-point correlation function (Lef t panel)
as a function of distance ( r) and the corresponding cu-
mulative mass functions ( Right panel) as a function of
stellar mass (M) for the group catalogs identified by the
GraphShed and FoF methods are shown in dark green
and dark orange, respectively.
C. Merger Identification
The final aspect of the comparison between the
GraphShed and FoF group catalogs is the identi-
fication and comparison of candidate mergers, fly-
bys, and accretion events among the detected galaxy
groups and clusters. For this purpose, a veloc-
ity‑based merger identification approach is intro-
duced and employed. The proposed procedure is
demonstrated using an example drawn from the
group catalogs identified by the GraphShed (Sec-
tion III) and FoF methods, applied to the dataset
described in Section II and illustrated in Figure 6.
As noted in Section IV, the corresponding linking
lengths adopted by GraphShed and FoF for this
dataset are very similar, ensuring that the presented
comparison is not influenced by variations that could
arise from differences in this parameter.
Among all pairs of galaxy groups and clusters in
the resulting group catalogs identified by GraphShed
and FoF, potential merger candidates are identified
using the center‑of‑mass positions (⃗ rC) and the R200
radii of the groups. A pair is classified as a potential
merger candidate if the distance between the COMs
of the two groups is smaller than the sum of their
R200 radii:
∆αβ = |⃗ rα
C − ⃗ rβ
C | < R α
200 + Rβ
200. (7)
where members of the pair are denoted by the labels
α and β.
Then, for each potential merger candidate pair,
the mass‑weighted radial and perpendicular relative
velocities are computed as described in Appendix
A. The pairs are subsequently classified according
to these velocity components. A pair is flagged as a
merger candidate if:
V∥
α > 0, V∥
β > 0, V ∥ > V ⊥ (8)
indicating that the two groups are approaching each
other with a dominant radial motion. Conversely,
the pair is classified as a flyby candidate if:
V⊥ > V ∥ (9)
indicating the domination of the perpendicular com-
ponent. It should be noted that within this classifi-
cation, some interacting systems such as pairs orbit-
ing each other during the stages of a merger might
also be categorized as flybys in the analyzed snap-
shot.
Finally, the mass ratio of each merger candidate
pair (Equation (8)) is defined as (e.g., [26]):
ξ ≡
min
(
M α
200, M β
200
)
max
(
M α
200, M β
200
) (10)
and pairs are then classified according to their mass
ratio. If ξ > 0.33, the pair is considered as a major
merger candidate, while those with 0.1 ≤ ξ ≤ 0.33
are considered as minor merger candidates (e.g.,
[26]). At the end, pairs with ξ < 0.1 are classified
as accretion candidates, since the secondary compo-
nent is suﬀiciently low in mass relative to the pri-
mary, that it does not constitute a genuine merger
(e.g., [39]).
After applying this procedure, a total of 271 and
63 potential group pairs satisfying the condition of
Equation (7) are detected and analyzed from the
GraphShed and FoF group catalogs, respectively.
The resulting classifications are summarized in Ta-
ble II. The substantially larger number of candidate
pairs identified by GraphShed reflects the higher
sensitivity of this density‑based approach to sub-
structures within galaxy systems, enabling the de-
tection of a broader range of dynamical interactions
among nearby groups and clusters.
TABLE II. Classifications of galaxy group merger and
interaction types for catalogs generated by GraphShed
and FoF methods.
Class GraphShed (271) FoF (63)
Major mergers 49 9
Minor mergers 31 15
Accretions 29 14
Flybys 162 25
11

FIG. 6. The stacked two-dimensional distribution of the galaxies in the largest FoF-identified group from the dataset
of Section II is shown at the U pper-Lef t panel, with the group’s center of mass marked by a black square. The
projection stacks a 2.13 Mpc/h along the X-direction, with the Y -Z plane shown due to their larger extent. The
GraphShed-detected groups at the same positional range are shown in theM iddle-Lef t panel. Each group plotted in
a distinct color and their centers of mass indicated by black crosses. The X-ray luminosity map of the same region is
presented in the Bottom-Lef t panel, where the centers of mass of both the GraphShed groups and the FoF group are
also marked with black crosses and a black square, respectively. TheU pper-Right panel shows the galaxies belonging
to the two groups forming a merger-candidate pair, from among the GraphShed-identified groups and each shown
in a different color. In addition, the weighted mean velocity vectors of the individual groups (Equation ( A1)) and
of the combined system (Equation (A2)) are drawn as arrows originating from their respective centers of mass. The
M iddle-Right panel shows the same galaxy distribution, but with the relative velocity vectors of the two groups with
respect to the pair’s rest frame (Equation (A3)), drawn as arrows from the group centers of mass. TheBottom-Right
panel displays the X-ray luminosity map of the region containing the two groups. The iso-contours are drawn at
logarithmic levels of 5, 5.6 and 6.2 in solar luminosity ( log10[L⊙]), and for each level the largest contour is shown.
The center of mass of the two groups are indicated with black crosses.
A comparison of the merger categories shows that
both methods detect comparable fractions of ma-
jor mergers, with GraphShed and FoF revealing 49
(18%) and 9 ( 14%) pairs, respectively. In contrast,
notable differences appear in the fractions of mi-
nor mergers and accretion events. The FoF cata-
log shows relatively larger proportions in these cate-
gories, accounting for 24% and 22% of the identified
12

pairs respectively, whereas the GraphShed catalog
yields smaller fractions of∼ 11% for both categories.
The most prominent difference between the two
catalogs appears in the classification of flyby sys-
tems. In the GraphShed catalog, flybys constitute
the majority of the detected pairs ( 60%), while in
the FoF catalog they represent about 40% of the
total. This indicates that GraphShed resolves a
larger number of dynamically independent neighbor-
ing structures whose relative motions are dominated
by tangential components rather than radial. The
lower fraction of flybys identified in the FoF catalog
reflects the tendency of this method to link nearby
systems based solely on their spatial proximity, po-
tentially combining galaxy systems that are in fact
passing alongside each other (e.g., [13, 53]).
These results suggest that the higher sensitivity of
density-based group-finding approaches can reveal
not only merger candidates that remain hidden in
position-only methods, but also identify flyby and
accretion systems that might otherwise be grouped
with other galaxy systems due to their positional
proximity. Consequently, the GraphShed method
provides a more detailed view of the dynamical in-
teractions occurring within dense environments, en-
abling a clearer distinction between different types of
close encounters among galaxy groups and clusters.
An example illustrating this capability is shown
in Figure 6. In this figure, the largest group iden-
tified by the FoF method from the galaxy distri-
bution described in Section II is displayed. For
comparison, the galaxy groups identified using the
GraphShed approach, whose boundaries lie within
the coordinate range of the FoF-identified group, are
also shown. In addition, the cumulative X-ray lumi-
nosity map of this region is presented.5
As shown in the left column of Figure6, the large
group identified by the FoF method as a single irreg-
ular structure is separated into five distinct groups
by the GraphShed algorithm. These groups corre-
spond to different overdensity regions that are lo-
cated close to each other within that same coor-
dinate range. The presence of these distinct over-
densities can also be inferred from the X-ray lumi-
nosity map, which could indicate that each group
corresponds to a separate mass concentration, and
the GraphShed method properly distinguishes these
structures despite their spatial proximity.
5 This map is derived from the IllustrisTNG100-1 simulation
by computing the X-ray luminosity of the gas cells using
the corresponding density maps and incorporating cooling
tables presented by [ 92].
Among these five GraphShed-identified groups,
the pair flagged as a merger candidate by the
velocity-based merger identification procedure de-
scribed earlier is illustrated in the right column of
Figure 6. The X-ray luminosity map of this region,
derived from the emission of gas cells in the simu-
lation, together with fixed-level luminosity contours
shown at several intensity levels, provides additional
insights about these two system. At the lowest con-
tour level (5), the emission exhibits an asymmet-
ric, extended and bimodal morphology that encom-
passes the central region of both systems, suggest-
ing the presence of multiple X-ray peaks associated
with distinct over-densities ([51]). At the intermedi-
ate level (5.6), the contour reveals a clear dumbbell-
like structure with two connected lobes, indicating
two nearby halos whose gaseous envelopes partially
overlap. Such bimodal X-ray morphologies are com-
monly associated with interacting systems, contain-
ing more than one gravitational potential well ([52]).
Finally, the highest contour level (6.2) encloses only
the central region of the brighter system, reflecting
the deeper gravitational potential of the more mas-
sive group. The presence of two nearby X-ray peaks
together with the elongated emission and the bridge
of gas between them supports the interpretation of
a merging pair ([3]), consistent with the merger can-
didate identified by the velocity-based procedure de-
scribed earlier.
V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
In this study, the GraphShed group finder is intro-
duced as a parameter–free, Voronoi-induced graph–
based watershed approach designed to identify par-
ticle aggregations within the input dataset directly
from its density field. The method has several key
characteristics:
• Employs the Voronoi tessellation on the com-
bined set of grid points and data points to en-
hance the segmentation of the dataset’s spatial
domain.
• Constructs a set of separated graphs using the
adjacency of the Voronoi cells associated with
the data points.
• Applies a top–down watershed procedure to
the density field of the dataset in order to iden-
tify the particle aggregations.
• Computes all relevant quantities directly from
the data, enabling the identification of groups
13

without externally imposed thresholds or tun-
able parameters.
• Possesses a mathematically simple and compu-
tationally eﬀicient formulation that is straight-
forward to implement.
The performance of GraphShed is evaluated us-
ing galaxies from the IllustrisTNG100‑1 simula-
tion, as described in Section II, which contains ∼
41000 galaxies and GraphShed additionally inserts
∼ 43000 grid points, yielding ∼ 84000 total points
to analyze. For this dataset and performing the
computations on an 11th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-1165G7 @ 2.80 GHz (4 cores; 8 logical processors)
CPU, the method required an average runtime of
∼ 73 s and a pick of ∼ 0.7 GB of additional resi-
dent memory. A galaxy group catalog constructed
by applying GraphShed to this dataset is systemat-
ically compared with the catalog obtained using the
Friends‑of‑Friends (FoF) method on the same data
(Section IV). The comparison focuses on three main
aspects: the internal structural properties of the
identified groups, large–scale statistical measures of
the galaxy groups and clusters, and the dynamical
classification of interacting systems, including merg-
ers, accretion events, and flybys.
Several structural features are examined (Section
IV A), including the distributions of R200, M200,
sphericity (Θ), compactness (ζ), spin parameter(λ′)
and centroid shift ( ∆C), along with two‑sided KS
tests applied to these distributions. The M200 dis-
tributions of the GraphShed and FoF groups are sta-
tistically equivalent, whereas the distributions of the
remaining parameters exhibit significant differences
between the two catalogs.
Large‑scale properties of the resulting group cat-
alogs are further examined (Section IV B) using the
TPCF and the MF. The TPCFs obtained from the
GraphShed and FoF catalogs show differences at
small separations but display similar trends at larger
scales. The mass functions also exhibit close overall
agreement, with discrepancies appearing primarily
at the high‑mass end.
Differences between the two catalogs become more
evident when the dynamical interactions within the
systems identified in each catalog are examined. To
interpret these interactions, a velocity‑based clas-
sification scheme is introduced and applied to the
GraphShed and FoF group catalogs (Section IV C;
Appendix A) to identify mergers, accretion events,
and flybys based on the radial and perpendicu-
lar components of the mass‑weighted relative ve-
locities of potential merger candidates (Equation
(7)). When applied to both catalogs, the classifi-
cation reveals that GraphShed identifies a substan-
tially larger number of interacting pairs than FoF.
This difference is consistent with the interpretation
that FoF might combine nearby systems undergo-
ing flyby interactions into a single halo due to posi-
tional proximity, while GraphShed more frequently
resolves them as separate interacting structures.
Overall, the results demonstrate that GraphShed
provides a robust alternative to traditional group
finding approaches. The presented analysis indicate
that the GraphShed group finder:
• Minimizes parameter–driven uncertainties
that could affect traditional group–finding ap-
proaches by avoiding tunable linking lengths
or density thresholds (Section III).
• Features computational simplicity, making it
well suited for applications to large cosmolog-
ical datasets (Section III).
• Modifies several internal structural character-
istics of the identified systems while preserv-
ing a mass distribution broadly consistent with
that obtained using the FoF method (Section
IV A).
• Introduces differences in the non‑linear regime
and at the high‑mass end of the TPCF and MF
of the resulting catalog, while showing simi-
lar trends to FoF in the large‑scales and linear
regime (Section IV B).
• Identifies a significantly larger number of in-
teracting systems, revealing higher numbers of
major and minor mergers as well as accretions
and flybys due to its high sensitivity to varia-
tions in the density field, which remains hidden
in position‑only approaches (Section IV C)
Future applications of GraphShed to observa-
tional datasets (e.g., [ 24]), larger cosmological sim-
ulations (e.g., [30, 66]), the effect of different group-
finders on the outcomes, and comparisons of its re-
sulting group catalog with those derived from other
physical density-based approaches (e.g., [45, 73]) will
enable further assessment of its capability to iden-
tify galaxy systems, characterize group morphology,
probe environmental drivers of galaxy evolution, and
enhance cosmological inferences drawn from studies
of the cosmic web.
14

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the use of the Illus-
trisTNG100‑1 simulation database and its associ-
ated data products, which constitute a valuable
resource for investigations of large‑scale structure
and cosmic‑web environments. The GraphShed
group‑finder introduced in this work will be made
publicly available in future publications; in the
meantime, it can be obtained from the authors upon
reasonable request.
Appendix A: Mass-Weighted Radial And Perpendicular
Relative Velocities
The calculation of the mass-weighted radial and
perpendicular components of the relative velocity
proceeds in four steps. First, the velocity vectors of
the galaxies in each group are used to compute the
stellar‑mass–weighted mean velocity vector of that
group:
⃗Vα =
∑
i∈α M ∗
i ⃗ vi∑
i∈α Mi
, ⃗Vβ =
∑
j∈β M ∗
j ⃗ vj
∑
j∈β Mj
(A1)
where M ∗ and ⃗ vdenote the stellar mass and velocity
vector of each member galaxy, respectively. The re-
sulting weighted mean velocity vector of the groups
are illustrated in the upper-right panel of Figure 6,
originating from the COM of each group.
In the second step, the mean weighted velocity
vectors of the groups are transformed to the rest
frame of the pair. This is achieved by first comput-
ing the stellar-mass–weighted mean velocity of the
combined system:
⃗Vαβ =
∑
l∈α,β M ∗
l ⃗ vl
∑
l∈α,β Ml
(A2)
and then subtracting this velocity vector from the
group’s weighted mean velocity vectors to obtain
their velocities relative to the pair rest frame:
⃗Vα = ⃗Vα − ⃗Vαβ, ⃗Vβ = ⃗Vβ − ⃗Vαβ. (A3)
These relative velocity vectors are shown in the
middle-right panel of Figure6, drawn from the COM
of each group.
In the third step, radial unit vectors are defined
from the COM of each group ( ⃗ rα
C , ⃗ rβ
C ) toward the
COM of the combined system (⃗ rαβ
C ):
ˆτα = ⃗ rαβ
C − ⃗ rα
C
|⃗ rαβ
C − ⃗ rα
C |
, ˆτβ = ⃗ rαβ
C − ⃗ rβ
C
|⃗ rαβ
C − ⃗ rβ
C |
(A4)
The radial components of the relative velocity vec-
tors are then obtained by:
V∥
α = ⃗Vα · ˆτα, V∥
β = ⃗Vβ · ˆτβ (A5)
and the perpendicular components are defined as:
V⊥
α = |⃗Vα − V∥
α ˆτα|, V⊥
β = |⃗Vβ − V∥
β ˆτβ|. (A6)
Having obtained the radial and perpendicular
components for both groups, the fourth step is to
compute the mass-weighted relative velocities of the
pair. The weighted radial relative velocity is defined
as:
V∥ =
M α
200V∥
α + M β
200V∥
β
M α
200 + M β
200
(A7)
and the weighted perpendicular relative velocity is
given by:
V⊥ =
|M α
200V⊥
α − M β
200V⊥
β |
M α
200 + M β
200
. (A8)
Here the weighting is performed using the group
masses M200 in order to reduce the influence of small
systems with unusually high velocities (e.g., flybys),
ensuring that the contribution of each group to the
relative velocity is based on its mass.
[1] Ade, P. A., Aghanim, N., Arnaud, M., Ashdown,
M., Aumont, J., Baccigalupi, C., Banday, A., Bar-
reiro, R., Bartlett, J., Bartolo, N., et al. (2016).
Planck 2015 results-xiii. cosmological parameters.
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 594:A13.
[2] Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y., Ashdown, M., Aumont,
J., Baccigalupi, C., Ballardini, M., Banday, A. J.,
Barreiro, R., Bartolo, N., Basak, S., et al. (2020).
Planck 2018 results-vi. cosmological parameters. As-
tronomy & Astrophysics, 641:A6.
15

[3] Andrade-Santos, F., Jones, C., Forman, W. R.,
Murray, S. S., Kraft, R. P., Vikhlinin, A., Weeren,
R. J. v., Nulsen, P. E., David, L. P., Dawson, W. A.,
et al. (2015). Chandra and xmm-newton obser-
vations of the bimodal planck sz-detected cluster
plckg345. 40-39.34 (a3716) with high and low en-
tropy subcluster cores. The Astrophysical Journal,
803(2):108.
[4] Ansarifard, S. et al. (2020a). The Three Hundred
Project: Correcting for the hydrostatic-equilibrium
mass bias in X-ray and SZ surveys. Astron. Astro-
phys., 634:A113.
[5] Ansarifard, S., Rasia, E., Biﬀi, V., Borgani, S., Cui,
W., De Petris, M., Dolag, K., Ettori, S., Movahed,
S., Murante, G., et al. (2020b). The three hundred
project: Correcting for the hydrostatic-equilibrium
mass bias in x-ray and sz surveys. Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 634:A113.
[6] Aragón-Calvo, M. A., Jones, B. J., Van De Wey-
gaert, R., and Van Der Hulst, J. (2007). The multi-
scale morphology filter: identifying and extracting
spatial patterns in the galaxy distribution. Astron-
omy & Astrophysics, 474(1):315–338.
[7] Artis, E., Bulbul, E., Grandis, S., Ghirardini, V.,
Clerc, N., Seppi, R., Comparat, J., Cataneo, M.,
Von Der Linden, A., Bahar, Y., et al. (2025). The
srg/erosita all-sky survey-constraints on the struc-
ture growth from cluster number counts. Astronomy
& Astrophysics, 696:A5.
[8] Aurenhammer, F. (1991). Voronoi diagrams—a
survey of a fundamental geometric data structure.
ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 23(3):345–405.
[9] Barber, C. B., Dobkin, D. P., and Huhdanpaa,
H. (1996). The quickhull algorithm for convex
hulls. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software
(TOMS), 22(4):469–483.
[10] Barrow, J. D., Bhavsar, S. P., and Sonoda, D.
(1985). Minimal spanning trees, filaments and
galaxy clustering. Monthly Notices of the Royal As-
tronomical Society, 216(1):17–35.
[11] Berlind, A. A., Frieman, J., Weinberg, D. H., Blan-
ton, M. R., Warren, M. S., Abazajian, K., Scranton,
R., Hogg, D. W., Scoccimarro, R., Bahcall, N. A.,
et al. (2006). Percolation galaxy groups and clusters
in the sdss redshift survey: identification, catalogs,
and the multiplicity function. The Astrophysical
Journal Supplement Series, 167(1):1–25.
[12] Bernardeau, F., Colombi, S., Gaztañaga, E., and
Scoccimarro, R. (2002). Large-scale structure of
the universe and cosmological perturbation theory.
Physics reports, 367(1-3):1–248.
[13] Bett, P., Eke, V., Frenk, C. S., Jenkins, A., Helly,
J., and Navarro, J. (2007). The spin and shape of
dark matter haloes in the millennium simulation of
a λ cold dark matter universe. Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 376(1):215–232.
[14] Beucher, S. (1979). Use of watersheds in contour
detection. In Proc. Int. Workshop on Image Pro-
cessing, Sept. 1979, pages 17–21.
[15] Blanchard, A., Camera, S., Carbone, C., Car-
done, V., Casas, S., Clesse, S., Ilić, S., Kilbinger,
M., Kitching, T., Kunz, M., et al. (2020). Eu-
clid preparation-vii. forecast validation for euclid
cosmological probes. Astronomy & Astrophysics,
642:A191.
[16] Bocquet, S., Grandis, S., Bleem, L., Klein, M.,
Mohr, J., Schrabback, T., Abbott, T., Ade, P.,
Aguena, M., Alarcon, A., et al. (2024). Spt clus-
ters with des and hst weak lensing. ii. cosmological
constraints from the abundance of massive halos.
Physical Review D, 110(8):083510.
[17] Bocquet, S., Saro, A., Dolag, K., and Mohr, J. J.
(2016). Halo mass function: baryon impact, fitting
formulae, and implications for cluster cosmology.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
456(3):2361–2373.
[18] Bond, J. R., Kofman, L., and Pogosyan, D. (1996).
How filaments of galaxies are woven into the cosmic
web. Nature, 380(6575):603–606.
[19] Boylan-Kolchin, M., Springel, V., White, S. D.,
Jenkins, A., and Lemson, G. (2009). Resolving cos-
mic structure formation with the millennium-ii sim-
ulation. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 398(3):1150–1164.
[20] Bullock, J. S., Dekel, A., Kolatt, T. S., Kravtsov,
A. V., Klypin, A. A., Porciani, C., and Primack,
J. R. (2001). A universal angular momentum pro-
file for galactic halos. The Astrophysical Journal,
555(1):240–257.
[21] Cautun, M., van de Weygaert, R., and Jones, B. J.
(2013). Nexus: tracing the cosmic web connection.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
429(2):1286–1308.
[22] Chiu, I.-N., Klein, M., Mohr, J., and Bocquet, S.
(2023). Cosmological constraints from galaxy clus-
ters and groups in the erosita final equatorial depth
survey. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 522(2):1601–1642.
[23] Cohen, J. and Hickey, T. (1979). Two algorithms for
determining volumes of convex polyhedra. Journal
of the ACM (JACM), 26(3):401–414.
[24] collaboration, D., Adame, A., Aguilar, J., Ahlen, S.,
Alam, S., Aldering, G., Alexander, D., Alfarsy, R.,
Allende Prieto, C., Alvarez, M., et al. (2024). The
early data release of the dark energy spectroscopic
instrument. The Astronomical Journal, 168(2):58.
[25] Colless, M., Dalton, G., Maddox, S., Sutherland,
W., Norberg, P., Cole, S., Bland-Hawthorn, J.,
Bridges, T., Cannon, R., Collins, C., et al. (2001).
The 2df galaxy redshift survey: spectra and red-
shifts. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 328(4):1039–1063.
[26] Contreras-Santos, A., Knebe, A., Pearce, F., Hag-
gar, R., Gray, M., Cui, W., Yepes, G., De Petris,
M., De Luca, F., Power, C., et al. (2022). The three
hundred project: galaxy cluster mergers and their
impact on the stellar component of brightest cluster
galaxies. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomi-
16

cal Society, 511(2):2897–2913.
[27] Croton, D. J., Gao, L., and White, S. D. (2007).
Halo assembly bias and its effects on galaxy clus-
tering. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 374(4):1303–1309.
[28] Davis, M., Efstathiou, G., Frenk, C. S., and White,
S. D. (1985). The evolution of large-scale structure
in a universe dominated by cold dark matter. As-
trophysical Journal, Part 1 (ISSN 0004-637X), vol.
292, May 15, 1985, p. 371-394. Research supported
by the Science and Engineering Research Council of
England and NASA., 292:371–394.
[29] Davis, M., Huchra, J., Latham, D. W., and Tonry,
J. (1982). A survey of galaxy redshifts. ii-the large
scale space distribution. Astrophysical Journal, Part
1, vol. 253, Feb. 15, 1982, p. 423-445., 253:423–445.
[30] Dolag, K., Remus, R.-S., Valenzuela, L. M., Kim-
mig, L. C., Seidel, B., Fortune, S., Stoiber, J.,
Ivleva, A., Hoffmann, T., Biﬀi, V., et al. (2025).
Encyclopedia magneticum: Scaling relations from
cosmic dawn to present day. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.01061.
[31] Dougherty, E. (1992). Mathematical morphology in
image processing. CRC press.
[32] Dragomir, R., Rodríguez-Puebla, A., Primack,
J. R., and Lee, C. T. (2018). Does the galaxy–halo
connection vary with environment? Monthly No-
tices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 476(1):741–
758.
[33] Epinat, B., Contini, T., Mercier, W., Ciesla, L.,
Lemaux, B. C., Johnson, S., Richard, J., Brinch-
mann, J., Boogaard, L. A., Carton, D., et al. (2024).
Magic: Muse galaxy groups in cosmos–a survey to
probe the impact of environment on galaxy evolu-
tion over the last 8 gyr. Astronomy & Astrophysics,
683:A205.
[34] Ertöz, L., Steinbach, M., and Kumar, V. (2003).
Finding clusters of different sizes, shapes, and den-
sities in noisy, high dimensional data. In Proceed-
ings of the 2003 SIAM international conference on
data mining, pages 47–58. SIAM.
[35] Ester, M., Kriegel, H.-P., Sander, J., Xu, X., et al.
(1996). A density-based algorithm for discovering
clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In
kdd, volume 96, pages 226–231.
[36] Falck, B. L., Neyrinck, M. C., and Szalay, A. S.
(2012). Origami: delineating halos using phase-
space folds. The Astrophysical Journal, 754(2):126.
[37] Fan, K. (1984). Some properties of convex sets re-
lated to fixed point theorems. Mathematische An-
nalen, 266(4):519–537.
[38] Fernandez, J., Alonso, S., Mesa, V., and Duplancic,
F. (2024). Revealing ringed galaxies in group envi-
ronments. Astronomy & Astrophysics, 683:A32.
[39] Genel, S., Bouché, N., Naab, T., Sternberg, A., and
Genzel, R. (2010). The growth of dark matter ha-
los: evidence for significant smooth accretion. The
Astrophysical Journal, 719(1):229–239.
[40] Ghafour, P. and Tavasoli, S. (2025). Gravipast’s lens
to the past: Unveiling the evolution of filamentary
structures. The Astrophysical Journal, 990(2):119.
[41] Ghafour, P., Tavasoli, S., and Shojaei, M. R. (2025).
Vega: Voids identification using genetic algorithm.
Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics,
2025(12):001.
[42] Graham, M. T. and Cappellari, M. (2023). A group
finder algorithm optimised for the study of local
galaxy environments. Astronomy & Astrophysics,
675:A161.
[43] Gurzadyan, V., Fimin, N., and Chechetkin, V.
(2025). Cosmic voids and the kinetic analysis-iv.
hubble tension and the cosmological constant. As-
tronomy & Astrophysics, 694:A252.
[44] Guth, A. H. (1981). Inflationary universe: A pos-
sible solution to the horizon and flatness problems.
Physical Review D, 23(2):347.
[45] Hahn, O., Porciani, C., Carollo, C. M., and Dekel,
A. (2007). Properties of dark matter haloes in clus-
ters, filaments, sheets and voids. Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society, 375(2):489–499.
[46] Hetznecker, H. and Burkert, A. (2006). The evolu-
tion of the dark halo spin parameters λ and λ￿ in a
λcdm universe: the role of minor and major mergers.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
370(4):1905–1914.
[47] Hong, S., Coutinho, B. C., Dey, A., Barabási, A.-
L., Vogelsberger, M., Hernquist, L., and Gebhardt,
K. (2016). Discriminating topology in galaxy distri-
butions using network analysis. Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 459(3):2690–2700.
[48] Hong, S. and Dey, A. (2015). Network analysis of
cosmic structures: network centrality and topologi-
cal environment. Monthly Notices of the Royal As-
tronomical Society, 450(2):1999–2015.
[49] Huchra, J. and Geller, M. (1982). Groups of galax-
ies. i-nearby groups. Astrophysical Journal, Part 1,
vol. 257, June 15, 1982, p. 423-437. Research sup-
ported by Cambridge University., 257:423–437.
[50] Jarvis, R. A. and Patrick, E. A. (2006). Clus-
tering using a similarity measure based on shared
near neighbors. IEEE Transactions on computers,
100(11):1025–1034.
[51] Jones, C. and Forman, W. (1999). Einstein observa-
tory images of clusters of galaxies. The Astrophysi-
cal Journal, 511(1):65–83.
[52] Jones, C., Forman, W., and Fabian, A. (1992). Clus-
ters and superclusters of galaxies. by AC Fabian
(Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1992), NATO Adv. Sci. Inst.
Ser. C, 366:49.
[53] Kang, X., Jing, Y., Mo, H., and Börner, G. (2005).
Semianalytical model of galaxy formation with high-
resolution n-body simulations. The Astrophysical
Journal, 631(1):21–40.
[54] Knebe, A., Pearce, F. R., Lux, H., Ascasibar, Y.,
Behroozi, P., Casado, J., Moran, C. C., Diemand,
J., Dolag, K., Dominguez-Tenreiro, R., et al. (2013).
Structure finding in cosmological simulations: the
state of affairs. Monthly Notices of the Royal As-
17

tronomical Society, 435(2):1618–1658.
[55] Korytov, D., Rangel, E., Bleem, L., Frontiere, N.,
Habib, S., Heitmann, K., Hollowed, J., and Pope, A.
(2023). Modeling the galaxy distribution in clusters
using halo cores. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04194.
[56] Levis, S., Coenda, V., Muriel, H., de los Rios, M.,
Ragone-Figueroa, C., Martínez, H. J., and Ruiz,
A. N. (2025). Galaxy evolution in groups: Tran-
sition galaxies in the illustristng simulations. As-
tronomy & Astrophysics, 698:A57.
[57] Libeskind, N. I., Van De Weygaert, R., Cautun,
M., Falck, B., Tempel, E., Abel, T., Alpaslan, M.,
Aragón-Calvo, M. A., Forero-Romero, J. E., Gon-
zalez, R., et al. (2018). Tracing the cosmic web.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
473(1):1195–1217.
[58] Liddle, A. R. and Lyth, D. H. (1993). The cold
dark matter density perturbation. Physics Reports,
231(1-2):1–105.
[59] Marini, I., Popesso, P., Dolag, K., Bravo, M.,
Robotham, A., Tempel, E., Li, Q., Yang, X., Csizi,
B., Behroozi, P., et al. (2025). Detecting clusters
and groups of galaxies populating the local universe
in large optical spectroscopic surveys. Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 694:A207.
[60] Marshall, P., Anguita, T., Bianco, F. B., Bellm,
E. C., Brandt, N., Clarkson, W., Connolly, A., Ga-
wiser, E., Ivezic, Z., Jones, L., et al. (2017). Science-
driven optimization of the lsst observing strategy.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04058.
[61] Massey Jr, F. J. (1951). The kolmogorov-smirnov
test for goodness of fit. Journal of the American
statistical Association, 46(253):68–78.
[62] Masson, F. and Parker, L. C. (2026). Calibrating
galaxy infall times in groups and clusters with il-
lustristng simulations. The Astrophysical Journal,
1000(2):194.
[63] More, S., Kravtsov, A. V., Dalal, N., and Gottlöber,
S. (2011). The overdensity and masses of the friends-
of-friends halos and universality of halo mass func-
tion. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,
195(1):4.
[64] Nelson, D., Pillepich, A., Genel, S., Vogelsberger,
M., Springel, V., Torrey, P., Rodriguez-Gomez, V.,
Sijacki, D., Snyder, G. F., Griffen, B., et al. (2015).
The illustris simulation: Public data release. As-
tronomy and Computing, 13:12–37.
[65] Nelson, D., Springel, V., Pillepich, A., Rodriguez-
Gomez, V., Torrey, P., Genel, S., Vogelsberger,
Pakmor, R., Marinacci, F., Weinberger, R., et al.
(2019). The illustristng simulations: public data re-
lease. Computational Astrophysics and Cosmology,
6:1–29.
[66] Pakmor, R., Springel, V., Coles, J. P., Guillet,
T., Pfrommer, C., Bose, S., Barrera, M., Del-
gado, A. M., Ferlito, F., Frenk, C., et al. (2023).
The millenniumtng project: the hydrodynamical full
physics simulation and a first look at its galaxy clus-
ters. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 524(2):2539–2555.
[67] Peebles, P. (1973). Statistical analysis of catalogs of
extragalactic objects. i. theory. Astrophysical Jour-
nal, Vol. 185, pp. 413-440 (1973), 185:413–440.
[68] Peebles, P. J. (1969). Origin of the angular momen-
tum of galaxies. Astrophysical Journal, vol. 155, p.
393, 155:393.
[69] Peebles, P. J. E. (2020). The large-scale structure of
the universe, volume 96. Princeton university press.
[70] Peterson, E. R., Carreres, B., Carr, A., Scolnic, D.,
Bailey, A., Davis, T. M., Brout, D., Howlett, C.,
Jones, D. O., Riess, A. G., et al. (2025). Improving
the determination of supernova cosmological red-
shifts by using galaxy groups. The Astrophysical
Journal, 980(1):21.
[71] Pizzardo, M., Geller, M. J., Kenyon, S. J., Dam-
janov, I., and Diaferio, A. (2023). An illustristng
view of the caustic technique for galaxy cluster mass
estimation. Astronomy & Astrophysics, 675:A56.
[72] Platen, E., Van De Weygaert, R., and Jones, B. J.
(2007). A cosmic watershed: the wvf void detection
technique. Monthly notices of the royal astronomical
society, 380(2):551–570.
[73] Pomarede, D., Hoffman, Y., Courtois, H. M., and
Tully, R. B. (2017). The cosmic v-web. The Astro-
physical Journal, 845(1):55.
[74] Poole, G. B., Fardal, M. A., Babul, A., McCarthy,
I. G., Quinn, T., and Wadsley, J. (2006). The im-
pact of mergers on relaxed x-ray clusters–i. dynam-
ical evolution and emergent transient structures.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
373(3):881–905.
[75] Pranav, P. (2021). Topology and geometry of gaus-
sian random fields ii: on critical points, excur-
sion sets, and persistent homology. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.08721.
[76] Pranav, P., Van de Weygaert, R., Vegter, G.,
Jones, B. J., Adler, R. J., Feldbrugge, J., Park,
C., Buchert, T., and Kerber, M. (2019). Topology
and geometry of gaussian random fields i: On betti
numbers, euler characteristic, and minkowski func-
tionals. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 485(3):4167–4208.
[77] Seppi, R., Comparat, J., Ghirardini, V., Garrel, C.,
Artis, E., Sanchez, A., Liu, A., Clerc, N., Bulbul,
E., Grandis, S., et al. (2024). The srg/erosita all-
sky survey-tracing the large-scale structure with a
clustering study of galaxy clusters. Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 686:A196.
[78] Shandarin, S. F. and Zeldovich, Y. B. (1989).
The large-scale structure of the universe: Turbu-
lence, intermittency, structures in a self-gravitating
medium. Reviews of Modern Physics, 61(2):185.
[79] Shin, T.-h., Jain, B., Adhikari, S., Baxter, E. J.,
Chang, C., Pandey, S., Salcedo, A., Weinberg, D.,
Amsellem, A., Battaglia, N., et al. (2021). The mass
and galaxy distribution around sz-selected clusters.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
507(4):5758–5779.
18

[80] Smoot, G. F., Bennett, C. L., Kogut, A., Wright,
E. L., Aymon, J., Boggess, N. W., Cheng, E. S.,
De Amici, G., Gulkis, S., Hauser, M. G., et al.
(1992). Structure in the cobe differential microwave
radiometer first-year maps. Astrophysical Journal,
Part 2-Letters (ISSN 0004-637X), vol. 396, no. 1,
Sept. 1, 1992, p. L1-L5. Research supported by
NASA., 396:L1–L5.
[81] Sousbie, T., Pichon, C., and Kawahara, H. (2011).
The persistent cosmic web and its filamentary
structure–ii. illustrations. Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 414(1):384–403.
[82] Spergel, D. N., Verde, L., Peiris, H. V., Komatsu,
E., Nolta, M., Bennett, C. L., Halpern, M., Hin-
shaw, G., Jarosik, N., Kogut, A., et al. (2003). First-
year wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe (wmap)
observations: determination of cosmological param-
eters. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,
148(1):175–194.
[83] Springel, V. (2010). E pur si muove: Galilean-
invariant cosmological hydrodynamical simulations
on a moving mesh. Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 401(2):791–851.
[84] Springel, V., White, S. D., Jenkins, A., Frenk, C. S.,
Yoshida, N., Gao, L., Navarro, J., Thacker, R., Cro-
ton, D., Helly, J., et al. (2005). Simulations of the
formation, evolution and clustering of galaxies and
quasars. nature, 435(7042):629–636.
[85] Springel, V., White, S. D., Tormen, G., and Kauff-
mann, G. (2001). Populating a cluster of galaxies–i.
results at z= 0. Monthly Notices of the Royal As-
tronomical Society, 328(3):726–750.
[86] Stoughton, C., Lupton, R. H., Bernardi, M., Blan-
ton, M. R., Burles, S., Castander, F. J., Connolly,
A., Eisenstein, D. J., Frieman, J. A., Hennessy, G.,
et al. (2002). Sloan digital sky survey: early data
release. The Astronomical Journal, 123(1):485–548.
[87] Tavasoli, S. and Ghafour, P. (2025). The filament
rift: λcdm’s structural challenge against observa-
tion. The Astrophysical Journal, 994(2):219.
[88] Tavasoli, S. and Ghafour, P. (2026). Cosmic en-
vironment as the primary driver of dwarf satellite
statistics. Astronomy & Astrophysics.
[89] Tomita, K. (1967). Non-linear theory of grav-
itational instability in the expanding universe.
Progress of Theoretical Physics, 37(5):831–846.
[90] Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., Haber-
land, M., Reddy, T., Cournapeau, D., Burovski,
E., Peterson, P., Weckesser, W., Bright, J., et al.
(2020). Scipy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for
scientific computing in python. Nature methods,
17(3):261–272.
[91] Wang, J., Yang, X., Zhang, J., Li, H., Fong, M.,
Xu, H., He, M., Gu, Y., Luo, W., Dong, F.,
et al. (2022). Halo properties and mass functions
of groups/clusters from the desi legacy imaging sur-
veys dr9. The Astrophysical Journal, 936(2):161.
[92] Wiersma, R. P., Schaye, J., and Smith, B. D. (2009).
The effect of photoionization on the cooling rates of
enriched, astrophysical plasmas. Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 393(1):99–107.
[93] Yang, X., Mo, H., and van den Bosch, F. C. (2008).
Galaxy groups in the sdss dr4. ii. halo occupation
statistics. The Astrophysical Journal, 676(1):248–
261.
[94] Yoo, J., Shin, J., Hwang, H. S., Sabiu, C. G., Kim,
H., Ko, J., and Lee, J. C. (2025). Tracing dark
matter in the central regions of galaxy clusters us-
ing galaxies, gas, and intracluster light in tng300:
Connections to cluster dynamical state. The Astro-
physical Journal, 988(2):229.
19