Title: Hub-Aware Hybrid Search: Accelerating the Locally Aligned Ant Technique
Authors: Simone Vilardi, Reynier Peletier, Felipe Contreras, Kerstin Bunte
Published: 2026-06-04
Categories: cs.NE, astro-ph.CO, astro-ph.GA, astro-ph.IM

Hub-Aware Hybrid Search: Accelerating the
Locally Aligned Ant Technique
Simone Vilardi1, Reynier Peletier 2, Felipe Contreras1,3 and Kerstin Bunte 1
1- University of Groningen - Bernoulli Institute
for Mathematics, Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
2- University of Groningen - Kapteyn Astronomical Institute
3- Instituto de F´ ısica y Astronom´ ıa, Universidad de Valpara´ ıso
Abstract. Finding manifold structures in noisy and high-dimensional
point clouds is a challenging but important problem. In astronomical ob-
servation survey and simulation data the detection of filaments, streams
(1D), walls (2D) and clusters (3D) gives rise to deeper understanding of
the evolution of our universe. The Locally Aligned Ant Technique (LAAT)
uses biologically inspired agents to efficiently recover faint and multidi-
mensional structures. However, very dense hubs (e.g. nodes or globular
clusters) dominate the ants’ activity, creating unnecessary computational
overheads. In this paper we propose a two-stage solution. First a fast
preprocessing step locates the hubs and replaces them with a tailored like-
lihood model. Subsequently, a mixed likelihood-pheromone strategy guides
the ants to efficiently bridge the dense regions. We demonstrate improve-
ments in detection efficiency and robustness of LAAT with synthetic and
a large-scale astronomical N-body simulation of the cosmic web.
1 Introduction
To understand the large-scale structure of the Universe, it is paramount to iden-
tify filaments, streams, and clusters within the cosmic web, which are diffi-
cult to detect due to noise and high dimensionality in astronomical surveys
and N-body simulations.[1–4] The 1-DREAM pipeline was developed to detect
and model one-dimensional manifolds in such settings [5, 6], with LAAT as
its first module for identifying likely manifold members via an ant-colony op-
timisation scheme combining local geometry and pheromone reinforcement [5].
However, real datasets often contain very dense hubs where ants rapidly accumu-
late, causing these clusters to dominate pheromone accumulation and subsequent
thresholding. This wastes computation resources and hampers the desired one-
dimensional manifold recovery. Recent extensions proposing a dynamic radius
[7, 8] improved the noise handling and user-friendliness of LAAT, but the ants
still spent a significant amount of steps (time) in dense regions. We present a
revised LAAT that mitigates hub dominance 1 by: (1) identifying dense regions,
(2) fitting a likelihood model to each region, (3) running ants on the combined
likelihood-point cloud domain, and (4) introducing a modified transition prob-
ability incorporating those models to guide the ants towards fainter structures.
These modifications retain the alignment-and-pheromone mechanism of LAAT,
while avoiding the repeated exploration of dense hubs. This improves the recov-
ery of filamentary manifolds in challenging cosmological datasets.
1code publicly available athttps://git.lwp.rug.nl/cs.projects/Hub-LAAT
arXiv:2606.06198v1  [cs.NE]  4 Jun 2026

2 Methodology
LAAT guides stochastic agents across a dataset using pheromone deposition
and evaporation schemes inspired by biology. Given a datasetX={x i}N
i=1, for
each point,x i ∈I RD we define a spherical neighbourhoodN (i)
r of radiusrand
compute local eigen-vectors and -values{(v d, λ)d)}D
d=1 within it. LAAT drives
ants with two preferences: (i) Alignment of (x j −x i) withv d represented by
angle|cosα (i,j)
d |and weighted byλ d, thusA (i,j) =PD
d=1
|cosα (i,j)
d |
P
d′ |cosα (i,j)
d′ | · λdP
d′ λd′
,
and neighborhood relative ¯A(i,j) = A(i,j)
P
j′∈N (i)
r
A(i,j′) . (ii) And relative accumulated
pheromone ¯F j(t) at timetat pointx j ∈ N (i)
r , that can evaporate on rarely
visited points (see [5]). Both combined result in a movement preference fromx i
tox j of an ant at timetwith contributions controlled byκ∈[0,1]:
V (i,j)(t) = (1−κ) ¯F j(t) +κ ¯A(i,j).(1)
The transition probabilities are viewed as negative “energies”
P(j|i, t) = exp

β V (i,j) (t)

/P
j′ ∈N (i)
r
exp

β V (i,j′ )(t)

,(2)
with inverse temperatureβ. Herej ′ indexes points in the local neighbour-
hoodN (i)
r of pointi. To allow efficient parallelization with multiple ants, the
pheromone is updated in epochs encompassing a number of ant steps. The evo-
lutionary process is linear with the number of points, with a one time squared
preprocessing cost including local PCA [5]. The presence of dense hubs induces
two issues: (1) pheromone accumulates, making them local attractors and reduc-
ing visitations in fainter structures, and (2) structure members are detected by
pheromone thresholding, which tends to keep a significant amount of points in
these small dense regions, slowing down any subsequent analysis unnecessarily.
2.1 Hub identification and modelling
Our approach is designed for efficiency, identifying dense regions to reduce com-
putational burden in the subsequent evolutionary computation. In the special
case ofκ= 1 in (1) the ants ignore the pheromone and transition probabilities
are independent oftand stay constant withP ij =P(j|i). It can be considered
a Markov Chain (MC) and studied as stationary distribution of the point cloud
(several if isolated). It is independent of the starting point and will converge
to a steady-state vectorπ, the dominant left eigenvector of the transition ma-
trix containing the visitation frequency of each data point. We compute this
eigenvector using the Power method and use the thresholding strategy proposed
in [7] to obtain high visitation values indicating dense regions. Concretely, for
every particlex i we sort its neighboursx j ∈ N (i)
r in ascending order of visi-
tation scores j =π j, obtain the minimum (maximum) values min (smax), and
smooth the distribution by fitting a cubic splinef(s). The first inflection point
s0 is found by differentiation and marks a steep change. A parameterηdefines

a local thresholdT i, more aggressive or conservative:
Ti =
(
s0 + (smax −s 0)η,1≥η≥0,
s0 + (s0 −s min)η,−1≤η <0. (3)
A minimum threshold is enforced as a fraction of the average visitationT i ≥
ψ
N
PN
j=1 πj. We then cluster high-visitation points via the friends-of-friends
algorithm with linking lengthl=b(V/N) 1/D, whereVis the data volume (or
surface) with free parameterb∈[0.1,1]. Alternativelylcan be chosen as LAAT
neighbourhood radiusr. We only retain hubs containing at leastN min points.
After detection we fit a likelihood model to each of theKhubs, forming
the basis for the new hybrid ant-movement scheme. We model the distribution
using a Bayesian Gaussian mixture with a Dirichlet process prior 2. The fitted
BGM yields a continuous likelihood field, which we divide into High-Likelihood
Points (HLPs) or Low-Likelihood Points (LLP) to remove the dense central
region and keep a transition region to lower density outskirts. Although hubs
are general, we simplify using nested equal-volume Mahalanobis shells centred at
the maximum likelihood point of thek’s modelc k to approximate likelihood level
sets. LetN p denote the number of particles enclosed up to shellℓwith radiusr ℓ,
Nhub the total number of hub particles and the enclosed fractionR=N p/Nhub.
For growing shellsS ℓ ={x j :r ℓ−1 <∥x j −c k∥ ≤r ℓ }, we compute a stopping
probabilityp stop = (eα/R −1) /(e1/R −1)withα= R−0.5
0.5 ,which increases as a larger
fraction of the hub has been enclosed. A random drawu∼U(0,1) terminates the
shell expansion whenu < p stop. The median likelihood of the final shell defines
the hub thresholdT k separating HLP (> T k) from LLP (≤T k). Removing
the HLP from the data before exploration prevents any future ant visitation,
reducing computational time and memory requirements.
2.2 New ant transition probabilities
All remaining data pointsx i carry likelihood information for theKmodelled
hubsL (i)
k withk= 1. . . K. The friends-of-friends clustering provides a crisp
assignment so each point has at most one likelihood value (extension to fuzzy
memberships are possible). For points that do not belong to any hub the original
LAAT transition probabilities (2) are used. When the current pointx i has a
valid hub assignmentk, we replace the old transition using the hub’s LLPs as
follows. For a neighbourx j ∈ N (i)
r we define the likelihood difference term
∆(i,j)
k =
L(i)
k − L(j)
k
, and the likelihood-based transition probability becomes
P(j|i) = ∆(i,j)
k L(j)
k /Tk
P
j′∈N (i)
r
∆(i,j′)
k L(j′)
k /Tk
.(4)
This probability favours target neighbours that both differ strongly in likelihood
fromx i and lie in high-likelihood regions, thus directing ants towards sharp
likelihood gradients. This transition alone would steer the ants to surround the
2BayesianGaussianMixtureinhttps://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn.

Fig. 1: a) Mock data. b) and c) Old and New LAAT outputs.
cavity. To allow faster exploration, we propose a double jump strategy with
controlled repulsion. For the targetx j fromx i (4) we compute the Euclidean
distanceδ ij. With a probabilityP 2nd(j) = exp(− δij/r) a 2nd jump is triggered
to a random pointx j′ in the LLP set of modelk, effectively expanding the
neighbourhoodN (i)
r to the model shell LLP k. A longe-range repulsion follows
the 2nd jump to increase the chance to leave the hub. Concretely, a shell is
formed centred atx j′ with potential target pointsx m at a distanceγ minr≤
δj′m ≤γ maxr. The parametersγ min andγ max control the repulsion range relative
to the LAAT parameter radiusr. The transition probability for repulsionP rep =
exp(−L(m)
k /L(j′)
k ), favours moves towards lower-likelihood points, that connect the
hub to fainter structures, effectively enabling the ants to leave the hub.
3 Experiments and Discussion
We compare the new algorithm with the original LAAT on a synthetic dataset
with known ground truth components, to measure component recovery directly.
Then we study the new parameters sensitivity using a second cosmic-web-like
mock dataset and demonstrate its scalability on a 50 3 Mpc3/hcosmic web N-
body simulation cube containing 2.8×10 5 particles. Throughout the experi-
ments, we fixβ= 10 in the MC transition probabilities toleranceε= 0.1 and a
maximum of 100 steps in the Power Iteration. We model each Bayesian Gaussian
mixture with maximal 10 components, full covariances and a uniform concen-
tration prior. We set ant-transition parametersγ min = 1.5 andγ max = 2.5.
Table 1: Component recovery.
OLD NEW
Dense hub 88% 5%
Filament 5% 72%
Noise 1% 3%
Synthetic data:the sample contains 8×10 3
particles: 64% in the dense hub, 26% in the
filament, and 10% noise. For the old method
we use 100 ants, 1000 epochs, and 10000 steps
withr= 0.25. For the new one, the new hyper-
parameters (ψ, η, b) are set to (0.005,−0.2, r).
To ensure a fair comparison, we estimated, by wall-clock CPU timing, that the
new preprocessing steps weight around 40 epochs of 10000 steps on this dataset.
As a consequence, we leave the number of ants and steps unchanged, and reduce
the number of epochs to 960. Results are shown in Figure 1 and Table 1 report-
ing the recovery fractions of each component and demonstrate the significant
improvement in filamentary component recovery achieved by the new algorithm.
Parameter analysis:the algorithm behaviour is primarily governed by the pre-
processing parameters, with all others fixed due to their weaker empirical impact.

Fig. 2: a) Mock data. b) Filament skeletons. c) Tubes to select candidate
filament points for the analysis.
The parameterbcontrols the typical spatial extent of detected hubs, whileψ
andηregulate the partition into dense and non-dense points, balancing speed
and completeness. Lower values classify more points as dense, risking removal of
faint structures, whereas higher values make hub detection stricter and limit hub
usage. To study this trade-off, we use a synthetic, cosmic web-like point cloud
comprising two high-density Gaussian nodes, three filaments of varying length,
shape and density, and uniform background noise (totalling around 2.4·10 4
points). We perform a sensitivity analysis of the parameters similar to [5].
Specifically, we alterψ∈[0.0005,0.5] andη∈[−1,1], and fix the remaining
parameters to 100 ants, 100 epochs, 5000 steps,r= 0.5, andb= 0.2. Figure 2
shows the dataset with filament skeletons and tube regions to select points at a
fixed radial distance (r= 0.35), corresponding to∼70% of all filament points.
As in Taghribi et al. [5] we evaluate the recovery of the filament using the av-
erage Hausdorff distance (AHD) [9]. We focus specifically on filaments with
comparisons made between the union of true filament points within the tubes in
Figure 2 and LAAT-selected points constrained to the same regions (Table 1).
Fig. 3: Global mean AHD as a func-
tion of the hyperparametersψandη.
As shown in Figure 3, increasing ei-
therψorηmakes hub detection more
restrictive, reducing filament complete-
ness and increasing the average Haus-
dorff distance. The best overall recovery
for this dataset is obtained for (ψ, η) =
(0.1,−1), which corresponds to the low-
est mean AHD.
cosmic web:The new Hub-LAAT
significantly improves scenarios involv-
ing multiple dense regions, as they guide
the ants more efficiently, accelerating
and substantially improving the overall
exploration process, as illustrated in Figure 4. Panels (b) and (c) show, the top
105 particles with the highest pheromone values obtained with the old and the
new LAAT algorithms, using identical settings (100 ants, 100 epochs, 10 4 steps
andr= 1). Hub-LAAT hyperparameters (ψ, η, b) were set to (0.005,−0.6, r).
Panel (d) displays the top 10 5 particles from Hub-LAAT (c) with an additional
number of particles equalling those removed during preprocessing (∼3.7×10 4).

Fig. 4: a) cosmic web data. b) and c) Top 10 5 particles with highest pheromone
levels from original and new LAAT. (d) Top 105 particles plus∼3.7·10 4 particles
(matching the number new LAAT preprocessing removed).
Lacking ground truth, the evaluation is necessarily qualitative.
4 Conclusions and future work
In this paper, we propose a two-stage modification to LAAT: fast hub detec-
tion with a tailored likelihood model, followed by mixed likelihood-pheromone
ant transition probabilities. These extensions mitigate hub-induced overconcen-
tration, reduce computational and memory overhead, accelerate the recovery of
filaments and streams, and improve robustness in noisy, high-dimensional cos-
mological datasets. In future work we will develop a temporal version of the
methodology to model the dynamic evolution of galaxy structures over time.
Acknowledgments
Funded by the European Union (MSCA EDUCADO, GA 101119830). Views and opinions
expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of
the European Union. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held
responsible for them.
References
[1] J. R. Bond, L. Kofman, and D. Pogosyan. “How filaments of galaxies are woven
into the cosmic web”. In:Nat.380.6575 (1996), pp. 603–606.
[2] M. Cautun et al. “Evolution of the cosmic web”. In:MNRAS441.4 (2014),
pp. 2923–2973.doi:10.1093/mnras/stu768.
[3] V. Springel. “The cosmological simulation code GADGET-2”. In:MNRAS364.4
(2005), pp. 1105–1134.doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.09655.x.
[4] J. Schaye et al. “The EAGLE project: simulating the evolution and assembly of
galaxies and their environments”. In:MNRAS446.1 (2015), pp. 521–554.
[5] A. Taghribi et al. “LAAT: Locally Aligned Ant Technique for Discovering Multiple
Faint Low Dimensional Structures of Varying Density”. In:IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng.35.6 (2023), pp. 6014–6027.doi:10.1109/TKDE.2022.3177368.
[6] M. Canducci et al. “1-DREAM: 1D Recovery, Extraction and Analysis of Mani-
folds in noisy environments”. In:Astron. Comput.41 (2022), p. 100658.
[7] F. Contreras, K. Bunte, and R. Peletier. “Improved LAAT strategy to recover
manifolds embedded in strong noise”. In:31st ESANN. 2023, pp. 71–76.
[8] F. Contreras, K. Bunte, and R. Peletier. “Adaptive Locally Aligned Ant Technique
for Manifold Detection and Denoising”. In:33rd ESANN. 2025, pp. 111–116.
[9] M.-P. Dubuisson and A. Jain. “A modified Hausdorff distance for object match-
ing”. In:Proc. of the 12th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit.Vol. 1. 1994, 566–568 vol.1.
doi:10.1109/ICPR.1994.576361.