Title: Systematically Measuring Ultra-Diffuse Galaxies. IX. A Gyr in the Life of Nearby Low Surface Brightness Galaxies
Authors: Dennis Zaritsky, Richard Donnerstein, Loraine Sandoval Ascencio, M. C. Cooper, Donghyeon J. Khim, Kristine Spekkens
Published: 2026-06-02
Categories: astro-ph.GA

Draft version June 3, 2026
Typeset using LATEXtwocolumnstyle in AASTeX7.0.1
Systematically Measuring Ultra-Diffuse Galaxies. IX. A Gyr in the Life of Nearby Low Surface
Brightness Galaxies
Dennis Zaritsky
 ,1 Richard Donnerstein
 ,1 Loraine Sandoval Ascencio
 ,2 M.C. Cooper
 ,2
Donghyeon J. Khim
 ,1 and Kristine Spekkens
 3
1Steward Observatory and Department of Astronomy, University of Arizona, 933 N. Cherry Ave., Tucson, AZ 85721, USA
2Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of California, Irvine, 4129 Reines Hall, Irvine, CA 92697, USA
3Department of Physics, Engineering Physics and Astronomy Queen ’s University Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada
Submitted to ApJ
ABSTRACT
We augment the published optical photometry of ultra-diffuse galaxy candidates in the SMUDGes
catalog with UV and IR measurements to investigate the recent (<1 Gyr) star formation history of
966 galaxies. We find that 1) we classify star forming, post-starforming, and quenched galaxies with
a precision that is comparable to that of spectroscopic studies, 2) the star forming systems are sub-
normally efficient and would not have formed their current stellar mass at their current star formation
rate over a Hubble time, 3) the sample is biased against more strongly star forming systems by the
central surface brightness criterion of ultra-diffuse galaxies, 4) for galaxies that are not quenched, the
timescale of star formation episodes in this sample is typically≲1 Gyr, 5) post-starburst galaxies in
the sample tend to be of lower stellar mass and star forming galaxies of higher stellar mass, suggesting
that the star forming behavior of these galaxies does depend on mass, and 6) there is a marginal
indication, with caveats, that star formation episodes increase galaxy size, as measured by the half-
light radius, by about 8%. In addition to providing a statistically-sized sample with which to explore
the star formation behavior of these galaxies, this study also provides a way to select galaxies with
specific recent star formation histories for spectroscopic follow-up.
Keywords:Low surface brightness galaxies (940), Galaxy properties (615)
1.INTRODUCTION
The study of star formation in galaxies is a far too
large and complex field to summarize here, even if we
confine ourselves to dwarf galaxies (see Haynes 2019,
and the associated conference proceedings for an intro-
duction to issues related to dwarf galaxy evolution). In-
stead, we consider how one might explore this topic in
a manner that simplifies to one or two questions of in-
terest — at the expense of ignoring other important as-
pects. Our current interest is in the internal processes
that govern star formation in the simplest possible cases.
In other words, if one leaves a galaxy alone — no inter-
actions, no environmental processes such as ram pres-
Corresponding author: Dennis Zaritsky
dennis.zaritsky@gmail.com
sure stripping or tidal harassment, no feedback from a
supermassive black hole — how does it behave?
This type of approach, and specifically this question,
has motivated the study of dwarf galaxies in the field
(for examples across the decades, see Gerola et al. 1980;
Davies & Phillipps 1988; Simpson & Gottesman 2000;
Ferrara & Tolstoy 2000; McQuinn et al. 2010; Mart´ ın-
Manj´ on et al. 2012). Although it is difficult to find a
sample of galaxies that avoids all of these complica-
tions, considering low-mass galaxies mitigates the ma-
jor coherent internal dynamical drivers (bars and spi-
ral arms, minimizes the likelihood of supermassive black
holes (although see Kaviraj et al. (2026) for a counter-
argument), and, avoids, for the most part, major merg-
ers. Low-mass star-forming systems are primarily found
away from overdense areas, thereby also mitigating the
complication of environmental effects. Dwarf galaxies
found in dense environments then probe the differen-
tiating effects of environments. Studies of field dwarf
arXiv:2606.03652v1  [astro-ph.GA]  2 Jun 2026

2Zaritsky, et al.
galaxies have generally concluded that low mass galaxies
undergo stochastic and episodic bursts of star formation
during their lifetimes (cf., Searle et al. 1973; McQuinn
et al. 2010; Weisz et al. 2011; Kauffmann 2014).
Such episodes, at least those most frequently observed,
are usually intense, can have profound effects on the
baryonic distribution of these low-mass galaxies (Silk
et al. 1987), and in some cases may eventually lead to
the morphological transformation of the galaxy (Davies
& Phillipps 1988). The key parameters determining the
role these bursts play are the strength, frequency, and
duration of the bursts. Bursts, in typical low-redshift
dwarf galaxies that are undergoing or have had a recent
burst, have star formation rates (SFRs) that are at least
a few times the average rate of star formation over the
galaxy’s lifetime, form between a few and∼20% of the
total stellar mass of a system, last about half a Gyr,
and have a frequency of roughly one per Gyr (McQuinn
et al. 2010).
Low-surface-brightness (LSB) dwarfs might be con-
sidered a contrast to these systems. At least those in
the field should have the fuel needed to drive star for-
mation, perhaps even the vigorous bursts identified in
other dwarf galaxies, and yet they are diffuse and have
low surface brightness, suggesting that at least recently
they have not had such a burst. In particular, the most
massive LSB dwarfs, where there is no question that
they should be able to gravitationally retain their gas,
present a dilemma.
These are the ultra-diffuse galaxies (UDGs), a term
coined by van Dokkum et al. (2015) upon their iden-
tification of a large number of galaxies with low cen-
tral surface brightness (µ 0,g >24 mag arcsec −2) and
large effective radii (r e >1.5 kpc) in the Coma cluster.
When, as was the case for van Dokkum et al. (2015),
these galaxies are found in dense environments, the lack
of star formation is attributed to environmental effects
(van Dokkum et al. 2015; Carleton et al. 2019; Sales
et al. 2020; Tremmel et al. 2020). When they are found
outside of clusters or groups (Prole et al. 2019), ques-
tions arise about what restricts their star formation.
There are various aspects to consider. First, field
UDGs/LSBs are more likely to be star-forming (or
younger) than their cluster counterparts (Prole et al.
2019; Kadowaki et al. 2021), although there is a quies-
cent field population (Prole et al. 2021). As such, per-
haps the moderating of star formation is not as abso-
lute as one might have thought necessary. Second, some
models for the formation of UDGs invoke strong bursts
of star formation, leading to strong stellar feedback, fol-
lowed by periods of quiescence (Di Cintio et al. 2017;
Chan et al. 2018). In such cases, current quiescence does
not imply sustained quiescence. In contrast, other mod-
els for UDG formation, such as those that invoke high
spin halos to halt collapse and subsequent high surface
brightness (Jimenez et al. 1998; Amorisco & Loeb 2016;
Wright et al. 2021), suggest that star formation may
always be modest in these galaxies.
To address these and other topics related to large LSB
galaxies, we describe our effort to Systematically Mea-
sure Ultra-Diffuse Galaxies (SMUDGes) by identifying
a sample of UDG candidates across the footprint of the
Legacy Survey (Dey et al. 2019) in a series of papers. A
strength of this survey is that it probes all galaxy en-
vironments. To summarize, the papers in the sequence
that are of relevance here are : 1) Zaritsky et al. (2019),
hereafter Paper I, which presents the survey concept and
initial results, 2) Zaritsky et al. (2021), hereafter Paper
II, which presents the analysis of an equatorial stripe, in-
troduces parameter error estimation, and begins to dis-
cuss the effect of Galactic Cirrus on the results, 3) Zarit-
sky et al. (2022), hereafter Paper III, which presents the
galaxy catalog obtained for the southern portion of the
Legacy Survey that is used here and describes further
refinements including, importantly for this study, how
redshifts are estimated for those galaxies that can be
associated with neighboring galaxies for which redshift
measurements exist, 4) Zaritsky et al. (2023), hereafter
Paper V, which presents the complete galaxy catalog,
and 5) Zaritsky et al. (2025), hereafter Paper VIII, which
refines the visual classification of candidates that are un-
likely to survive scrutiny.
It is our aim in this study to use this sample to quan-
tify the recent (≲1 Gyr) star formation history (SFH)
of these galaxies and determine the nature of SFR fluc-
tuations — whether the SFR behaves as in other low
mass galaxies and whether there is any relation between
recent bursts and galaxy size, among other questions.
In§2 we describe our data, including new UV and IR
photometry of these sources that is essential to recov-
ering the recent star formation history. In§3 we de-
scribe our process for recovering the SFH of these sys-
tems, with a particular focus on the most recent Gyr,
where the available diagnostics can best constrain it.
We present and discuss our results in§4 and summarize
in§5. Throughout, we use a WMAP9 ΛCDM flat cos-
mology with Ω = 0.287 and H 0 = 69.3 km s −1 Mpc−1
(Hinshaw et al. 2013). Magnitudes are in the AB sys-
tem (Oke 1964; Oke & Gunn 1983). In the appendix,
we compare our photometry to that available in the lit-
erature and test our ability to recover certain aspects
of the SFH of these galaxies. This paper is the first of
several underway that will use these results to investi-

A Gyr in the Life3
gate the governors of star formation in local, low surface
brightness galaxies across different environments.
2.THE DATA
2.1.The Sample
We begin with the 5598 UDG candidates identified
in Paper III from our analysis of all images obtained
with DECam (Flaugher et al. 2015) at the CTIO 4m,
or Blanco, telescope that are included in Data Release 9
(DR9) of the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys (Dey et al.
2019). We limit the analysis to this southern portion of
the Legacy Survey because of the superior image quality
of that section. Following the revisited visual classifica-
tions presented in Paper VIII, we reject a few of these
candidates and retain 5428.
We extend the wavelength range of the spectral en-
ergy distribution (SED) that we have available to ana-
lyze by augmenting the SMUDGesg,r, andzmeasure-
ments with ultraviolet bands, FUV (1539 ˚A) and NUV
(2316 ˚A) from theGalaxy Evolution Explorer(GALEX;
Morrissey et al. 2007), and infrared bands, W1 (3.4
µm), W2 (4.6µm), W3 (12µm), and W4 (22µm) from
theWide-field Infrared Survey Explorer(WISE; Wright
et al. 2010). For our analysis, we require acceptable
photometry in all three optical bands and in at least one
band in each of the UV and IR regimes (see Appendix B
for a discussion of this requirement). This requirement
reduces the sample down to 4440 candidates.
GALEX imaging of the sky is limited, and many re-
gions were observed using short exposure times, result-
ing in poor measurements for these faint galaxies. We
conclude that robust photometry requires a minimum
GALEX exposure time of 900 seconds for our sources
and therefore add this as a requirement. After applying
this additional requirement, we have 2428 candidates
available for further processing. For these candidates,
we provide our non-optical photometric measurements
in Table 1. Our photometry procedure is described in
§2.3 and§2.4, for the UV and IR bands, respectively.
Finally, because a measured redshift is necessary to es-
timate a distance and derive physical parameters, such
as the stellar mass, we further limit the sample analyzed
here to the subsample of 966 SMUDGes that have an ex-
isting redshift estimate. Our SED fitting is unstable if
we attempt to simultaneously fit the redshift. Of these
966 galaxies, 159 have spectroscopic measurements from
a range of sources that we continually update (see Paper
VIII for details and contact authors for an up-to-date
list), 701 are projected onto rich clusters with known
distances (e.g., Coma, Virgo, and Fornax), and 106 are
in groups where other members have known redshifts
(see Paper III for details on this subsample). Although
cluster associations have proven to be relatively robust
(e.g., Kadowaki et al. 2017, 2021), in Paper III we es-
timate that up to∼30% of redshifts based on group
membership may be catastrophically wrong. This error
rate implies that perhaps 32 galaxies in the sample have
such redshift errors. We will show that such errors do
not qualitatively affect our conclusions in this study.
The redshift requirement introduces certain biases in
the sample. First, the sample tends to be biased to-
ward dense environments because many of the redshift
estimates are for galaxies associated with dense environ-
ments. Among the field galaxies in the sample, we tend
to be biased toward star forming systems because it is
easier to measure a redshift from an optical spectrum if
emission lines are present and because a significant num-
ber of our field redshifts come from HIobservations. As
such, one should be cautious when drawing inferences
from the relative number of galaxies of certain types.
We will analyze our star formation history results in the
context of different environmental measures in Khim et
al. (in prep.) and present those environmental measures
in Narisetty et al. (in prep.).
As in our previous studies, all processing and analysis
is performed using the Puma cluster at the University
of Arizona High Performance Computing center 4.
2.2.Optical Photometry
Our image processing pipeline for the DECam optical
bands is described in detail in Papers I, II, III, and V.
We summarize only here. Briefly, for the Southern Sur-
vey (Papers I, II, and III), we obtained calibrated CCD
images and data quality masks that have been processed
by the DECam Community Pipeline (Valdes et al. 2014)
from the NOIRLab website. Our approach to object de-
tection is primarily described in Paper I. We start by
masking objects that are too bright to be UDGs and
then use tailored filters to select targets that may match
our size requirements (r e ≳5 arcsec). We then measure
the photometric and structural properties for each de-
tection using GALFIT (Peng et al. 2002a) and retain vi-
able candidates. Detections likely to be cirrus are culled
usingτ 353 (Planck Collaboration et al. 2014) and WISE
12µm (Meisner & Finkbeiner 2014) dust maps. Specif-
ically, we reject those at locations with single-point val-
ues greater than 0.05 forτ 353 or 0.1 MJy/sr for WISE 12
µm. Further screening is performed with an automated
system using a convolutional neural network previously
trained with known candidate UDGs. Each of the sur-
viving candidates is then visually reviewed. The four
structural parameters derived from the optical GALFIT
4 public.confluence.arizona.edu/display/UAHPC/Resources

4Zaritsky, et al.
T able 1.SMUDGes GALEX UV and WISE IR Photometry
SMUDGes ID FUVσ F U V NUVσ N U V W1σ W1 W2σ W2 W3σ W3 W4σ W4
SMDG0039472−370027 4.53 0.17 4.60 0.30 0.00 2.25 0.00 3.07 0.00 39.58 371.88 321.40
SMDG0039489−162223−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99
SMDG0039525+034347 0.00 0.12 0.00 0.21 0.00 1.62 0.00 1.98 0.00 40.29 0.00 112.52
SMDG0039587+024558 0.31 0.15 0.72 0.23 0.00 1.02 0.00 1.63 0.00 30.02 0.00 85.31
SMDG0040029+025725 0.00 0.13 0.00 0.24 2.71 2.19−9.99−9.99 113.97 43.35 0.00 61.44
SMDG0040103−303513−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99
SMDG0040194+033200 1.77 0.11 2.70 0.29 0.00 1.95 0.00 2.73−9.99−9.99 0.00 100.21
SMDG0040218−220213−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99
SMDG0040239−013230−9.99−9.99 0.37 0.23 0.00 0.85 0.00 1.40 0.00 22.97 0.00 65.61
SMDG0040340−561554−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99−9.99
Note—Photometry is presented here for a random set of 10 objects from the SMUDGes catalog (Zaritsky et al. 2023). Table
is line matched to the SMUDGes catalog and the full Table is available electronically. Entries of−9.99 indicated no suitable
data, while entries with 0.00 indicate no detection and the associated uncertainties provide information on upper flux limits.
All fluxes are in units of nanomaggies.
estimates (effective radius,r e; axis ratio,b/a; S´ ersic in-
dex,n; and position angle,θ) are used to measure the
magnitudes in the UV and IR bands.
Our approach for estimating the uncertainties of the
optical measurements is described in detail in Paper II
with modifications noted in Papers III and V. We use
the values obtained from Paper V. Briefly, we estimate
uncertainties by planting simulated UDGs using S´ ersic
profiles with random structural and photometric prop-
erties at random locations. These were processed sepa-
rately with the same pipeline used for our real sources,
including automated classification. We define errors for
these simulations as the difference between their final
GALFIT values and the values used when creating them
(GALFIT−input). These uncertainties are generally
asymmetric, and we estimate the “1σ” confidence lim-
its as the 16 and 84 percentiles of the distribution for a
set of similar simulated objects. Finally, we model the
simulated uncertainties using a second-order polynomial
to fit the simulation data and apply these results to the
optical data.
2.3.Ultraviolet Photometry
UV images of galaxies tend to be clumpy and, in gen-
eral, are not well represented by S´ ersic profiles. There-
fore, we measure the magnitudes and associated un-
certainties using aperture photometry. All GALEX
images were obtained from the Mikulski Archive for
Space Telescopes (MAST) 56 and can be accessed via
5 http://galex.stsci.edu/data/
6 galex
https://doi.org/10.17909/npwd-sh81 (Donnerstein et al.
2026). Downloaded images include the raw number of
counts per pixel (cnt), the high resolution relative re-
sponse (rrhr, which is the relative sensitivity multiplied
by the exposure time map), and the sky background
map (skybg). For each candidate, we download all ob-
servations in which the candidate’s centroid lies less than
0.55 degrees from the center of the field of view. This
approach rejects data where the target is in a part of
the field-of-view where the image quality deteriorates.
We then stack the available images for each candidate.
After creating cutouts centered on the candidate, an in-
tensity image is generated as cnt/rrhr. Native GALEX
images are not background-subtracted so skybg is sub-
tracted from the intensity image. Using the structural
parameters obtained in the optical, an effective centered
aperture of 1.5r e is calculated by convolving the asso-
ciated filter point-spread function (FWHM in FUV of
4.2′′and in NUV of 5.2 ′′; Morrissey et al. 2007) with the
object’s S´ ersic profile and then matching the flux within
that aperture in the convolved profile to the flux at 1.5re
in the original profile.
Although we subtract the sky level from the intensity
image, the aperture can still be contaminated by pro-
jected objects. To estimate both the level of contam-
ination and the associated uncertainties, we define 24
wedge-shaped apertures in two annuli surrounding the
target starting at a distance of 3r e from its center. This
step is done using the observation with the longest ex-
posure time, which is generally roughly consistent with
the total exposure time (on average the longest expo-
sure comprises 87% of the total exposure time). Each

A Gyr in the Life5
annulus is configured such that its total area is 12 times
that of the 1.5re aperture used for the target. Small dif-
ferences in area between wedges and the target aperture
are corrected by multiplying the flux within a wedge by
the ratio of the target aperture area to that of the wedge.
In general, the distributions of enclosed flux within the
background apertures are not Gaussian, and, therefore,
we estimate the contamination level and the 1σconfi-
dence limits using the Python astropy.stats functions bi-
weight location and biweight scale, respectively (Beers
et al. 1990). We generate our final estimate for the tar-
get GALEX flux by subtracting the contamination level
and multiplying by the aperture correction factor. We
adopt the FUV and NUV zeropoints of 18.82 and 20.08
AB mag (Morrissey et al. 2007). Any resulting flux value
less than zero has its associated magnitude flagged.
Although the above describes our basic approach,
there are additional issues that we address to ensure
that the results are reliable. First, although the targets
are chosen to be 0.55 deg away from an image edge, the
background apertures may be closer to an image edge
and, therefore, unreliable. In such cases, the number
of available background wedges may be significantly re-
duced, thereby reducing the robustness of our statistics.
Moreover, if a bright UV object lies near a target or
background aperture, it will skew the measurement. We
mitigate this potential contamination using theg−band
Legacy Survey images7. Each UV aperture is evaluated
separately. If there is an object that is too bright to
be a UDG (µ 0,g <24 mag arcsec −2) within 10 ′′ of its
aperture edge, then that object is masked out to the
g−band 26.5 mag arcsec −2 isophote. Background aper-
tures that have more than 20% of their pixels masked
are discarded. Masked pixels are converted to NaN’s and
then replaced with interpolated values using the numpy
function interpolate replace nans. We found that this
gave poor results when the g-band object flux was>15
nanomaggies. Therefore, background wedges containing
objects that exceed this value are discarded. Results ob-
tained using fewer than 5 background wedges or where
the target aperture itself was discarded are flagged as
unacceptable. A total of 117 UV observations are re-
jected by these criteria, with 42 failing in both bands.
In these cases, the photometry is set to−9.99 in Table
1, the same value as if there are no available data.
2.4.Infrared Photometry
We use a modified version of forced photometry for the
infrared bands, fixing the structural parameters to be
those derived from the optical data but unfixing the cen-
7 www.legacysurvey.org/viewer
troid. The centroid freedom allows for slight astrometric
differences. We download the WISE images as coadded
bricks from Data Release 10 of the southern portion of
the Legacy Survey8. As with the optical pipeline used in
Paper V, both the science and inverse-variance images
are used in the GALFIT processing. For each target, we
create cutouts of 325 ′′ on a side for further processing.
Because the WISE pixel scale is 2.75′′ pix−1, the cutouts
are first resampled to 0.262 ′′ pix−1 to match the opti-
cal images. We then create a mask using SEP (Barbary
2016) with a threshold set at the background rms level.
After three sigma-clipping, we estimate the median sky
level and its uncertainty. As with the optical images, we
use wavelets to isolate objects at different scales with a
tailored filter (see Paper I for details). However, while
wavelets were used to detect potential candidates in the
optical, here they are used to mask point sources that
may affect GALFIT results in crowded IR fields. We
measure the apparent magnitudes using GALFIT and
the optical structural parameters. We flag the results
if GALFIT failed to converge or if the estimates were
found to be unreliable. Although these requirements led
to a total of 1576 IR observations being flagged, none
were rejected in all four bands. WISE stacked images
are on the Vega system and are converted to AB mag-
nitudes using
magAB =mag V ega + ∆mag(1)
where ∆mag= 2.699, 3.339, 5.174, and 6.620 mag, for
W1 through W4, respectively 9.
The uncertainty estimates produced by GALFIT have
been shown to significantly underestimate true errors
(Haussler et al. 2007). As with our optical measure-
ments, we estimate the uncertainties using simulations.
Due to the low completeness at faint magnitudes, the
number of simulated sources required for statistical ro-
bustness ranged from about 10 6 for W4 to 5×10 6 for
W3. We divide the simulated sources by magnitude into
0.1 mag bins and fit the resulting measured parameter
histogram with a Gaussian. We find that for faint ob-
jects, GALFIT sometimes moves the object centroid to
a nearby object rather than failing. We mitigate this
problem by requiring that the offset between the fitted
GALFIT and optical locations be<0.4r e for both sci-
ence and simulated targets. As we show in Figure 1,
until sky noise begins to dominate the results (at about
21.5 mag in this example), there is a linear correlation
between the logarithm of uncertainty, log(σ mag), and
8 portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr10/south/coadd
9 wise2.ipac.caltech.edu/docs/release/allsky/expsup/-
sec4 4h.html#conv2ab

6Zaritsky, et al.
T able 2.WISE Uncer-
tainty Fit Coefficients
Band a b
W1 0.243−5.261
W2 0.295−6.152
W3 0.374−6.876
W4 0.424−6.843
magnitude. We use these results to estimate uncertain-
ties using
σmag = 10a∗mag+b,(2)
where a and b are the band-dependent slopes and inter-
cepts given in Table 2.
Figure 1.The WISE W1 photometric 1σuncertainties de-
termined assuming that the error distributions derived from
simulations are Gaussian (bottom panel). Histogram (top
panel) represents the W1 magnitude distribution of the sci-
ence targets. The fitted functional form is given (see Table
2 for corresponding coefficients for the other bands).
2.5.The Photometric Catalog
We provide UV and IR photometry in Table 1 for 2428
SMUDGes. The Table is line matched to the Paper V
SMUDGes catalog, so many lines contain no photom-
etry (all entries are−9.99). For the UV bands, if the
magnitude is flagged, indicating that its associated flux
was≤0, we assigned a flux value of zero. Similarly, we
assign a UV flux value of zero if the flux is less than the
1σupper bound. For the IR bands, if the flux is less
than the uncertainty or if the offset between the GAL-
FIT IR and optical centers is>0.4r e, then the flux is
set to zero. For these cases, we conservatively set the
uncertainty to be the flux contained within the corre-
sponding S´ ersic profile that has a peak flux equal to the
noise in the sky.
3.DERIVING THE STAR FORMATION HISTORY
We model the SEDs using PROSPECTOR (Johnson
et al. 2021), a Bayesian forward-modeling code devel-
oped to infer stellar population parameters from galaxy
photometry. This software uses the publicly available
Flexible Stellar Population Synthesis (FSPS) code (Con-
roy et al. 2009; Conroy & Gunn 2010). We now proceed
to provide details on our application of PROSPECTOR
in SMUDGes.
3.1.Curating the Input
Some pre-processing of the data is needed before run-
ning PROSPECTOR. First, we correct apparent magni-
tudes for Galactic extinction using dustmaps.py (Green
2018) to obtainE(B-V) SF D, where SFD references the
extinction maps of Schlegel et al. (1998). We obtain
the optical and WISE extinction coefficients (A g =
3.214, Ar = 2.165, A z = 1.211, A W1 = 0.184, A W2 =
0.113, AW3 = 0.024, AW4 = 0.009) from the Legacy Sur-
vey10 and those for GALEX (A F U V = 8.01, A N U V =
6.79) from Wall et al. (2019). First, we correct AB mag-
nitudes,mag AB by subtractingA X ×E(B−V) SF D from
the uncorrected values whereA X is the associated ex-
tinction coefficient for the relevant filter band. Second,
we convert frommag AB to flux in maggies using
f lux= 10 −9 
10(22.5−magAB)/2.5
(3)
where 22.5 is the zeropoint for the conversion. Similarly,
we convert the magnitude uncertainties for optical and
WISE images,σ magAB, to the flux uncertainties,σ f lux,
using
σf lux = ln(10)
2.5 σmagAB .(4)
For the optical, magnitudes and their uncertainties are
obtained from the SMUDGes catalog available in Paper
III. PROSPECTOR expects symmetric uncertainties, so
we average the upper and lower errors provided in the
catalog.
10 www.legacysurvey.org/dr10/catalogs/#galactic-extinction-
coefficients

A Gyr in the Life7
3.2.Recovering The Star Formation History
PROSPECTOR allows one to fit either a parametric
SFH model (an SFR with a pre-determined functional
form across time) or a nonparametric one, where the
SFR is (relatively) freely determined within separate age
bins. We opt to fit a nonparametric SFH because we
are focusing on unknown variations in the recent SFR.
This choice allows maximum flexibility in the SFH in a
limited set of time bins (Johnson et al. 2021; Leja et al.
2019).
An important choice lies in the definition of the age
bins. We set our age bins to roughly match the ages
where the different diagnostics available to us differen-
tiate best. We set four age bins (<20 Myr, 20-150
Myr, 150 Myr-1 Gyr, and>1 Gyr). The first age bin
is best tracked by Hαemission and tracks ongoing star
formation. While we do not currently have Hαimaging
broadly for SMUDGes, there are subsamples (e.g., San-
doval Ascencio et al. 2025) for which Hαspectroscopy is
beginning to become available. The second bin is best
probed by the GALEX UV flux and indicates recent
or ongoing star formation. While the UV fades after
that, the optical (blue colors, Balmer lines) tracks star
formation within the last∼Gyr and so this intermedi-
ate population is measured in the third bin. Finally, at
ages>1 Gyr, we are primarily tracking the integrated
stellar mass, and we have few diagnostics from broad
band photometry with which to recover star formation
rate variations. IR photometry provides the most robust
measure of the total stellar mass.
There is, however, a difficult choice in the degree of
freedom that one is willing to allow in bin-to-bin SFR
variations. It is likely unphysical to allow for arbitrarily
large variations because the SFR is unlikely to change
rapidly in correspondence to arbitrary bin boundaries
or to be tightly coordinated across an entire galaxy.
PROSPECTOR offers several options for the adopted
priors to help the user control the bin-to-bin SFR vari-
ations. The most common ones cited are one that is
termed the continuity prior (cf., Leja et al. 2019; Suess
et al. 2022; Haskell et al. 2024; Das et al. 2024; Ners-
esian, Angelos et al. 2025; Turner et al. 2025; Williams
et al. 2024; de los Reyes et al. 2025) and another that is
termed the Dirichlet prior (cf., Leja et al. 2019; Lower
et al. 2020; Ji & Giavalisco 2023; Williams et al. 2024;
Tanaka et al. 2023; Haskell et al. 2024; Webb et al.
2022; de los Reyes et al. 2025). The continuity prior
fits for ∆log(SFR) between adjacent time bins (Leja
et al. 2019) using a prior that favors small values of
∆log(SFR), disfavoring sharp transitions in star forma-
tion rates. Although this dampens sharp changes be-
tween adjacent age bins, it is considered sufficiently flex-
ible to handle both bursts and quenching (Leja et al.
2019; Suess et al. 2022; Haskell et al. 2024; Das et al.
2024). The Dirichlet prior models the fractional specific
SFR in each time bin using a Dirichlet distribution (Leja
et al. 2019). The Dirichlet prior as used in PROSPEC-
TOR contains a concentration parameterα D, such that
high values (≳1) tend to smooth the distribution be-
tween bins, while lower values prefer to concentrate the
mass in single bins with results strongly dependent on
the selected value (Leja et al. 2019).
We investigate this choice in more detail in Appendix
E.1 using simulations and a wide range ofα D selections.
To summarize, because our population consists of galax-
ies with diverse environments, colors, and physical char-
acteristics, we expect large variations in global SFHs
and, therefore, choose to use the more general continuity
prior. Our decision is further reinforced by the work of
de los Reyes et al. (2025) who note that PROSPECTOR
has trouble fitting low-mass galaxies using the Dirichlet
prior below some minimum number of age bins and for
certainα D values. In particular, they suggest using at
least six age bins and restrictingα D to values≳0.7. We
confirm their findings in Appendix E.1.
Next, we outline some more technical choices. First,
we choose to set the continuity nonparametric prior to
the default Student’s t-distribution. Second, we use the
Kroupa initial mass function (Kroupa 2001), the MILES
spectral library (S´ anchez-Bl´ azquez et al. 2006) and the
MIST isochrones (Dotter 2016; Choi et al. 2016; Paxton
et al. 2011, 2013, 2015). Third, low-mass UDGs tend
to be metal-poor (Ruiz-Lara et al. 2018; Ferr´ e-Mateu
et al. 2018; Barbosa et al. 2020; Heesters et al. 2023)
and, therefore, we adopt the SMC bar extinction law
from Gordon et al. (2003). We adopt an initial dust
prior that is uniform from−0.4 to 2 mag and ignore
dust emission 11. The unphysical lower limit allows for
full exploration of this parameter given the uncertainties
and degeneracies between the parameters. We discuss
this choice in more detail in Appendix C. Fourth, we
fit for the log of the total stellar mass (logmass) in so-
lar units and metallicity (logzsol). We adopt uniform
priors of 2.5 - 10 forlogmassand−4 to 0.2 dex forlogz-
sol. Bayesian posteriors are estimated using thedynesty
package (Speagle 2020; Koposov et al. 2024) based on
a nested sampling algorithm described by Higson et al.
(2019) and Skilling (2004, 2006) with 200 live points.
11 Dust emission is potentially a factor only in the W3 and W4
bands (R´ emy-Ruyer et al. 2015), where we mostly have upper
limits. The small number of galaxies, 8(4), for which we have
a W3(W4) measurement that exceeds a non-detection by 2σis
entirely consistent with attribution to random noise.

8Zaritsky, et al.
We estimate the SFR and the total mass for
each age bin using the PROSPECTOR functions
logsfr ratios to sfrs and logsfr ratios to masses. We de-
fine the lower and upper uncertainties as the 16 th and
84th percentiles, respectively.
4.RESULTS
We present the PROSPECTOR results in Table 3 for
the 966 SMUDGes with distance estimates that are used
in all of the following analysis. In our presentation, we
use certain combinations of the results to provide intu-
ition and synthesize this rich dataset. In particular, we
will discuss the current star formation as measured by
the mass of stars in the first bin, denoted by subscript 0,
divided by the time duration of that bin (SFR0 ≡M 0/20
Myr), the current specific SFR, which will be SFR 0 di-
vided by the total stellar mass (sSFR 0 ≡SFR 0/M∗),
and the intermediate age stellar mass fraction, which
we define to be the stellar mass in the 3rd bin divided
by the stellar mass in the 4th bin (≡M 2/M3, hereafter
referred to as A/K, reflecting the ratio of A-type stars
to K-type stars for historical reasons and as shorthand).
We have opted not to includeM1 in the intermediate age
bin to provide greater statistical independence between
A/K and the SFR. The M1 bin is likely to be dominated
by B-type stars if there has been recent star formation.
A key consideration in interpreting the results is the
“leakage” of inferred star formation from one temporal
bin to the next resulting both from photometric uncer-
tainties and from our PROSPECTOR priors. We have
previously discussed why smoother star formation his-
tories rather than ones with abrupt changes that cor-
respond to the edges of the defined bins may be ap-
propriate, nevertheless certain scenarios are disfavored
due to this choice. Because of this challenge, results
and the corresponding inferences must be vetted with
either spectroscopic observations, which offer more tem-
poral fidelity, or simulations, where one can test whether
a specific scenario does indeed produce the anticipated
signature in the PROSPECTOR results. The reader
should bear this in mind during our discussion and in
any independent application of the star formation rates
presented in Table 3. We discuss the effects of leakage
on our specific interpretations in Appendices D and E.
4.1.Comparison to Published Classifications
The preferred way to quantify the stellar populations
of galaxies is through spectroscopy. There, one can iden-
tify emission lines that testify to ongoing star forma-
tion (or possible nuclear activity), Balmer absorption
lines that highlight intermediate age stars, a Solar-type
spectrum that shows the presence of long-lived, lower
mass stars, and other diagnostics that can be used to
measure metallicity and dust extinction. However, even
with spectroscopy there are potential pitfalls. Perhaps
the most dangerous is that of aperture bias, where the
spectral aperture does not welcome light from the entire
galaxy. In that case, knots of star formation or a ra-
dial gradient may skew the inference. The antidote for
this problem is integral field spectroscopy (IFS), where
most or all of the galaxy is included in the aperture.
IFS observations are presented for a modest number of
SMUDGEs by Sandoval Ascencio et al. (2025) and for
other LSBs/UDGs by Ferr´ e-Mateu et al. (2018), who
happened to include a few SMUDGes within their larger
sample. These provide the best comparison set to our re-
sults, which are photometric rather than spectroscopic,
but which are at least based on the light from the entire
galaxy.
In Figure 2 we show where the SMUDGes lie within
our preferred diagnostic plot of SFR 0 vs. A/K. SFR 0
provides a measure of the ongoing star formation, so
we expect the star forming systems to lie near the top
of the Figure. A/K measures the ratio of intermediate
age stars (with ages<1 Gyr) to older stars, represent-
ing a measure of the relative strength of the recent star
formation rate of the galaxy. Exclusively old stellar pop-
ulations will lie toward the left of the Figure, and also
toward the bottom because they have no ongoing star
formation. Those galaxies that may have had recent
star formation, but have no current star formation, will
lie toward the lower right of the Figure. The degree
to which star forming, post-starforming, and quenched
galaxies are segregated in this Figure will determine the
precision with which we can use it for diagnostic pur-
poses.
We test these expectations by highlighting those
SMUDGes in the Figure with previously published des-
ignations using larger plotting symbols. We clarify that
the values of SFR 0 and A/K are those we measure for
these galaxies, not from the literature. The star forming
(SF) systems of Sandoval Ascencio et al. (2025) all cor-
rectly lie at the upper end of the inferred SFR 0 values.
This agreement validates the description of this popula-
tion and confirms that our SED analysis correctly classi-
fies these systems. Galaxies classified as post-starburst
(PSB) or quenched by Sandoval Ascencio et al. (2025)
and those classified as quenched by Ferr´ e-Mateu et al.
(2018) also fall as expected. The slight overlap between
PSBs and quenched galaxies may hint at either some
level of uncertainty in our classification or at a problem
with the previous classification. The latter could arise if
the IFS did not actually cover the full galaxy, which we
know to be the case for at least some of the KCWI obser-

A Gyr in the Life9
T able 3.Entry Description for the Star Formation History SMUDGes Table a
Column Name Description
SMDG SMUDGes Catalog Name
logzsol [Fe/H]
logzsol-upper 1σupper bound on [Fe/H]
logzsol-lower 1σlower bound on [Fe/H]
AV internal V-bandb extinction [mag]
AV -upper 1σupper bound on internal V-band extinction [mag]
AV -lower 1σlower bound on internal V-band extinction [mag]
M∗ log10(M∗/M⊙)
M∗-upper 1σupper bound on log10(M ∗/M⊙)
M∗-lower 1σlower bound on log10(M ∗/M⊙)
SFR0 log10(current star formation rate/(M ∗ yr−1))
SFR0-upper 1σupper bound on log10(SFR 0/(M∗ yr−1))
SFR0-lower 1σlower bound on log10(SFR 0/(M∗ yr−1))
M∗,0 log10(stellar mass in most recent age bin/M ⊙)
M∗,0-upper 1σupper bound on log10(M ∗,0/M⊙)
M∗,0-lower 1σlower bound on log10(M ∗,0/M⊙)
M∗,1 log10(M∗,1/M⊙)
M∗,1-upper 1σupper bound on log10(M ∗,1/M⊙)
M∗,1-lower 1σlower bound on log10(M ∗,1/M⊙)
M∗,2 log10(M∗,2/M⊙)
M∗,2-upper 1σupper bound on log10(M ∗,2/M⊙)
M∗,2-lower 1σlower bound on log10(M ∗,2/M⊙)
M∗,3 log10(M∗,3/M⊙)
M∗,3-upper 1σupper bound on log10(M ∗,3/M⊙)
M∗,3-lower 1σlower bound on log10(M ∗,3/M⊙)
sSFR0 log10(specific star formation rate in most recent age bin/yr −1)
sSFR0-upper 1σupper bound on log10(sSFR 0/yr−1)
sSFR0-lower 1σlower bound on log10(sSFR 0/yr−1)
sSFR1 log10(specific star formation rate in second age bin/yr −1)
sSFR1-upper 1σupper bound on log10(sSFR 1/yr−1)
sSFR1-lower 1σlower bound on log10(sSFR 1/yr−1)
sSFR2 log10(specific star formation rate in third age bin/yr −1)
sSFR2-upper 1σupper bound on log10(sSFR 2/yr−1)
sSFR2-lower 1σlower bound on log10(sSFR 2/yr−1)
sSFR3 log10(specific star formation rate in fourth age bin/yr −1)
sSFR3-upper 1σupper bound on log10(sSFR 3/yr−1)
sSFR3-lower 1σlower bound on log10(sSFR 3/yr−1)
f-SFH analysis flag (2 = has all non-optical photometric data (2 UV + 4 IR),
1 = meets minimal necessary photometry requirement, 0 = missing necessary redshift or photometry)
aThe complete catalog is available as the electronic version of this Table.
bExtinction values are allowed to be negative to avoid biasing other parameters (see text). PROSPECTOR returns values for the
optical depth. We correct to magnitudes of extinction by multiplying by 1.086 and present those values here.

10Zaritsky, et al.
vations of Sandoval Ascencio et al. (2025). Despite this
partial overlap, the PSB galaxies generally have small
uncertainties in A/K, in contrast to the quenched galax-
ies, which have large uncertainties, and they are segre-
gated in the Figure.
We also compare our results to those obtained for a
sample of galaxies using a photometric SED analysis
that is similar to ours (Buzzo et al. 2022). The galax-
ies they classified as quenched fall along the quenched
sequence highlighted by the Ferr´ e-Mateu et al. (2018)
galaxies. These galaxies have very few stars with age
<1 Gyr, so the uncertainties in our log-log plot are
large along both axes, but still clearly distinguishable
from the star forming systems, and to a lesser degree
from the PSBs. The relative coherence of the quenched
sample given the large uncertainties suggests that our
uncertainty estimates along each axis for the quenched
population are not independent. We will return to this
topic later.
Conclusion 1: Our SED analysis is capable of identi-
fying SF, PSB, and quenched galaxies at a level of pre-
cision comparable to that achieved using integral field
spectroscopy.
4.2.Initial Impressions
The SMUDGes sample includes LSB dwarf galaxies
and UDGs in all environments. The distribution in Fig-
ure 2 has various interestingapparentcharacteristics.
First, there is a population of galaxies that has both
strong star formation and a relatively high fraction of
intermediate age stars (large A/K). We infer that 1)
there is a significant population of star forming galaxies
in SMUDGes and they can be identified by our analy-
sis, 2) if star formation is episodic, those episodes have
coherence over at least∼Gyr because, for the most
part, SFR 0 and A/K correlate, and 3) if star forma-
tion is episodic, the breaks in star formation activity
cannot be≳1 Gyr because we do not find old systems
(low A/K) with ongoing star formation. These first im-
pressions suggest that this diagram can be used to put
limits on the timescale of star formation in the low sur-
face brightness galaxies that are currently forming stars.
We have added the caveatapparentbecause we have not
yet established the degree to which the non-parametric
modeling faithfully models the actual SFH of these sys-
tems. We will return to this question later and find that
all is not necessarily as it first appears. In particular,
as we discuss in detail in§4.4 and the Appendix, our
models are unreliable in identifying galaxies that have
been quenched over at least the last Gyr but have re-
cently (<20 Myr) started forming stars. The models
are otherwise broadly reliable (see Appendix).
Figure 2.A/K plotted against star formation rate, SFR 0, as
measured from our PROSPECTOR modeling for SMUDGes
galaxies. The larger, filled points with errorbars highlight
galaxies for which we have independent classifications from
spectroscopic observations (Ferr´ e-Mateu et al. 2018; San-
doval Ascencio et al. 2025) or SED analysis (Buzzo et al.
2022). References for the independent classifications are
given in the legend.
Before proceeding in interpreting these results, we
show in Figure 3 how the results vary both as a function
of the redshift source (spectroscopic vs. estimated) and
the galaxy type (LSB dwarf (r e <1.5 kpc) vs. UDG
(re ≥1.5 kpc)). We see a distinction in SFR 0 between
the LSB dwarf and UDG populations. This presumably
reflects a difference in mass between these two popula-
tions, where galaxies of greater mass can also support a
higher SFR 0. We will test this assumption below. We
see no evident distinction in the behavior of galaxies
with spectroscopic vs. estimated redshifts. As such, we
continue to utilize the full sample.
4.3.Current Star Formation
We now return to the features of the distribution
shown in Figure 2 that we refer to as apparent. The first
of those addressed the population of star forming galax-
ies. Using simulations (Appendix E), we demonstrate
that our recovered SFR 0 is robust under various condi-
tions, although perhaps with a modest bias of<0.4 dex
(Table 4 in the Appendix) relative to the input values
in our simulations. Therefore, we are confident to this
level of accuracy in the calculated SFR 0. For context,
SFR0 in the Figure spans 9 dex in comparison to this
possible bias of≤0.4 dex.

A Gyr in the Life11
Figure 3.Testing subsamples. We compare the distribution
of LSB dwarf galaxies to UDGs and of those with estimated
vs. spectroscopic redshifts (see legend). There is a clear
offset in SFR 0 between LSB dwarfs and UDGs that is pre-
sumably due to differences in overall mass when we divide
the sample byr e. There is no clear distinction between those
galaxies with and without spectroscopic redshifts.
We examine the nature of SMUDGes with ongoing
star formation in Figure 4. Here we present the fraction
of the stellar mass,M ∗, that would have been produced
had the galaxy had a constant SFR at the level cur-
rently observed for 10 Gyr. We find that in all but one
case, the observed level of star formation underproduces
the total stars. In other words, the current level of star
formation is lower than the average level of star forma-
tion even for those SMUDGes that are currently forming
stars. For all of these systems, with perhaps the one ex-
ception, the dominant epoch of star formation was in
the past. This result is in contrast to what is found for
dwIrr galaxies, which appear to have current SFRs that
are consistent with being constant over time (Hunter
& Gallagher 1985), but consistent with what has been
found for HI-rich UDGs (Kado-Fong et al. 2022a).
This is a result that merits closer scrutiny given the
results of our simulations. Our simulated results sug-
gest that the recovered SFR may be biased downward
by a few tenths of a dex, depending on the nature of the
underlying stellar population. If we add 0.3 dex uni-
versally to the measured values of log(SFR 0), then of
the 81 systems with log(sSFR 0)>−11 (open circles in
Figure 4), 11, rather than only one, lie above the line.
The majority of SMUDGes are still forming stars at a
rate below that necessary to create their stars (subcrit-
ically efficient), but at least a handful of systems may
be critically efficient. Nevertheless, broadly speaking,
SMUDGes, whether they are dwarf LSBs or UDGs, had
their dominant episode(s) of star formation in the past.
Figure 4.The fraction,F ∗, of the stellar mass that would
have been created if the current SFR had been the SFR
over the past 10 Gyr, as a function of stellar mass,M ∗.
SMUDGes designated as starforming are highlighted, either
as filled blue circles for log(SFR0)>−3.75 or larger open cir-
cles for log(sSFR 0)>−11, where sSFR 0 is the specific star
formation rate (SFR 0/M∗). The dashed line separates the
galaxies for which the current SFR over or underproduces
M∗.
Another way of exploring the star forming properties
of these galaxies is to place them on the SFR 0 −M ∗
relation. This relation is well studied, particularly for
more massive galaxies, both locally and at higher red-
shifts (e.g., Speagle et al. 2014). In Figure 5 we present
SMUDGes in this context and compare to a set of pre-
vious determinations of the relation for the star form-
ing sequence of galaxies. All of the published relations
are derived from the study of more massive and higher
surface brightness galaxies, although with some over-
lap with the stellar mass range explored here. Despite
the evident variation among previous determinations, all
of them lie above even the most strongly star-forming
SMUDGes (this conclusion is not qualitatively altered
by the possible bias discussed above). UDGs are inef-
ficient star-forming systems (see also Kado-Fong et al.
2022a,b).
Conclusion 2: The star forming systems in SMUDGes
are sub-normally efficient. They are not producing stars

12Zaritsky, et al.
at a level that puts them on the SFR0 −M ∗ relation nor
at a rate where they could have produced their current
stellar mass over 10 Gyr.
SMUDGes are currently low efficiency star forming
systems. However, that behavior may not be a uni-
versal characteristic of galaxies in this stellar mass
range. Because of our surface brightness selection crite-
ria for SMUDGes (µ 0,g ≥24 mag arcsec −2), analogs of
SMUDGes within thisM ∗ range that happen to be more
strongly star forming may have been excluded from our
sample (see Li et al. (2023) for discussion of this selec-
tion bias). We present in Figure 6 a comparison of the
current star formation rate and that inferred for the time
interval 150 Myr to 1 Gyr ago, SFR2. If there have been
bursts that are significantly stronger in the recent past
than what we include in our sample because of our sur-
face brightness selection criteria, we should find some
evidence of those in our sample. We do indeed find
some systems among the currently star forming systems
that had significantly higher (order of magnitude) av-
erage SFR between 150 and 1 Gyr ago. These systems
are candidates for systems we would have rejected if we
had observed them during their dominant star forma-
tion episode. Given the age width of the earlier bin, the
“instantaneous” SFR (i.e, over the equivalent 20 Myr
window as our first bin) could have been even larger
than the average SFRs that we show in Figure 6. Given
these examples and the assumption that we do not live
in a special epoch, it is likely that our sample is biased
in SFR0.
Conclusion 3: SMUDGes galaxies are likely to be bi-
ased against strongly star forming systems and not fully
representative of the range of SFR 0 among galaxies of
these stellar masses. Even if UDGs have an intrinsic
property that defines their nature, such as high spin ha-
los, these results suggest that some may not currently
satisfy the UDG criteria.
The possibility of stronger star formation episodes
in the past raises the question of whether unquenched
UDGs are distinct from other field galaxies of similar
total mass or are simply being caught at a particular
time during a star formation cycle. We cannot answer
this with the data presented here, but previous studies
(Zaritsky et al. 2023; Forbes & Gannon 2025) concluded
that the stellar-to-halo mass ratios of UDGs in general
are lower than average for galaxies of their halo mass.
As such, SMUDGes that are UDGs, not only have low
current SFRs but also have lower than typical average
SFR.
Conclusion 4: The SMUDGes galaxies include some
that have had significantly higher SFRs in the recent
(<1 Gyr) past but have faded sufficiently in surface
brightness that they currently satisfy the UDG surface
brightness criterion. As such, we do find significant vari-
ations in the SFR on timescales<1Gyr. Nevertheless,
we do not support a scenario in which the UDG criterion
is simply catching normal galaxies in a low-SF phase.
Figure 5.SFR 0 vs.M ∗ for SMUDGes. We compare where
the SMUDGes lie relative to various determinations of the
galaxy star formation-stellar mass relation. We draw from
the compilation of Speagle et al. (2014), who used it to de-
termine the evolution of the relation. We only use the low
redshift determinations and adopt a 1 Gyr lookback time for
the Speagle et al. (2014) formulation. The other relations
come from Elbaz et al. (2007), Salim et al. (2007), Chen
et al. (2009), Oliver et al. (2010), Elbaz et al. (2011) and
Zahid et al. (2012). Galaxies designated as starforming are
highlighted, either as filled blue circles for log(SFR0)>−3.75
and/or larger open circles for log(sSFR 0)>−11, where
sSFR0 is the specific star formation rate (SFR 0/M∗). Four
galaxies with log(M ∗/M⊙)<6 are not shown.
At each value of A/K in Figure 2 there is significant
scatter in SFR 0. One reason for this scatter, a de-
pendence on stellar mass, was already proposed when
we compared LSBs and UDGs within the sample. The
straightforward way to remove this behavior is by calcu-
lating the specific SFR 0 (sSFR0), which is simply SFR 0
normalized by the galaxy’s stellar mass,M ∗. This ap-
proach also removes the effect of distance errors as a
potential source of scatter. We present the results for
sSFR0 vs. A/K in Figure 7.
The relationship tightens significantly, confirming that
the source of most of the original scatter was due to the
wide range of stellar masses in the sample. The relation-

A Gyr in the Life13
Figure 6.The star formation rates determined for the 0-20
Myr epoch (SFR 0) and for the 150 Myr to 1 Gyr epoch
(SFR2). The dashed diagonal line is the 1:1 line drawn for
guidance and divides the regions of the diagram where galax-
ies are currently forming stars at a higher mean rate relative
to the 150 Myr to 1 Gyr epoch from that where the reverse
is the case. To the right of the vertical dotted line the mean
star formation rates in the 150 Myr to 1 Gyr epoch were
greater than any rate measured currently. Galaxies forming
stars at these rates currently are galaxies that are likely to
not have met our surface brightness criteria.
Figure 7.A/K plotted against specific star formation rate,
sSFR0, as measured from our PROSPECTOR modeling for
SMUDGes galaxies. The larger, filled points highlight the
same objects as in Figure 2.
ship shows a sharp increase in sSFR 0 as A/K increases,
as one might expect in systems that continue to form
stars for a time that is long enough to link the current
star formation rate with the number of intermediate-
mass stars,∼1 Gyr. However, there is a somewhat
surprising reversal in that trend beyond the peak at
log(A/K)∼ −2 toward the largest values of A/K. We
will return to this feature later. Among the quenched
galaxies, there also appears to be an exceedingly tight
relationship between A/K and sSFR, but the large er-
ror bars argue against assigning physical significance to
this relation. Instead, for quenched galaxies we suspect
that errors in M ∗, which is dominated byM 3, lead to
galaxies sliding along the diagonal because both axes are
affected. Given the uncertainties, the quenched galax-
ies are mostly statistically indistinguishable from each
other in terms of sSFR 0 or A/K.
Conclusion 5: The SMUDGes galaxies exhibit more
coherent behavior when the specific star formation rate
is examined. There is a reversal in the general behavior
between sSFR 0 and A/K for large values of A/K that
merits further investigation and a tight behavior in these
properties for quenched galaxies that is not physical.
4.4.Recent Star Formation
Our Conclusion 4 suggests that the recent SFH
of these galaxies might show significant fluctuations.
Again, we need to turn to simulations to better un-
derstand what the PROSPECTOR analysis is able to
faithfully recover in such cases. We show in Appendix
E that we have varying degrees of success in identifying
different possible variations. We will place those results
in context as we proceed in this discussion.
We focus here on our previously defined A/K index.
One striking aspect of Figure 2 is the absence of galax-
ies with high SFR 0 and low A/K values. This appar-
ent result suggests that we have no long-term quenched
galaxies that have recently and suddenly re-activated
star formation. Such a finding would have implications
for how long a galaxy could retain the fuel for star for-
mation without forming stars or for how a galaxy might
re-acquire that fuel. As such, the absence (or presence)
of such objects is of scientific interest.
The interpretation of this result is predicated on the
ability of the SFH reconstruction to recover a current
burst without “leakage” to intermediate age bins (oth-
erwise the galaxy would appear to have higher A/K and
merge in the Figure with other star forming galaxies).
Our simulations (Appendix E) show that our analysis
methodology can miss such objects if they exist. As
such, the absence of such objects in Figure 2 cannot be

14Zaritsky, et al.
used to interpret that they are truly absent. This is un-
fortunate, but it is a strict limitation of our approach.
Conclusion 6: Galaxies that have been otherwise qui-
escent for longer than 1 Gyr but have a current sud-
den increase in star formation can be misidentified in
our analysis. Simulations are critical in determining
which features in this parameter space are recoverable
and which are not.
We now focus on the complementary question of
whether we can identify a galaxy that has had signif-
icant recent star formation but has little or no current
star formation (i.e., a post-starburst). We have already
discussed that if a galaxy is currently forming stars, we
can recover the current star formation rate well. We find
(Appendix E) that galaxies that have a large fraction
of intermediate age stars, A/K∼1, and low to neg-
ligible current star formation rates are correctly iden-
tified as such systems. However, we tend to overesti-
mate the current star formation rates, particularly for
those with exceedingly low input star formation rates.
As such, we cannot expect to identify systems that are
fully quenched at the current time as such (they will
appear to have some residual current star formation).
To identify PSBs we should set a modest upper limit on
the star formation rate rather than require the apparent
complete cessation of star formation.
Conclusion 7: Our methodology can identify galaxies
that have had a recent (age<1Gyr) episode of star
formation and are currently forming few if any stars
(log(sSFR0/yr−1)<−11). Our sample includes such
systems.
4.5.Classifying Galaxies
We categorize the galaxies, with guidance from the
spectroscopic classifications of Ferr´ e-Mateu et al. (2018)
and Sandoval Ascencio et al. (2025), and from the SED
results of Buzzo et al. (2022) in Figure 8. We identify
post-starburst, or at least post-starforming, SMUDGes
by requiring both a high value of A/K (−3<log(A/K))
and a low SFR0 (log(SFR0)<−3.75). There are 74 can-
didate PSB galaxies using these criteria in this sample.
For quenched galaxies we require (log(A/K)<−3) and
a low SFR0 (log(SFR0)<−3.75), while for star forming
galaxies (−2.5<log(A/K)) and a high SFR 0 (−3.75<
log(SFR0) ).
Using these selection criteria, we compare the stellar
mass distribution of the SF and PSB galaxies to that
of the full sample in Figure 9. We find candidate PSBs
across the full range of stellar mass in our sample but
with an apparent preference for the lower masses. Nev-
ertheless, we caution against drawing strong inferences
from the distributions of subclasses because of the var-
ious biases in selecting this sample. It is evident from
Figure 7 that selection criteria based on sSFR 0 would
not produce a clean sample of PSBs. What our selec-
tion criteria do provide is a sample of objects in the
various classes that can be studied further, rather than
a complete set of each class.
Conclusion 8: PSB galaxies are found in our sample
at all stellar masses, but there is a preference, given our
selection criteria, for them to be among the lower mass
systems. In contrast, star forming systems lie preferen-
tially toward the upper mass range of our sample. There
are potential biases in the sample that preclude a defini-
tive interpretation but the result is consistent with the
supposition that higher mass galaxies can maintain a
more regular rate of SF while lower ones are more cycli-
cal. This is in line with results seen generally among
galaxies (Searle et al. 1973).
Surrounding various of these questions is the unknown
nature of star forming galaxies that might lie above the
SMUDGes surface brightness limit. As we have noted
previously, it is likely that there is a population of star
forming objects with the same range of stellar masses
that lies just above our surface brightness cut and are
otherwise comparable to SMUDGes. This bias high-
lights the challenge of understanding the full population
of systems when a strict parameter cut is applied. In
such cases, it is advisable to forward model the sam-
ple using the selection that was imposed, rather than
analyzing the existing sample to draw conclusions.
4.6.Do Star Formation Episodes Lead to Larger
Galaxies?
Next we probe whether there is any indication that
a star formation episode leads to an enlargement of the
galaxy. In Figure 10 we examine whether those galaxies
with a recent episode, those we classify as PSB, are on
average larger than their quenched counterparts. To do
this, we normalize using ther e-M∗ relation and examine
the distribution of the residuals about this relationship
for the sample in general and for PSBs. We adopt and
fit a power law relationship betweenr e andM ∗, finding
re = (M∗/(3.32×10 7)0.44, wherer e is in kpc andM ∗ in
solar units.
We find that the PSBs are slightly larger, offset from
the mean relation by 0.034±0.012 dex (or 8% larger).
The probability of such a difference in the mean occur-
ring randomly is 0.004, as determined using a standard
t-test. Of course, this shift could be both statistically
significant and physically insignificant. For example, it
could be exaggerated due to a slight variation in the lo-
cations where the younger stars formed relative to the

A Gyr in the Life15
older stars if the growth of these galaxies is inside-out.
Our estimate ofr e would be skewed large by the higher
luminosity of these younger stars, but would ease back
to the previous value as this younger stellar population
fades. Higher angular resolution IR imaging, with which
sizes could be measured while minimizing the effect of
the younger stellar population, is needed to address this
concern. In more massive PSBs, the trend for where the
new stars form is in the opposite sense (Norton et al.
2001), but those systems appear to be mostly driven by
interactions (Zabludoff et al. 1996) rather than the cycli-
cal pattern of star formation that we suspect to be at
work here. On the other hand, if this measurement rep-
resents galaxy growth by 8%, then nine such episodes
would double the size of the galaxy. If these episodes
happen every∼Gyr, there is sufficient time for an ef-
fect of this magnitude. As we have also noted, at least
some of the previous star formation episodes had to be
of greater magnitude than the current episodes we are
witnessing, so fewer episodes might be needed to have
a comparable effect. This may not be a viable model
for the formation of cluster UDGs if their star forma-
tion was quenched by early infall into the cluster, but it
might be viable for field UDGs if one can explain why
such episodes occur only in some dwarf galaxies and ad-
dress the issues raised Kado-Fong et al. (2022a). They
argued on both empirical grounds, based on the current
extended distribution of star formation, and theoretical
grounds, a disagreement with predictions from bursty
galaxy models, that feedback driven expansion does not
appear to be the responsible mechanism for the char-
acter of UDGs, unless that feedback happened at high
redshift.
Conclusion 9. There is a suggestion in the data that
star formation episodes marginally increase (by∼8%)
the effective radius of galaxies in our sample. This is
likely to be an upper limit, or perhaps just an observa-
tional bias driven by where the recent star formation oc-
curs. Taken at face value, the result suggests that order
one changes to the size require either multiple episodes
or much more violent ones than the ones we are observ-
ing in these galaxies.
Of course, there is always a danger of oversimplifica-
tion. Various mechanisms are possibly at work creat-
ing what is a heterogeneous population of UDGs. For
example, Di Cintio et al. (2019) suggest that feedback
dominates for lower mass UDGs and high angular mo-
mentum for higher mass UDGs. In their models the
transition in behavior occurs at galaxy stellar masses of
∼10 9 M⊙, which is above the stellar mass of almost all
of our SMUDGes, but our cautionary note still holds.
Figure 8.Categorization regions. A reprise of Figure 2
with regions highlighted where we define star forming (SF),
post-starburst (PSB), and quenched galaxies. Larger sym-
bols again highlight the independently classified galaxies that
are also highlighted in Figures 2 and 7. We have omitted the
errorbars for clarity but they are the same as in Figure 2.
5.SUMMARY
We present UV and IR photometry for the SMUDGes
catalog, which we then use to construct the spectral
energy distribution (SED) and recover the recent star
formation history (SFH) for the 966 sources from the
catalog for which we have either a spectroscopic or es-
timated redshift. We present both the photometry and
the recovered star formation rates (SFR) as a function
of age in tabular form. We find no clear differences be-
tween galaxies with spectroscopic or estimated redshifts
or large (UDG) or small (normal dwarf) galaxies and so
we present and analyze the full sample.
We find that our SED analysis is able to identify star
forming, post-starburst, and quenched galaxies at a pre-
cision comparable to what has been done with IFU spec-
troscopy. This enables us to identify 74 candidate LSB
PSB galaxies, including 6 that satisfy the UDG size cri-
terion12.
We find that the star forming systems among our LSB
population are less efficient at forming stars over the last
20 Myr than are normal star forming galaxies. They are
12 Different studies adopt different central surface brightness
and/or size criteria; for example, Sandoval Ascencio et al.
(2025) adoptedr e >1 kpc as their UDG size criterion. For
that particular choice, we find 15 PSB UDGs in our sample.

16Zaritsky, et al.
Figure 9.The intermediate age diagnostic, A/K, as a func-
tion of stellar mass,M ∗. Bottom panel shows the distri-
bution with three types of objects highlighted: 1) those
with log(sSFR 0)>−11 (filled blue circles), 2) those with
log(SFR0)>−3.75 (larger unfilled circles), and 3) those
identified by Sandoval Ascencio et al. (2025) as post-star-
burst (PSB; filled green diamonds). In the upper panel we
show the distribution inM ∗ for the star forming systems
(those with either filled blue or open blue circles). In the
second panel down we show the distribution for those sys-
tems that satisfy log(SFR 0)<−3.75 and log(A/K)>−3,
which is our PSB criteria. In the third panel down we show
the distribution for the entire sample. PSB candidates may
have a slight bias toward less massive systems but there are
some candidates even at the largest masses we probe. The
PSB and SF distributions differ significantly.
neither producing stars at a level that places them on
the SFR-M ∗ relation nor at a SFR where they could
have produced their current stellar mass over 10 Gyr if
the rate remained constant. We conclude that they must
have had more vigorous star formation episodes in the
past. However, we caution that some more vigorous star
forming galaxies of similar stellar mass would have most
likely been excluded from our sample by the SMUDGes
surface brightness selection criterion. As such, weak star
formation is a property of the SMUDGes sample, not
necessarily of galaxies of this stellar mass or size.
Figure 10.The scale length - stellar mass relation for the
quenched SMUDGes samples and for the subsample of PSB
galaxies (filled circles). There is a minor shift to larger sizes
in the PSB galaxies at a given stellar mass (0.034±0.012
dex, or∼8%) seen in the upper panel where we plot residuals
relative to the best fit relationship from the lower panel. The
histograms in the upper panel are normalized relative to each
other (filled histogram represents the PSB sample, solid line
the quenched SUMDGes sample).
We find that our analysis produces false and true
features in the diagnostic diagrams of SFR 0 or sSFR 0
vs. A/K. Simple simulations that we carry out to test
our methodology show us that the absence of quenched
galaxies in our sample that have recently re-activated
star formation (log(A/K)≲−4 and log(sSFR 0)>
−12.5) may be a mirage. Our methodology tends to
place such objects, when they exist, at different loca-
tions in the diagram. However, the downturn in the re-
lationship between sSFR 0 and A/K for log(A/K)>−2
is true. We find that the analysis robustly returns sSFR0
and can return the properties of PSB galaxies reliably.
The identification of PSB galaxies demonstrates that
SFRs vary significantly over the last Gyr in a number
of SMUDGes systems. We cannot determine whether
those systems with recent star formation that are cur-
rently quenched will remain so, or if they are part of a

A Gyr in the Life17
cyclical process where SF will begin anew. However, the
number of such systems suggests that this is unlikely to
be their last episode.
We find PSB galaxies in our sample at all stellar
masses, but with a preference among the lower mass
systems. In contrast, star forming systems lie preferen-
tially toward the upper mass range of our sample. There
are potential biases caused by our selection criteria that
could affect these distributions and preclude a defini-
tive interpretation. Nevertheless, the result is consis-
tent with the supposition that higher mass galaxies can
maintain a more regular rate of SF while lower ones are
more cyclical.
We find evidence that star formation episodes
marginally increase (by∼8%) the size of galaxies in
our sample. If this is not merely an observational bias
caused by star formation occurring at larger radii, this
is still likely to be an upper limit to the size change per
episode and as such suggests that order one changes to
the size require either multiple episodes or much more
violent ones.
The availability of the recent star formation histories
for a large sample of low surface brightness galaxies en-
ables investigations of a number of additional topics be-
yond those explored here. We are in the process of exam-
ining connections between environment and recent SFH
(Khim et al. in prep.), the presence of a nuclear cluster
(Lambert et al. 2024; Khim et al. 2024) and recent SFH,
and HIproperties (Karunakaran et al. 2024; Motiwala
et al. 2025) and recent SFH (Sandoval Ascencio et al. in
prep.) By making both the photometry and our mod-
eled SFHs available, we aim to enable others to explore
these and other questions as well.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank an anonymous referee for helpful comments
that improved the manuscript. DZ, RD, and DJK ac-
knowledge financial support from NSF AST-1713841,
AST-2006785, and AST-2510821 and NASA 22-ADAP-
011. KS acknowledges funding from the Natural Sci-
ences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC). An allocation of computer time from the Uni-
versity of Arizona Research Computing High Perfor-
mance Computing (HPC) Research Computing group
and the prompt assistance of the associated computer
support group are gratefully acknowledged.
This research has used the NASA IPAC Extragalactic
Database (NED), which is operated by the Jet Propul-
sion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, un-
der contract with NASA.
The Legacy Surveys consist of three individual and
complementary projects: the Dark Energy Camera
Legacy Survey (DECaLS; Proposal ID #2014B-0404;
PIs: David Schlegel and Arjun Dey), the Beijing-
Arizona Sky Survey (BASS; NOAO Prop. ID #2015A-
0801; PIs: Zhou Xu and Xiaohui Fan), and the Mayall
z-band Legacy Survey (MzLS; Prop. ID #2016A-0453;
PI: Arjun Dey). DECaLS, BASS and MzLS together
include data obtained, respectively, at the Blanco tele-
scope, Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, NSF’s
NOIRLab; the Bok telescope, Steward Observatory,
University of Arizona; and the Mayall telescope, Kitt
Peak National Observatory, NOIRLab. The pipeline
processing and analysis of the data were supported by
NOIRLab and the Lawrence Berkeley National Labora-
tory (LBNL). The Legacy Surveys project is honored
to be permitted to conduct astronomical research on
Iolkam Du’ag (Kitt Peak), a mountain with particular
significance to the Tohono O’odham Nation.
NOIRLab is operated by the Association of Universi-
ties for Research in Astronomy (AURA) under a cooper-
ative agreement with the National Science Foundation.
LBNL is managed by the Regents of the University of
California under contract to the U.S. Department of En-
ergy.
This project used data obtained with the Dark En-
ergy Camera (DECam), which was constructed by the
Dark Energy Survey (DES) collaboration. Funding for
the DES Projects has been provided by the U.S. De-
partment of Energy, the U.S. National Science Founda-
tion, the Ministry of Science and Education of Spain,
the Science and Technology Facilities Council of the
United Kingdom, the Higher Education Funding Coun-
cil for England, the National Center for Supercomput-
ing Applications at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, the Kavli Institute of Cosmological Physics
at the University of Chicago, Center for Cosmology
and Astro-Particle Physics at the Ohio State Univer-
sity, the Mitchell Institute for Fundamental Physics and
Astronomy at Texas A&M University, Financiadora de
Estudos e Projetos, Fundacao Carlos Chagas Filho de
Amparo, Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos, Funda-
cao Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo a Pesquisa do Es-
tado do Rio de Janeiro, Conselho Nacional de Desen-
volvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico and the Ministe-
rio da Ciencia, Tecnologia e Inovacao, the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Collaborating Institu-
tions in the Dark Energy Survey. The Collaborat-
ing Institutions are Argonne National Laboratory, the
University of California at Santa Cruz, the University
of Cambridge, Centro de Investigaciones Energeticas,
Medioambientales y Tecnologicas-Madrid, the Univer-

18Zaritsky, et al.
sity of Chicago, University College London, the DES-
Brazil Consortium, the University of Edinburgh, the
Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule (ETH) Zurich,
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the Institut de Cien-
cies de l’Espai (IEEC/CSIC), the Institut de Fisica
d’Altes Energies, Lawrence Berkeley National Labora-
tory, the Ludwig Maximilians Universitat Munchen and
the associated Excellence Cluster Universe, the Univer-
sity of Michigan, NSF’s NOIRLab, the University of
Nottingham, the Ohio State University, the University
of Pennsylvania, the University of Portsmouth, SLAC
National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford University,
the University of Sussex, and Texas A&M University.
BASS is a key project of the Telescope Access
Program (TAP), which has been funded by the Na-
tional Astronomical Observatories of China, the Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences (the Strategic Priority Re-
search Program “The Emergence of Cosmological Struc-
tures” Grant #XDB09000000), and the Special Fund
for Astronomy from the Ministry of Finance. The
BASS is also supported by the External Coopera-
tion Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant
#4A11KYSB20160057), and Chinese National Natural
Science Foundation (Grant #12120101003, #11433005).
The Legacy Survey team makes use of data products
from the Near-Earth Object Wide-field Infrared Sur-
vey Explorer (NEOWISE), which is a project of the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory/California Institute of Technol-
ogy. NEOWISE is funded by the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration.
The Legacy Surveys imaging of the DESI footprint
is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office
of High Energy Physics of the U.S. Department of En-
ergy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH1123, by the
National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center,
a DOE Office of Science User Facility under the same
contract; and by the U.S. National Science Foundation,
Division of Astronomical Sciences under Contract No.
AST-0950945 to NOAO.
This research used data based on observations made
with the Galaxy Evolution Explorer, obtained from the
MAST data archive at the Space Telescope Science Insti-
tute, which is operated by the Association of Universities
for Research in Astronomy, Inc., under NASA contract
NAS 5–26555. The specific observations analyzed can
be accessed via https://doi.org/10.17909/npwd-sh81.
Facilities:GALEX, WISE
Software:Astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al.
2013, 2018, 2022), astroquery (Ginsburg et al. 2019),
asymmetric uncertainty (Gobat 2022), dustmaps (Green
2018), dynesty (Speagle 2020; Koposov et al. 2024), fsps
(Conroy et al. 2009; Conroy & Gunn 2010), GALFIT
(Peng et al. 2002b), h5py (Collette 2013), Matplotlib
(Hunter 2007), NumPy (van der Walt et al. 2011), pan-
das (McKinney 2010), PROSPECTOR (Johnson et al.
2021), SciPy (Oliphant 2007; Millman & Aivazis 2011),
sep (Barbary 2016)
REFERENCES
Amorisco, N. C., & Loeb, A. 2016, MNRAS, 459, L51,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slw055
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J.,
et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sip˝ ocz, B. M.,
et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Lim, P. L.,
et al. 2022, ApJ, 935, 167, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c74
Barbary, K. 2016, SEP: Source Extractor as a library,
doi: 10.21105/joss.00058
Barbosa, C. E., Zaritsky, D., Donnerstein, R., et al. 2020,
ApJS, 247, 46, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab7660
Beers, T. C., Flynn, K., & Gebhardt, K. 1990, AJ, 100, 32,
doi: 10.1086/115487
Buzzo, M. L., Forbes, D. A., Brodie, J. P., et al. 2022,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 517,
2231, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac2442
Buzzo, M. L., Forbes, D. A., Jarrett, T. H., et al. 2024a,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 529,
3210, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae564
—. 2024b, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 536, 2536, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2700
Carleton, T., Errani, R., Cooper, M., et al. 2019, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 485, 382,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz383
Chan, T. K., Kereˇ s, D., Wetzel, A., et al. 2018, MNRAS,
478, 906, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1153
Chen, Y.-M., Wild, V., Kauffmann, G., et al. 2009,
MNRAS, 393, 406, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.14247.x
Choi, J., Dotter, A., Conroy, C., et al. 2016, ApJ, 823, 102,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/823/2/102
Collette, A. 2013, Python and HDF5 (O’Reilly)
Conroy, C., & Gunn, J. E. 2010, ApJ, 712, 833,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/712/2/833

A Gyr in the Life19
Conroy, C., Gunn, J. E., & White, M. 2009, ApJ, 699, 486,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/699/1/486
Das, S., Smith, D. J. B., Haskell, P., et al. 2024, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 531, 977,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae1204
Davies, J. I., & Phillipps, S. 1988, MNRAS, 233, 553,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/233.3.553
de los Reyes, M. A. C., Asali, Y., Wechsler, R. H., et al.
2025, The Astrophysical Journal, 989, 91,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade4c5
Dey, A., Schlegel, D. J., Lang, D., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 168,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab089d
Di Cintio, A., Brook, C. B., Dutton, A. A., et al. 2017,
MNRAS, 466, L1, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slw210
Di Cintio, A., Brook, C. B., Macci` o, A. V., Dutton, A. A.,
& Cardona-Barrero, S. 2019, MNRAS, 486, 2535,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz985
Donnerstein, R., Zaritsky, D., & Team, S. 2026, GALEX
data from Systematically Measuring Ultra-Diffuse
Galaxies. IX, STScI/MAST, doi: 10.17909/NPWD-SH81
Dotter, A. 2016, ApJS, 222, 8,
doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/222/1/8
Elbaz, D., Daddi, E., Le Borgne, D., et al. 2007, A&A, 468,
33, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20077525
Elbaz, D., Dickinson, M., Hwang, H. S., et al. 2011, A&A,
533, A119, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201117239
Ferrara, A., & Tolstoy, E. 2000, MNRAS, 313, 291,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2000.03209.x
Ferr´ e-Mateu, A., Alabi, A., Forbes, D. A., et al. 2018,
MNRAS, 479, 4891, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1597
Flaugher, B., Diehl, H. T., Honscheid, K., et al. 2015, AJ,
150, 150, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/150/5/150
Forbes, D. A., & Gannon, J. S. 2025, MNRAS, 543, L1,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slaf084
Gerola, H., Seiden, P. E., & Schulman, L. S. 1980, ApJ,
242, 517, doi: 10.1086/158485
Ginsburg, A., Sip˝ ocz, B. M., Brasseur, C. E., et al. 2019,
AJ, 157, 98, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aafc33
Gobat, C. 2022, Asymmetric Uncertainty: Handling
nonstandard numerical uncertainties, Astrophysics
Source Code Library, record ascl:2208.005.
http://ascl.net/2208.005
Gordon, K. D., Clayton, G. C., Misselt, K. A., Landolt,
A. U., & Wolff, M. J. 2003, ApJ, 594, 279,
doi: 10.1086/376774
Greco, J. P., Goulding, A. D., Greene, J. E., et al. 2018,
ApJ, 866, 112, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aae0f4
Green, G. 2018, The Journal of Open Source Software, 3,
695, doi: 10.21105/joss.00695
Haskell, P., Das, S., Smith, D. J. B., et al. 2024, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters, 530,
L7, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slae019
Haussler, B., McIntosh, D. H., Barden, M., et al. 2007, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 172, 615.
https://doi.org/10.1086/518836
Haynes, M. P. 2019, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 344, Dwarf
Galaxies: From the Deep Universe to the Present, ed.
K. B. W. McQuinn & S. Stierwalt, 3–16,
doi: 10.1017/S1743921319000073
Heesters, N., Muller, O., Marleau, F. R., et al. 2023, A&A,
676, A33, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346441
Higson, E., Handley, W., Hobson, M., & Lasenby, A. 2019,
Statistics and Computing, 29, 891,
doi: 10.1007/s11222-018-9844-0
Hinshaw, G., Larson, D., Komatsu, E., et al. 2013, ApJS,
208, 19, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/208/2/19
Hunter, D. A., & Gallagher, III, J. S. 1985, ApJS, 58, 533,
doi: 10.1086/191051
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering,
9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Ji, Z., & Giavalisco, M. 2023, The Astrophysical Journal,
943, 54, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aca807
Jimenez, R., Padoan, P., Matteucci, F., & Heavens, A. F.
1998, MNRAS, 299, 123,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.1998.01731.x
Johnson, B. D., Leja, J., Conroy, C., & Speagle, J. S. 2021,
ApJS, 254, 22, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/abef67
Junais, Boissier, S., Boselli, A., et al. 2022, A&A, 667, A76,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202244237
Kado-Fong, E., Greene, J. E., Huang, S., & Goulding, A.
2022a, ApJ, 941, 11, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac9964
Kado-Fong, E., Kim, C.-G., Greene, J. E., & Lancaster, L.
2022b, ApJ, 939, 101, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac9673
Kadowaki, J., Zaritsky, D., & Donnerstein, R. L. 2017,
ApJL, 838, L21, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa653d
Kadowaki, J., Zaritsky, D., Donnerstein, R. L., et al. 2021,
ApJ, 923, 257, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac2948
Karunakaran, A., Motiwala, K., Spekkens, K., et al. 2024,
ApJ, 975, 91, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad77cf
Kauffmann, G. 2014, MNRAS, 441, 2717,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu752
Kaviraj, S., De Cicco, D., Lazar, I., et al. 2026, MNRAS,
545, staf1918, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1918
Khim, D. J., Zaritsky, D., Lambert, M., & Donnerstein, R.
2024, AJ, 168, 45, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad4ed3
Koposov, S., Speagle, J., Barbary, K., et al. 2024,
joshspeagle/dynesty: v2.1.4, v2.1.4, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.12537467

20Zaritsky, et al.
Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04022.x
Lambert, M., Khim, D. J., Zaritsky, D., & Donnerstein, R.
2024, AJ, 167, 61, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad0f25
Lee, J. H., Kang, J., Lee, M. G., & Jang, I. S. 2020, ApJ,
894, 75, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab8632
Leja, J., Carnall, A. C., Johnson, B. D., Conroy, C., &
Speagle, J. S. 2019, The Astrophysical Journal, 876, 3,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab133c
Li, J., Greene, J. E., Greco, J. P., et al. 2023, ApJ, 955, 1,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ace829
Lower, S., Narayanan, D., Leja, J., et al. 2020, The
Astrophysical Journal, 904, 33,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abbfa7
Mart´ ın-Manj´ on, M. L., Moll´ a, M., D´ ıaz, A. I., & Terlevich,
R. 2012, MNRAS, 420, 1294,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.20122.x
McKinney, W. 2010, Proceedings of the 9th Python in
Science Conference, 51
McQuinn, K. B. W., Skillman, E. D., Cannon, J. M., et al.
2010, ApJ, 724, 49, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/724/1/49
Meisner, A. M., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2014, ApJ, 781, 5,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/781/1/5
Millman, K. J., & Aivazis, M. 2011, Computing in Science
and Engineering, 13, 9, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2011.36
Morrissey, P., Conrow, T., Barlow, T. A., et al. 2007,
ApJS, 173, 682, doi: 10.1086/520512
Motiwala, K., Karunakaran, A., Spekkens, K., et al. 2025,
ApJ, 989, 86, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade9a0
Nersesian, Angelos, van der Wel, Arjen, Gallazzi, Anna R.,
et al. 2025, A&A, 695, A86,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202452662
Norton, S. A., Gebhardt, K., Zabludoff, A. I., & Zaritsky,
D. 2001, ApJ, 557, 150, doi: 10.1086/321668
Oke, J. B. 1964, ApJ, 140, 689, doi: 10.1086/147960
Oke, J. B., & Gunn, J. E. 1983, ApJ, 266, 713,
doi: 10.1086/160817
Oliphant, T. E. 2007, Computing in Science and
Engineering, 9, 10, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.58
Oliver, S., Frost, M., Farrah, D., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 405,
2279, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.16643.x
Paxton, B., Bildsten, L., Dotter, A., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192,
3, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/192/1/3
Paxton, B., Cantiello, M., Arras, P., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208,
4, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/208/1/4
Paxton, B., Marchant, P., Schwab, J., et al. 2015, ApJS,
220, 15, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/220/1/15
Peng, C. Y., Ho, L. C., Impey, C. D., & Rix, H.-W. 2002a,
AJ, 124, 266, doi: 10.1086/340952
—. 2002b, AJ, 124, 266, doi: 10.1086/340952
Planck Collaboration, Abergel, A., Ade, P. A. R., et al.
2014, A&A, 571, A11, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201323195
Prole, D. J., van der Burg, R. F. J., Hilker, M., & Davies,
J. I. 2019, MNRAS, 488, 2143,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1843
Prole, D. J., van der Burg, R. F. J., Hilker, M., & Spitler,
L. R. 2021, MNRAS, 500, 2049,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3296
R´ emy-Ruyer, A., Madden, S. C., Galliano, F., et al. 2015,
A&A, 582, A121, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201526067
Ruiz-Lara, T., Beasley, M. A., Falc´ on-Barroso, J., et al.
2018, MNRAS, 478, 2034, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1112
Sales, L. V., Navarro, J. F., Pe˜ nafiel, L., et al. 2020,
MNRAS, 494, 1848, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa854
Salim, S., Rich, R. M., Charlot, S., et al. 2007, ApJS, 173,
267, doi: 10.1086/519218
S´ anchez-Bl´ azquez, P., Peletier, R. F., Jim´ enez-Vicente, J.,
et al. 2006, MNRAS, 371, 703,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.10699.x
Sandoval Ascencio, L., Cooper, M. C., Zaritsky, D., et al.
2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2502.00117,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2502.00117
Schlegel, D. J., Finkbeiner, D. P., & Davis, M. 1998, ApJ,
500, 525, doi: 10.1086/305772
Searle, L., Sargent, W. L. W., & Bagnuolo, W. G. 1973,
ApJ, 179, 427, doi: 10.1086/151882
Silk, J., Wyse, R. F. G., & Shields, G. A. 1987, ApJL, 322,
L59, doi: 10.1086/185037
Simpson, C. E., & Gottesman, S. T. 2000, AJ, 120, 2975,
doi: 10.1086/316879
Singh, P. R., Zaritsky, D., Donnerstein, R., & Spekkens, K.
2019, The Astronomical Journal, 157, 212,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab16f2
Skilling, J. 2004, in American Institute of Physics
Conference Series, Vol. 735, Bayesian Inference and
Maximum Entropy Methods in Science and Engineering:
24th International Workshop on Bayesian Inference and
Maximum Entropy Methods in Science and Engineering,
ed. R. Fischer, R. Preuss, & U. V. Toussaint (AIP),
395–405, doi: 10.1063/1.1835238
Skilling, J. 2006, Bayesian Analysis, 1, 833 ,
doi: 10.1214/06-BA127
Speagle, J. S. 2020, MNRAS, 493, 3132,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa278
Speagle, J. S., Steinhardt, C. L., Capak, P. L., & Silverman,
J. D. 2014, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,
214, 15, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/214/2/15
Suess, K. A., Leja, J., Johnson, B. D., et al. 2022, ApJ, 935,
146, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac82b0

A Gyr in the Life21
Tanaka, T. S., Shimasaku, K., Tacchella, S., et al. 2023,
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan, 76, 1,
doi: 10.1093/pasj/psad076
Tremmel, M., Wright, A. C., Brooks, A. M., et al. 2020,
MNRAS, 497, 2786, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2015
Turner, C., Tacchella, S., D’Eugenio, F., et al. 2025,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 537,
1826, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf128
Valdes, F., Gruendl, R., & DES Project. 2014
van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011,
Computing in Science and Engineering, 13, 22,
doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2011.37
van Dokkum, P. G., Abraham, R., Merritt, A., et al. 2015,
ApJL, 798, L45, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/798/2/L45
Voyer, E., Boselli, A., Boissier, S., et al. 2014, A&A, 569,
A124, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322511
Wall, R. E., Kilic, M., Bergeron, P., et al. 2019, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 489, 5046,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2506
Webb, K. A., Villaume, A., Laine, S., et al. 2022, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 516, 3318,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac2417
Weisz, D. R., Dalcanton, J. J., Williams, B. F., et al. 2011,
ApJ, 739, 5, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/739/1/5
Williams, C. C., Alberts, S., Ji, Z., et al. 2024, The
Astrophysical Journal, 968, 34,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad3f17
Wright, A. C., Tremmel, M., Brooks, A. M., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 502, 5370, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab081
Wright, E. L., Eisenhardt, P. R. M., Mainzer, A. K., et al.
2010, The Astronomical Journal, 140, 1868,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/140/6/1868
Zabludoff, A. I., Zaritsky, D., Lin, H., et al. 1996, ApJ, 466,
104, doi: 10.1086/177495
Zahid, H. J., Dima, G. I., Kewley, L. J., Erb, D. K., &
Dav´ e, R. 2012, ApJ, 757, 54,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/757/1/54
Zaritsky, D., Donnerstein, R., Dey, A., et al. 2023, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 267, 27,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/acdd71
Zaritsky, D., Donnerstein, R., Karunakaran, A., et al. 2021,
ApJS, 257, 60, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac2607
—. 2022, ApJS, 261, 11, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac6ceb
Zaritsky, D., Donnerstein, R., & Khim, D. J. 2025, The
Open Journal of Astrophysics, 8, 90,
doi: 10.33232/001c.142073
Zaritsky, D., Donnerstein, R., Dey, A., et al. 2019, ApJS,
240, 1, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aaefe9

22Zaritsky, et al.
APPENDIX
A.COMPARING OUR PHOTOMETRY TO PUBLISHED VALUES
Several smaller prior studies have investigated the SFHs of UDGs. In most cases, their methodology differs signifi-
cantly from ours in terms of both their photometry and modeling. Here we compare to their photometry to provide
an external check on the robustness of the measurements.
A.1.UV Photometry
Several authors have measured UV fluxes of UDGs (Voyer et al. 2014; Singh et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2020; Junais
et al. 2022). Generally, the approach has been similar to ours, using aperture photometry but differing in how the
apertures are defined. We present comparisons for galaxies in common among these studies in Figure 11. The apparent
magnitudes agree well, with small mean zero point offsets (NUV, FUV =−0.11±0.05, 0.12±0.40 mag).
We now describe the individual literature studies and any key differences. Voyer et al. (2014) limited their UV
estimates to sources in the Virgo cluster observed by GALEX. Although they used apertures that encompassed the
entire galaxy, the overall agreement is good with no evidence of significant systematic biases. Singh et al. (2019) used
an earlier version of the SMUDGes catalog (Paper I) using a circular aperture with a radius of 2r e estimated with
a fixed S´ ersic index of one. Their estimates ofr e differ from our more recent values and, together with the use of
circular apertures and different methods to estimate background contamination, probably account for the magnitude
offset. As shown in Figure 11, many of our UDGs that match those of Lee et al. (2020) are faint and at the edge of
GALEX detectability, so, as expected, uncertainties in UV photometry are relatively large. They also used a circular
aperture, but used a radius of 1r e obtained from van Dokkum et al. (2015). For the object with the largest offset in
NUV (DF25, SMDG1259487+274639), they adoptedr e = 9.4′′compared to a SMUDGes value of 7.0 ′′. Despite these
differences, the magnitude difference is not highly significant. Junais et al. (2022) estimated UV flux in UDGs located
within the Virgo cluster. They generated their apertures from the largest measured radius in their g-band images,
which is 3σabove the sky level. Our results have an average offset of∼0.5 mag in NUV, although there are only two
galaxies for comparison. We conclude that we find no systematic differences between our UV photometry and the
averages of those in the literature that are greater than our internal error estimates.
A.2.IR Photometry
Other studies examining the SFHs of UDGs have also taken advantage of WISE IR imaging (Buzzo et al. 2022,
2024a,b; Greco et al. 2018). However, in all cases their methodologies differed significantly from ours in both how
they acquired the images and the photometry obtained. For example, Buzzo et al. (2022, 2024a,b) obtained their
images from archival ALLWISE data as well as mosaics created from single frames, while, as noted in Section 2.4,
we downloaded ours as coadded bricks from the Legacy Survey. These discrepancies are further compounded by the
relatively poor resolution of WISE images (6.1, 6.4, 6.5, and 12.0 ′′ for W1-4, respectively, Wright et al. 2010), the
faintness of these particular galaxies, and the crowded fields in which they frequently lie. Comparing the WISE results
for W1 and W2 (Figure 12), we find that even with significant processing differences, our results correlate well (r =
0.87 for W1 and 0.86 for W2) and have mean zero point magnitude offsets of 0.18±0.10 and 0.47±0.14 mag for W1
and W2, respectively, relative to the complete set of data from the literature. There were not enough matching data
points to compare the results for W3 and W4. Because at least the W2 offset is statistically significant, we explore
whether these differences affect our results. We rerun PROSPECTOR on the 19 galaxies in our science data set that
matched galaxies having IR estimates by others. The original W1 and W2 photometry are replaced with the values
from the associated matching galaxy with all other parameters unchanged. As shown in Figure 13, the original and
test results for both log(A/K) and log(sSFR 0) agree well. The mean differences are−0.16±0.13 and−0.05±0.12,
respectively, which are statistically insignificant offsets. We conclude that the possible offset in our W2 photometry
does not affect our conclusions compared to previously published results.
B.DETERMINING THE MINIMUM NECESSARY PHOTOMETRIC DATA
To determine the minimum photometric data needed for a reliable SED reconstruction, we use the 509 SMUDGes
with acceptable photometry in all nine bands (referred to as the base group and assigned f-phot = 2 in Table 3). By

A Gyr in the Life23
Figure 11.Comparisons between UV mags estimated by other authors and those obtained in this study. The left panels show
the direct comparison while the right ones show the differences (SMUDGes - Others). Dashed lines in the right panels indicate
the mean differences of−0.11±0.05 for NUV and 0.12±0.40 mag for FUV. Individual measurement standard deviations are
0.43 and 1.20 mag, respectively, and shown as the shaded regions.
selectively removing some of the UV and IR photometry, we assess whether we can recover results that are consistent
with those obtained using the full data set. The fewer bands we need, the larger our galaxy sample will be beyond the
base group.
We focus on cases where either the UV or IR datasets are partially incomplete. We tested three scenarios: 1) we
have at least one good measurement in both UV and IR, 2) we are only missing one measurement in the UV, and 3)
we are missing only one measurement in the IR. We randomly delete bands from the base group in a way that matches
the numbers of galaxies in our sample with the same missing data entry. In Figure 14 we present the comparison of
the results for our two main measurements (A/K and SFR 0).
It is evident from Figure 14 that the correlation remains in place (i.e. we reproduce the results obtained using all of
the data, albeit with larger scatter), even when we require only one UV and one IR measurement. We opt to define
this as the minimal necessary photometric data, which allows us to nearly double the sample of galaxies that we can
analyze. For those who only want our most reliable results, we flag the galaxies for which all nine data bands are used
in Table 3.
C.SETTING THE LOWER LIMIT ON THE DUST PRIOR
As discussed in Section 3.2, we intentionally set the lower limit of the dust prior to the unphysical value of−0.4.
Here we explore the effects of this choice on our results, particularly on our key measures of sSFR0 and A/K. As shown
in Figure 15, these parameters are nearly unchanged for larger values, particularly compared to the results of setting
the lower limit of the prior to beA V ≥0 (upper panels). For smaller values, there is generally increased scatter and,

24Zaritsky, et al.
Figure 12.Comparisons between WISE mags estimated by other authors and those obtained in this study. Plots are as
described in Figure 11. We find mean differences of 0.18±0.10 mag for W1 and 0.47±0.14 mag for W2. Individual measurement
standard deviations are 0.54 and 0.56 mag, respectively, and shown as the shaded regions.
in the case of settingA V = 0, systemic offsets. The systemic offsets in sSFR 0 and A/K are of little consequence since
these occur for values that are already quite small. We conclude that the choice of prior, within the range explored,
has no bearing on our conclusions regarding the recent star formation histories of these galaxies (see Figure 16).
The situation is different for metallicity determinations, which show a significant difference between whenA V is
allowed to vary versus when it is set to 0. Although we do not know which results are closer to reality, it seems much
more likely that most of these galaxies have metallicities between−2 and−1 rather than between−3 and−4. If
so, then there is a failure in the modeling, in this aspect, for some quenched galaxies when allowing for dust (Figure
17). We conclude that the metallicity estimates in our catalog should be treated with skepticism for galaxies with
log(sSFR0/yr−1)<−12 or log(A/K)<−3.
D.PROSPECTOR SFR CONTINUITY CONDITION
As we discussed briefly in§3.2, we have some flexibility in assigning a prior that moderates the degree of continuity
in the recovered SFRs between adjacent temporal bins. The most cited nonparametric priors used in PROSPECTOR
are referred to as the “continuity” and “Dirichlet” options (for specific details, see Leja et al. 2019).
As noted in Section 3.2, de los Reyes et al. (2025) found that PROSPECTOR has difficulty fitting faint galaxies
with the Dirichlet prior when the number of age bins is inadequate (<6) or the concentration factor (α D) is too
small. We test whether this conclusion is applicable to our dataset using simulations. We start by selecting the 93
star-forming science galaxies with A/K>−2 and−11.5<sSFR 0/yr−1 <−9.5. The total mass and sSFR 0 for each
of these guide our simulations. Our input SFH model consists of two delayed-τcomponents. The first component
approximates an old stellar population and starts 8 Gyr ago with an e-folding time of 3.4 Gyr and is quenched at

A Gyr in the Life25
Figure 13.Changes in log(A/K) and log(sSFR 0) after replacing original W1 and W2 photometry with values obtained from
other sources. Dashed lines in the right panels indicate the mean differences (SMUDGes−Others) which are−0.16±0.13 for
log(A/K) and−0.05±0.12 for log(sSFR 0). Standard deviations for individual measurements, shown as the shaded regions, are
0.56 and 0.53, respectively. Uncertainties for the differences are generated using the Python package asymmetric uncertainty
(Gobat 2022).
various times in different realizations (20, 100, 200, 500, and 1000 Myr ago). We set the e-folding time to produce a
log(A/K) of−1, approximately the location of the middle of our defined “star-forming” region. The second component
represents recent star formation and starts at 10 Myr ago with an e-folding time of 1 Myr. For each simulation, the
young component is assigned a mass equal to the mass we recovered for the youngest bin of the associated science
target, and the old component’s mass is set to the total mass we recovered minus this value. We fit these simulations
using the continuity and Dirichlet priors, using fourα D values (0.2, 0.4, 0.7 and 1.0) for the latter.
We present our results in Figure 18, where we find that the continuity prior results in smaller errors for both SFR 0
and A/K than any of the Dirichlet priors for all quenching times. This supports the de los Reyes et al. (2025) conclusion
that Dirichlet priors underperform when the number of age bins is small. Also, as expected from the analysis by de los
Reyes et al. (2025), Dirichlet errors increase asα D decreases. However, this finding may be limited to our particular
implementation, where we use only four age bins to evaluate faint galaxies, and variations of the Dirichlet prior may be
appropriate in other situations. We conclude that for our particular sample and goals, the continuity prior is preferable
to the Dirichlet prior.
E.SIMULATED UDGS
We now test the accuracy and precision with which the analysis can recover sharp changes in SFR behavior. In
particular, we focus on the two measures from which we draw inferences, SFR 0 and A/K. In all cases where we refer
to these quantities, even for galaxies where spectral classification exists in the literature, what we are discussing and
plotting are our estimates of SFR 0 and A/K as we have defined these to be in terms of our PROSPECTOR model

26Zaritsky, et al.
Figure 14.The effect on the recovered A/K and SFR 0 of omitting some UV or IR observations from the 509 candidates with
acceptable photometry in all nine bands (base group). In parenthesis are the numbers of additional candidates that are added
to the base group for the corresponding criteria. In each panel we present ∆, the mean difference and the uncertainty in the
mean between the original and the revised analysis (original−revised).
results. We now determine the degree to which we recover our input values for simulated galaxies that are similar to
our actual galaxies in specific scenarios.
E.1.Galaxies With Young Stars
We begin by assessing the reliability of our measure of ongoing star formation, SFR 0, for galaxies that are currently
star-forming. To assess the effects of the smoothing in recovered values of SFRs inherent to the continuity prior,
we begin with the same two component input model used in Appendix D and the same quenching times for the old
component (20 Myr, 100 Myr, 200 Myr, 500 Myr and 1 Gyr) and a young component normalized to the recovered SFR0
of our actual galaxies. In Table 4 we present a summary of the results. The correlations between the input values and
the recovered values are strong, indicating that the relative rankings of SFR0, sSFR0, and M∗ are preserved. However,
there are systematic biases in which the output values underestimate SFR 0 and overestimate the stellar mass. Our
results demonstrate that we are likely underestimating SFR0 by a factor of two (an average offset of 0.34±0.23 dex) in
any situation where there has been a pause in star formation, but that this bias is relatively insensitive to the length
of that pause. This is likely due to the “leakage” of some star formation from the youngest to the second youngest
bin. This problem is not unexpected because our photometry does not present a direct constraint on stars of age<20
Myr. Adding, Hαphotometry, for example, could address this shortcoming. If star formation has not recently paused,
then we recover the input value, presumably because the leakage between the adjacent bins comes close to averaging
out. These differences are negligible on the scale on which we classify our galaxies (e.g. Figure 8). We conclude that
we recover sSFR0 well, to a factor of two or better.
We perform a similar analysis on A/K using the same simulations. In this case, we compare simulations in which
we set the e-folding time of the old component to produce a log(A/K) of−1 if the quenching time is more recent than
150 Myr ago. We obtain log(A/K) differences of 0.08±0.06, 0.21±0.06, 0.29±0.07, and 0.36±0.19 dex, respectively,
for quenching times of 20, 100, 200, and 500 Myr. We do not include the simulations with a quenching time of 1 Gyr

A Gyr in the Life27
Figure 15.Exploring the dependence of results on different dust priors. Upper panels compare the results when settingA V
to be nonnegative vs. our choice of allowing moderately negative values. Lower panels compare the results when settingA V
to 0. Effects on our key measurements of sSFR 0 and A/K are modest and do not affect our conclusions, but the effects on the
recovered metallicity are large for quiescent galaxies.
Figure 16.The effects of different dust priors on one of our principle diagnostic diagrams. The leftmost panel shows results
from our adopted approach, the middle panel results from setting the lower limit on A V to 0, and the rightmost panel the
results from setting A V = 0 for all galaxies. Although there are quantitative differences, those appear to be mostly limited to
the quiesent systems and our classification of the galaxies remains consistent.
since these contain no mass in the next to oldest age bin (i.e. log(A/K) =−∞). As expected, when quenching occurs
at 500 Myr (within the bin), log(A/K) is reduced. The mean value is now−1.21.
Finally, in Figure 7 the lack of star forming systems with low values of A/K is striking and naively suggests that old
stellar populations do not suddenly restart star formation. Identifying systems in which a purely old stellar population
suddenly restarts star formation is difficult for various reasons. First, the recent star formation would have to confine
itself to the latest 100 Myr or otherwise it would extend into the bin we use to define intermediate age stars. This

28Zaritsky, et al.
Figure 17.How dust prior limits affect the recovered [Z/Z ⊙]. The primary difference among these results occurs for quenched
galaxies (log(A/K)<−3.5). WhenA V is set to 0, the metallicity for the subgroup of these galaxies that appear to have
metallicities below−3 move up, joining the rest of the sample at−1 to−2.
Figure 18.Differences between simulation and fitted results for log(sSFR0) and log(A/K) using the continuity and four
different Dirichlet priors. In all cases, there are overestimations of sSFR 0 and A/K. Biases for both SFR 0 and A/K are smaller
for the continuity prior than any of the Dirichlet priors for all tested quench times. ∆log(A/K) points are not shown for a
quench time of 1000 Myr because the input A/K’s equal zero.
would require us to be rather fortuitous in finding such systems. Second, even such a system (one with star formation
only in the recent past) will have formed intermediate mass stars that the analysis might have difficulty distinguishing
from an intermediate age population (for example, if the initial mass function is not quite correct). Finally, — and the
issue we are discussing here — our analysis will tend to smooth out the SFH and, therefore, avoid placing galaxies in
this region of the diagram. Here we explore whether our analysis could have missed such a population of young stars
in otherwise quiescent galaxies.
As above, we address this question with simulations using two component delayed tau models. We again fix dust
extinction at 0,logzsolat−1, total mass at 10 8M⊙ and redshift at 0.01. We set the old component to produce
a log(A/K) of−5 with no quenching which simulates the value in about the middle of the quiescent region of our
science targets. The recent star-forming component starts at 10 Myr with an e-folding time of 1 Myr with the only
variable being the mass of this component. We run 16 simulations starting with the mass of the science target with
the largest sSFR0 in the sample and reducing this by 50% for each subsequent simulation. As shown in Figure 19, the
PROSPECTOR results differ significantly from the input parameters and do not reproduce the condition where there
is recent sudden star formation after a long period of quiescence. We conclude that we cannot say with confidence
that the lack of SMUDGes in this region of the diagram reflects an actual lack of such galaxies.

A Gyr in the Life29
T able 4.Comparisons between simulated input and output values for star-forming galaxiesa
Quench time ∆ log(sSFR 0/yr−1) ∆ log(SFR 0/(M⊙yr−1)) ∆ log(M ∗/M⊙)
[Myr]
20 0.01±0.24 (r = 0.85)−0.11±0.24 (r = 0.97)−0.12±0.01 (r = 1.00)
100 0.31±0.11 (r = 0.97) 0.18±0.11 (r = 0.99)−0.13±0.01 (r = 1.00)
200 0.45±0.11 (r = 0.99) 0.32±0.11 (r = 0.99)−0.13±0.01 (r = 1.00)
500 0.49±0.14 (r = 0.99) 0.36±0.12 (r = 0.99)−0.13±0.02 (r = 1.00)
1000 0.43±0.13 (r = 1.00) 0.33±0.12 (r = 1.00)−0.10±0.02 (r = 1.00)
aValues are for output minus input. The r values given in parentheses are the Pearson correlation
coefficient and demonstrate that the relative rankings remain nearly unchanged.
Figure 19.Simulating 16 galaxies with long standing quiescent populations and different levels of current star formation. We
conclude that such systems are not correctly recovered in our treatment.
E.2.Galaxies with Intermediate Age Stars
In Figure 7 there is a reversal in the relationship between sSFR 0 and A/K for log(A/K)>∼ −2. This behavior is
qualitatively what one might expect for post-starburst systems. In such galaxies, the current SFR declines, and the
fraction of A stars increases. However, as always, we need to determine if the modeling is indeed faithfully recovering
the behavior.
We explore whether galaxies found in the downturn seen in Figure 7 can be reproduced with a simple scenario or
are necessarily “scattered” into this region of the diagram. As previously done, we create models consisting of two
delayed-τcomponents. The first simulates an old population and starts at 8 Gyr with an e-folding time of 3.4 Gyr,
which produces log(A/K) of−1 and approximates the location of the middle of the downturn of the science targets
(Figure 7). Unlike in Appendix E.1, we now simply use a fixed stellar mass of 10 8 M⊙. We simulate the post-starburst
effect by truncating star formation in this component at either 100 or 200 Myr (corresponding to the edges of our
second and third age bins). The second component simulates a burst starting at 10 Myr with an e-folding time of 0.5
Gyr and a variable mass that approximates the sSFRs of our science targets. Specifically, we use the 16 targets with

30Zaritsky, et al.
−1.2<log(A/K)<−0.8 and sSFR 0 <−11.5. Because these are already selected to be in the downturn region they
have lower SFR0 than the star forming galaxies we examined in Appendix E.1. All other parameters are kept constant
with dust extinction set to 0,logzsolto−1, and redshift to 0.01. We set the uncertainties in flux using those of our
science targets with similar flux values and the resulting photometry is processed identically as for our science targets.
In Figure 20 we present the results of these simulations, where we find that we qualitatively replicate the downturn.
Nevertheless, we do find some offsets. The resulting sSFR 0’s are generally larger than those input, particularly when
the input sSFR0 is exceedingly low, probably due to “leakage” into the youngest age bin. Moreover, when the quenching
is set to 200 Myr, which allots no mass to the second youngest age bin, there is a more significant decrease in log(A/K),
presumably caused by leakage from the second oldest bin into that bin. We are encouraged by these findings with
respect to our ability to distinguish recent declines in SFRs.
Figure 20.Testing the downturn in the log(sSFR 0) vs. log(A/K) relationship. Sixteen simulated galaxies, constructed to match
the observed properties of galaxies in the downturn, are modeled and passed through our analysis. The output values tend to
slightly lower values of log(A/K) and log(sSFR 0) but are generally still like in the downturn region of Figure 7, confirming that
galaxies with recently quenched star formation are identified as such even if they have a modest level of residual star formation.