Title: Observing the integrated and spatially resolved Sun with ultra-high spectral resolution
Authors: S. Schäfer, K. Royen, A. Huster Zapke, M. Ellwarth, A. Reiners
Published: 2026-06-04
Categories: astro-ph.IM, astro-ph.SR

Observing the integrated and spatially resolved Sun with ultra-high
spectral resolution
Sch¨afer, S.a, Royen, K.a, Huster Zapke, A.a, Ellwarth, M.a, and Reiners, A.a
aGeorg-August Universit¨at G¨ottingen, Institut f¨ur Astrophysik, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1, 37077
G¨ottingen, Germany
ABSTRACT
The Institute for Astrophysics G¨ottingen operates a solar observatory that combines a 50 cm siderostat with (1) a vacuum
vertical telescope, (2) a very high resolution Fourier Transform Spectrograph (R> 900, 000 at 600 nm), and (3) a Laser
Frequency Comb for extremely precise and accurate frequency calibration (< 10 cm/s). We introduce our setup that feeds
the spectrograph with either a 32.5” field of view of the solar surface, or with disk-integrated sunlight for Sun-as-a-star
observations and explain the necessary computational steps to guide specific positions on the solar surface into the fiber.
Our instrument suite can deliver spectroscopic measurements with extremely accurate frequency calibration, which
is valid across very large frequency regions (approx. 400-800 nm in wavelength). This allows precision spectroscopy of
individual lines in order to study the variability of spectral lines in Sun-as-a-star observations as well as determining the
convective blueshift across the solar surface from many spectral lines.
Keywords:Sun, Spectroscopy, Fiber, Radial-Velocity, Guiding
1. MOTIV ATION
The Sun provides invaluable reference for understanding the influence of stellar surface velocity fields and active regions
because it is possible to relate precision radial velocity (RV) observations to spatially resolved solar surface information
(Haywood et al. 2016; Meunier et al. 2010b). However, obtaining solar disk observations with m s−1 precision or better is
extremely difficult, and current solar Dopplergrams are known to exhibit severe problems in this respect (Couvidat et al.
2012; L¨ohner-B¨ottcher and Schlichenmaier 2013; Welsch et al. 2013). Furthermore, measuring precise Sun-as-a-star RVs
is very challenging because the spatial extension of the Sun implies that feeding light from the Sun into a spectrograph
involves the problem of collecting light from all areas of the solar disk equally. Earlier attempts have demonstrated this
difficulty (Deming and Plymate 1994; Deming et al. 1987; Jimenez et al. 1986; McMillan et al. 1993) but there is new
motivation for instruments facing this challenge, for example, observing the Sun with HARPS (Dumusque et al. 2015) and
in the G¨ottingen Solar Radial Velocity Project (Lemke and Reiners 2016). For example, disk-integrated data taken with
HARPS have demonstrated its high potential for understanding stellar RV variability (Collier Cameron et al. 2019) and also
for understanding systematic instrumental effects (Dumusque et al. 2020).
The main mechanism causing RV variability in stellar observations is the influence of magnetic activity on convective
blueshift (Dumusque et al. 2014; Haywood et al. 2016; Lagrange et al. 2010; Lanza et al. 2010; Marchwinski et al. 2015;
Meunier et al. 2010a,b). The motion of hot, rising plasma on the surface of a star causes a Doppler shift of the observed
spectrum (Beckers and Nelson 1978; Dravins et al. 1981; Livingston 1982). Because the motion of the plasma is non-
isotropic, the amplitude of the Doppler shift varies across the stellar disk (it depends on the stellar limb angle). For a
Sun-like star, the disk-integrated effect is on the order of a hundred m s−1 such that the observed radial velocity of a star is
systematically blueshifted. The variability of RV observations is then caused by the presence of temporally evolving and
co-rotating active regions. In an active region, the magnetic field can inhibit convection and shut offconvective blueshift
with the result that the spectrum emerging from that area appears redshifted with respect to the quiet photosphere.
Our motivation for observing the Sun with a Fourier Transform Spectrograph (FTS) is twofold. First, an FTS provides
very high spectral resolution (up to 106) allowing to study effects that cannot be resolved in typical astronomical spectrographs.
Our dataset is complementary to data from other facilities because we are targeting the analysis of spectral lines at the highest
Further author information: (Send correspondence to Sebastian Sch¨afer)
Sebastian Sch¨afer: E-mail: schaefer@astro.physik.uni-goettingen.de, Telephone:+49 (0)551 39 25068
arXiv:2606.05811v1  [astro-ph.IM]  4 Jun 2026

resolution across very large wavelength ranges but at lower cadence than other programs. Second, frequency calibration of
an FTS in principle is extremely robust because light of all frequencies follows the same optical path, which allows to use
light with a limited frequency range for calibrating the entire spectrum. While this does not render frequency calibration an
easy task, it eliminates a large number of free parameters inherent in ´echelle spectrograph calibration.
2. OVERVIEW OF INSTRUMENTAL SETUP AT IAG
The Institute for Astrophysics G ¨ottingen (IAG) is hosting a number of instruments: On the rooftop there are the 50 cm
Cassegrain night telescope and a 50 cm siderostat for solar observations. Attached to the siderostat is an integrated Sun
setup to observe the Sun as a star (see Sec. 7). The siderostat is connected to a vacuum tube, reaching down to below the 3rd
floor where the primary mirror is located, making it a vertical vacuum telescope (see Sec. 3 for more details). The focal
point of the Solar telescope is inside the optical lab on the 4th floor, where the resolved Sun setup is located (see Sec. 5).
This lab also hosts a Fourier Transform Spectrograph (Sec. 4), a number of calibration sources and a coupling stage with two
fibers leading into the FTS. Finally in the 3rd floor lab a Laser Frequency Comb is located, with fibers connecting it to the
4th floor lab. Figure 1 shows a crosssection of the building (not to scale) to illustrate the location of the different setups and
their connections.
Figure 1: Rooftop: 50 cm siderostat with vertical vacuum telescope, integrated Sun setup with integrating sphere, 50 cm
Cassegrain telescope for stellar observations; 4th floor: Resolved Sun setup, Fourier Transform Spectrograph (fiber-fed,
R>900,000), calibration sources; 3rd floor: Laser Frequency Comb.

3. TELESCOPE
The siderostat has been built by Halfmann Teleskoptechnik. A vertical vacuum tube was built directly into the new phycics
building with the siderostat on top of the 5th floor and the primary mirror located below the 3rd floor. Installation of the
system and first light happened in September 2008 and for a couple of years the solar telescope was mainly used for student
lab courses, featuring an open air Littrow spektrograph with a focal length of 8 m and a resolving power of over 100,000 in a
small wavelength range. This allowed the observation of sunspots and the measurement of their magnetic field strength
across the slit of the spectrograph via Zeeman splitting. Figure 2 shows the siderostat with the view towards G¨ottingen and
Table 1 gives an overview over the mirrors used.
Figure 2: Siderostat on the roof, view southbound towards the city center of G¨ottingen: The S1 mirror on the right is tracking
the movement of the target object (e.g. the Sun), the S2 mirror on the left is fixed in its 45◦position. The vacuum window of
the vertical part of the telescope is below the S2.
Table 1: Telescope mirror system
S1 S2 M1 Nasmyth
Type flat circular flat circular on axis parabolic elliptical 45◦flat
Diameter 515.3 mm (mech)
502 mm (opt)
515.3 mm (mech)
502 mm (opt) 500 mm 120 mm (semi-minor axis)
Thickness 63.2 mm 62.8 mm 25 mm
Focal length - - 5750 mm
P-V wavefront error 0.118λ 0.115λ 0.1λ 0.1λ
RMS wavefront error 0.024λ 0.021λ 0.1λ 0.1λ
Surface quality
(scratch/dig) 70/50 80/50
Material Zerodur Zerodu Zerodur Zerodur
Coating Al+SiO2 Al+SiO2
Reflectivity 90.2% 90.3%

4. SPECTROGRAPH
Our spectrograph is a Bruker IFS125HR Fourier-Transform-Spectrograph (FTS). In principle the FTS is a Michelson-
Interferometer: The light is divided by a beamsplitter, one part being back-reflected by a fixed mirror and the other part by a
movable mirror. The beamsplitter recombines the light and the resulting interference signal is captured by a detector as a
function of the position of the movable mirror. This is called the interferogram. Performing a fast Fourier transform on the
interferogram results in the spectrum of the input light. This can either be done with the OPUS software package (that is
also controlling the FTS) or manually.
For our solar observations we use the double-sided mode, which means we can achieve a resolving power of up to
R =925 , 000 at 600 nm. In contrast to Echelle spectrographs the FTS doesn’t have an exposure-time. Instead the movable
mirror has to scan the whole optical path difference of the Michelson-Interferometer to achieve a certain resolution. A single
scan at maximum resolution takes about 1.3 minutes. The equivalent of taking a longer exposure time is to do multiple scans
and adding them up. This increases the signal to noise ratio similarly to a longer exposure time on an Echelle spectrograph.
We modified our FTS so that we can now input two light sources simultaneously - a ’science light’ and a calibration
source, a technique commonly used in high precision spectroscopy, e.g. HARPS (Mayor et al. 2003), CARMENES
(Quirrenbach et al. 2012). Even though the FTS has an internal HeNe laser, stabilized to its TEM01 mode, external drift
calibration is needed to achieve a radial velocity stability of better than ∼ 10 m/s. Available options for our FTS include
Hollow cathode lamps, a Fabry-P´erot Etalon or a Laser Frequency comb.
For more details about our FTS modifications and the dual-source setup see Schaefer et al. (2020). A detailed
characterization of the FTS using our laser frequency comb can be found in Huke et al. (2019)
5. RESOLVED SUN SETUP
Initially the Solar telescope was used with a Gregory setup: The primary mirror (M1) produces an image of the Sun onto the
45◦Nasmyth mirror which has a conic hole in the direction of the optical axis. Above the Nasmyth the Gregory mirror is
placed. It is re-imaging the Sun onto a spectrograph slit via the Nasmyth’s backside. This setup is no longer used, but the
hole in the center of the Nasmyth is still there and is marking the center of the telescope axis (see Fig. 4).
In order to use the FTS to do spectroscopic observations of the spatially resolved Sun we build a new setup: The primary
image of the Sun on the front side of the Nasmyth is used and re-imaged onto a fiber pickup. The fiber is leading towards
the FTS. In order to select different observation regions on the Sun the siderostat mirror S1 is moved until the region of
interest is placed onto the fiber.
Section 5.1 explains the optical setup and Sec. 5.2 shows first results. The computational steps needed to move the
telescope correctly in order to track the region of interest inside the fiber follow in the next section (Sec. 6).
5.1 Optical setup
The current version of the resolved Sun setup is the fifths iteration with all previous version having different goals and
objectives. This latest design was developed with the following goals and constraints in mind:
•Re-image the solar disc onto the 525µmfiber.
•Use a camera setup to image the solar disc and the fiber pickup in order to guide the telescope.
•Ideally this should also work on the Moon and on stars.
• The design needs to be compact enough to use the limited installation space between the vacuum tube and the wall
behind it.
•If possible use existing hardware to minimize additional costs.

Figure 3 illustrates the optical setup: After the Nasmyth focus (1) the light passes the vacuum window (2). An achromat
(3) (Linos G322316000) collimates the light and a 30 ◦off-axis parabolic mirror (4) (d=76.2 mm, EFL=272.2 mm, Edmund
Optics 83963) re-images the solar disc onto the fiber pickup (5). The fiber pickup is a circular, polished stainless steel disc
with a 2.5 mm hole in the center. A FC/PC fiber connector is built into this hole from the backside, so the fiber head is sitting
2 mm behind the surface. The fiber pickup is tilted by 34 ◦while the hole is tilted by -34 ◦so the fiber head is parallel to the
image plane.
Figure 3: Zemax simulation of the resolved Sun setup, starting at the Nasmyth focus (1) and ending at the camera position
(not shown) behind the last lens (10).
The fiber leading towards the FTS is hexagonal shaped with a diameter of 525µm (Ceramoptec HEX WF 525). The
angular diameter of the Sun is approximately 1920′′. With the existing optics this results in a re-imaged solar disc on the
fiber pickup with a diameter of 31 mm, therefore the field of view of the fiber is about 32.5′′.
For subsequent elements after the fiber pickup both the image quality and the spectral information are not of a big
concern anymore, because the scientific data is collected by the fiber and analyzed with the FTS while the guiding system is
not limited by image quality. Therefore for the rest of the setup towards the camera, using cheaper components is prioritized
over image quality, hence we use simple lenses and accept both spherical and chromatic aberrations. Particularly the
chromatic effects can be ignored because a narrow band filter is used in front of the detector to avoid oversaturation.
After the fiber pickup another off-axis parabolic mirror (6) (d=101.6 mm, EFL=304.8 mm, Edmund Optics 83967) and
a lens (7) (d=100 mm, f=402 mm, unknown manufacturer) collimate the beam. Because the siderostat controls are used
in order to move the solar image on the fiber pickup with respect to the fiber, the off-axis parabolic mirror placed behind
the fiber pickup needs to be quite close to the fiber pickup. Otherwise the light would be wandering offthe mirror when a
position on the solar edge is placed onto the fiber.
A flat mirror (8) folds the light back and a combination of two lenses (9+10) (d=75 mm, f=250 mm and d=75 mm,
f=75 mm, Edmund Optics 86914+86911) is used to compress the beam to a diameter of d=14 mm. A H-alpha filter and a
reflective neutral density filter (not shown) are used to remove most of the light. They can be moved out of the beam for

observation of the moon or stars. Finally, a wide angle low distortion lens (not shown) (Edmund Optics 68671) is used in
combination with the CMOS detector (The Imaging Source DMK 23GP031).
Figure 4 shows the solar disc as seen by the detector. Measuring the position of the fiber hole, the position of the disc
center and a given set of solar coordinates the telescope can be moved in order to hold the region of interest inside the fiber
(see Sec. 6).
Figure 4: The solar disc as seen by the detector (including flat-field correction). Both, the hole from the Nasmyth mirror
and the fiber hole are visible as shadows on the Sun. The fiber itself is about 1/5 the size of the fiber hole. The remaining
shadows and speckles are scratches on the fibre-pickup mirror (5) itself that couldn’t be removed completely by the flat-field
correction.
5.2 First results
Since the Sun is the only Star we can resolve spatially, it is a matter of particular interest to create a detailed profile of it. For
first analysis we use spectra from 9 different areas on the Sun. This data-set was observed on the 8th of April 2020. In Fig. 5
small segments of three different spectra are shown. This region includes two solar Fe I lines and two telluric O2 lines which
are generated by earths atmosphere. The black spectrum corresponds to the solar center ( µ =1 .0, Φ =0), while the blue one
is taken in the east (at µ =0 .8, Φ =90) and shows a blueshift of the solar lines based on the solar rotation. On the other
hand the red spectrum which is observed in the west (µ =0 .8, Φ =270) of the solar surface shows a redshift (cf. Fig. 6).
The telluric O2 lines are stable since the motion on the Sun is not affecting them.
In the data reduction the spectra are normalized and all telluric lines are removed by masking. After this we perform a
cross correlation for the wavelength range of 505nm to 680 nm with the spectra from the center of the Sun used as reference.
Afterwards, the barycentric motion between the telescope and the solar region needs to be removed. Therefore we use
an ephemeris code (Doerr 2015) which is based on NASA’s Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility SPICE toolkit
(Acton 1996) with an accuracy of a few cm/s. The resulting velocities are shown in Fig. 6. As to be expected, the radial
velocities are dominated by the solar rotation. Since the solar center serves as reference there is no velocity marker set for
this area.

Figure 5: Segment of the solar spectrum plotted in vacuum wavelength. Spectra for three different areas of the solar disc are
shown and the two Fe I solar lines and two O2 telluric lines are marked. The red- and blueshift due to the solar rotation can
be clearly seen in the spectra taken towards the solar edge: While the Fe I lines are shifted the telluric O2 lines are not.
We substract the solar rotation using the solar rotation model from Snodgrass and Ulrich (1990) and obtain the convective
blueshift velocities which are shown in Fig. 7. These velocities have values between -200 m/s and -400 m/s and are consistent
with e.g. L¨ohner-B¨ottcher et al. (2019), who calculate the blueshift for different line depths. In their work, they determine the
blueshift for 26 different photospheric to chromospheric spectral lines for the four solar axis. In our case the cross correlation
relates to roughly 1000 spectral lines of different atmospheric heights. Therefore it is reasonable that our velocities are in the
range of the blueshifts of lines between 0.3 and 0.6 in the normalized spectrum of L¨ohner-B¨ottcher et al. (2019) since we
basically measure the mean velocity.
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.20.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
       
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500
v [m/s]
Figure 6: Radial velocities of eight solar surface regions
referring to the solar center.
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.20.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
       
400
375
350
325
300
275
250
225
200
v [m/s]
Figure 7: Remaining convective blueshift velocities of eight
solar surface regions referring to the solar center after re-
moving the solar rotation.

6. GUIDING RESOLVED SUN FEATURES
The goal of the resolved Sun guiding system is to guide a certain feature on the Sun’s surface towards the spectrograph
fiber (see Fig. 4) for the duration of the measurement with a 2σ precision of the fiber-size: 32.5′′. Since the tracking of
the telescope’s original software is not accurate and stable enough to accomplish that, we present an image-based guiding,
specifically designed to reduce errors for a spatially extended target (the Sun). A control loop minimizes the distance of the
target and the fiber by correcting the position of the S1 mirror (see Fig. 2) during observation. For that, the position of any
sun feature in pixel coordinates through coordinate transformations is computed in section 6.2. Section 6.3 presents a model
for the pointing uncertainty.
6.1 Guiding
The guiding’s control loop tries to minimize the distance between the target position in the image - theprocess variable-
and the position of the fiber in the image - theset point. The image like seen in Fig. 4 provides several important information
for image-based guiding.
• Theposition of the center of the solar diskprovides a reference point with known position in image and sky
coordinates.
• Theellipsoidal shape of the solar diskin the image linked with its shape in the sky provides the scaling between
both coordinate systems.
•Theshadow of the fiber holeprovides an estimate for theset pointof the guiding control loop.
Two important features are however missing from the image.
1. Theexact position of the fiberrelative to its shadow in the image is not known. The fiber is five times smaller than
the shadow and might very well not lie at the centre of the shadow.
2. Theorientation of the solar diskin the image is not detectable because it lacks any features visible in the image.
Solar spots are too rare during the inactive phase of the solar cycle.
The missing fiber position results in an inaccuracy in theset pointfor the control loop of the guiding process. The missing
orientation means that the angle of the target relative to the sun center is to be calculated from the theoretical light propagation
as described in Sec. 6.2.2.
The information available in the image is used to build a control loop consisting of the following steps.
1. Detect position and shape of the solar disk in the image (see Sec. 6.4).
2. Use the latter to refine the current mapping between Sun and image coordinates (see Sec. 6.2).
3. With the updated mapping transform the offset between the center of sun and the target feature at the suns surface to
image coordinates.
4. Calculate theprocess variable: the absolute position of the target in image coordinates. This is given by the sum of
the detected position of the suns center and the offset.
5. Calculate the difference between fiber and target position.
6. Transform the difference to sky coordinates using the inverse mapping from step two to correct the telescope position.
Steps 1, 2 and 5 introduce uncertainties originating from the sun detection algorithm, the calibration of the optical path
and the position of the fibre, respectively. The overall effect of these uncertainties on the guiding result is estimated in
Sec. 6.3.

Figure 8: Schematic view of the different coordinate systems used during frame transformations. Orange: Sun’s (lon,
lat)-coordinates. Blue (curved): absolute topocentric coordinates. Green: Projected Plane coordinates. Red: Native
coordinates.
6.2 Frame transformation: Sun to Image
Computing the camera pixel coordinates of a sun-feature is the result of a mapping chain that transforms some solar-surface
input coordinates. That chain is subdivided into two main transformations. Astrometric mappings transform solar surface
(lon, lat)-coordinates to local sky or topocentric coordinates (az, alt) and are realized through implementation of Astropy
(Astropy Collaboration et al. 2018). The instrumental mappings, which concern the transformation of local sky coordinates
throughout the optical elements into the guiding-camera, are modelled and fitted to a series of observations. This whole
process can be visualized as ”drawing” sun’s (lon, lat)-coordinates within the sun’s disk onto the camera image like shown
in Fig. 8. Appying these transformations introduces some uncertainties which are investigated closer in Sec. 6.3.
We first introduce the following coordinate systems, and refer to their definition for further reading.
6.2.1 Reference frame definitions
• Helioprojective radial (HPR) coordinates (µ, ϕ)Commonly used in solar science, it defines a two dimensional
polar frame on the visible sun’s disk, from the observers perspective (Seidelmann et al. 2007). It is, together with
Stonyhurst (see below), one of the solar frames in which user input occurs.
• Stonyhurst (SH) coordinates (lon, lat)In SH coordinates, the longitude starts counting from the central meridian
(Seidelmann et al. 2007), which is the plane spanned by the observer, the sun center and the sun’s north pole. The
latitude starts counting positively towards the sun’s north pole.
• Refracted topocentric/Sky coordinates (az, alt)Describe the position, corrected by atmospheric refraction, of
a target within the local sky above the telescope. They constitute the ”bridge frame” between astrometric and
instrumental mappings. We follow the World Coordinate System and FITS convention (Calabretta and Greisen 2002)
to transform celestial coordinates to pixel coordinates. In the latter section, we refer to them as celestial”Real World
Coordinates (RWC)”.

• True camera coordinates (x, y)As the last frame in the chain, it provides the guiding system with empirically
measured properties of the sun like the position and shape of the solar disk in the camera image.
• ICRS coordinates(ra, dec)Solar system barycentric, equatorial aligned coordinate system (Ma et al. 1998). HCRS
and GCRS correspond to the translation of the system to the heliocenter and geocenter, respectively.
• Celestial Intermediate Reference System (CIRS) (ra, dec)CIRS are the modern equatorial ”of Date” coordinates,
using the Celestial Intermediate Origin (CIO) instead of the equinox of date. Catalogue coordinates are generally
corrected by proper motion and parallax, gravitational deflection of light, precession and nutation (Capitaine 2008).
6.2.2 Astrometric mapping: Sun to sky
We aim to compile a coordinate transformation chain that returns refracted topocentric (az,alt ), telescope centered coordi-
nates of a target on the Sun’s surface at a certain time. Through the Python library Astropy, we can use software routines
from The Standards of Fundamental Astronomy (SOFA), which is maintained by the International Astronomical Union.
They provide all ephemeris methods and astrometric transformations that are needed for such a task. Sunpy (Barnes et al.
2020) is used for solar coordinates. The uncertainty propagated by this chain will be neglected, since its errors (±0.06′′) lie
some orders of magnitude below the instrumental errors. This subchain’s structure is shown in Fig. 9.
Figure 9: Astrometric coordinate transformation steps from solar Helioprojective radial to Refracted topocentric coordinates.
6.2.3 Instrumental mapping: Sky to Pixel
The goal of the instrumental mapping is to transform topocentric coordinates (relative to the Sun-center) through the optical
elements into pixel coordinates. Given (from the astrometric mapping) the spatially extended target (Sun) in the sky as a
set of topocentric coordinates and its corresponding Sun-surface coordinates, this actually completes the transformation of
the solar surface to pixel coordinates. We use the empirically detected Sun’s pixel position and size (see Sec. 6.4) in the
transformation, adjusting the calculated Sun grid to the observed sun, which saves some modelling effort, but needs the Sun
to be in the guiding image.
This subchain follows World Coordinate Systems (WCS) transformation conventions (Calabretta and Greisen 2002): For
a ground-based instrument, we refer to topocentric/sky coordinates as celestial ”Real World Coordinates (RWC)” in WCS
terminology. Figure 10 gives a schematic overview over all the instrumental transformation steps and Fig. 11 illustrates
them in a 3D context.
Due to the small telescope’s field of view (FOV) (D≈ 0.5◦), this subchain has been approximated by a linear map in the
past, creating a systematic error.
Figure 10: Instrumental coordinate transformation steps from real world coordinates to pixel coordinates in the camera
image.
1. Real World (az, alt) to Native coordinatesThis process corresponds to rotating the pole of spherical topocentric
coordinates towards the Sun-center, which serves as a reference point for all the following transformations (Calabretta
and Greisen 2002). When computing these (Sun-center relative) coordinates, we cancel any error concerning absolute
Sun-center’s position (especially atmospheric refraction and uncertainty about telescope’s location*), leaving us to
deal only with errors concerning the orientation of the Sun’s sphere. This can be done, since we obtain the Sun-center
in pixel empirically by fitting an ellipse in the camera image rather than tracking its absolute position in the sky.
However, a new error detecting the Sun in pixel is being introduced here, which we will discuss later.
*A (lon, lat) error would impact 1:1 the absolute topocentric coordinate error

Figure 11: Overview of the siderostat-specific coordinate transformations for a spatially extended target (Sun or Moon). See
Figs. 8 and 10 for comparison.
2.Native to Projection Plane coordinates
Next step is to project the native sphere into the (cartesian) projection plane (in units of arcsec; orthogonal to the
optical axis for any telescope position). For an observer in the center of the celestial sphere, this is called a gnomonic
projection. For this step we use premade methods within astropy.
3.Projection Plane coordinates to Ideal Pixel coordinates:
The transformation from projection plane coordinates throughout the whole optical system and into the camera pixel
coordinates. This is, in the case of a perfectly aligned optical system, a linear transformation T = Rλ composed of a
2 × 2 dimensional rotation/roll matrix R and a physical scaling from arcsec to pixel represented by a diagonal matrix
λ. We will discuss these two separately, as we can again use the fact that our target is spatially extended to avoid
inserting new pointing uncertainties.
• Scaling arcsec to ideal pixel (circular sun):Instead of modelling the different focal lengths and the distances
of the optical elements to obtain the scaling factor (which can deviate from the physical one), we empirically
measure the circular pixel size of the Sun within the guiding camera. We also know, thanks to Astropy’s
ephemerides, its angular size at any given time. The ratio of these two provides us with the scaling factor
and diagonal matrix λ we are looking for. But this is only half the truth for scaling, as it will see in the last
transformation to true pixel coordinates.
• Modelling the optical path’s reflections to obtain the roll angle:A first approach is to simply model every
optical element’s reflection by applying a three dimensional rotation in each step. We orient both axis of the
Projection Plane in three dimensional space (x-axis must be parallel to the ground), and rotate them around
the axis r1 (normal to this step’s reflection plane) that describes the orientation of the first optical element, the

S1 mirror in this case (see Fig. 11). This provides us with the orientation of the reflected Proj. Plane system
(which already contains the Sun-surface system) in optical path 2 between S1 and S2 . This is repeated for every
optical element, always using nominal (theoretical) values rn for every mirror’s orientation. At last we project
the result into the two dimensional frame of the camera and read the modelled orientation ϕ of the Projection
Plane system in the camera image. This angle only depends on the S1 mirror’s orientation (which is unique for a
certain Sun position (az,alt ), therefore we can define a model function that maps topocentric coordinates to a
roll anglef: (az,alt)→ϕ.
• Resolved Sun setup orientation calibration - Fitting the model to observations of the sun, bright stars
and landmarks:The true orientation of the optical elements does not exactly match the nominal values, which
causes a deviation between measured roll ϕn at (az,alt )n and modelled roll angle f (az,alt )= ϕ. Therefore, we
use the sun, some bright stars and landmarks on the horizon to actually measure the roll angle. For that, we
make small movements (δaz, δalt) and measure the angle ϕn of the resulting image shift in pixel coordinates
(δx, δy). We obtain a dataset with different sky positions and according roll angles{azn,alt n, ϕn}. Then we fit
our model, leaving every orientation rn as a free parameter. Figure 12 shows the residuals of that fit. From the
standard deviation of the residuals we obtain the uncertainty of the orientation as listed in Table 2.
Figure 12: For several positions at the sky, represented by the points in the left image, measurements of the roll angleϕn
were made. This allows to fit our f : (az,alt ) →ϕ model, that describes the relative orientation of image and sky coordinates.
The residuals of that fit plotted against the local sky coordinates in the middle and right image show no obvious systematics,
which can also be seen in the color coded residuals in the left image. Together with a mean value of zero for the residuals
(red line in middle and right image) this means that our model provides a good description of the actual orientation. The
standard deviation (red area in middle and right plot) provides a measure for the uncertainty in the orientation returned by
our model.
4. Ideal Pixel coordinates to True Pixel coordinates (ellipsoid)At last, we observe an optical distortion of the Sun
that makes it appear an ellipsoid rather than the expected circular shape. An extension of the last empirical scaling
method is following: First, use some arbitrary circular pixel Sun size for the last scaling ratio (arcsec to ideal pixel,
see above). Then run an ellipsoid detection method, which returns its orientation, position and two different axis sizes,
and compute the 2x2 transformation matrix relative to that arbitrary ideal pixel size (circular sun).
This means that we fit the whole transformation chain to the empirically observed ellipsoid, sparing a detailed
modelling of the instrument and still reaching high pointing accuracy. Nevertheless, the ellipsoid detection itself
carries uncertainties, concerning size and position.
Sun-detection accuracy: To get an estimate of the Sun detection’s uncertainty we simulate several Sun images. We
run the principle component analysis based ellipsoid detection method (see Sec. 6.4) on images with different Sun

Table 2: Estimated partial uncertainties collected along the transformation chain.
Source of error estimated uncertainty
Detected position of Sun centerσ pos 1.10′′
Detected size of Sunσ size 3.67′′
fiber positionσ fib 3.00′′
Calibrated orientation of Sunσ roll 0.6◦
positions, sizes, angles and levels of noise and compare its results to the simulated values. The uncertainty displayed
in Table 2 is determined from its stochastic evaluation.
Note: these values can only be considered rough estimates of the algorithm’s performance for real images. On the
assumption that the actual uncertainty about the Sun-center’s position in image coordinates is actually isotropic, we
choose the biggest value and call each cartesian component σpos for the error analysis below†.We apply the same for
the detected size and fiber position uncertaintyσ size andσ f ib.
6.3 Overall pointing uncertainty
In the following, linear error propagation is applied to the instrumental mappings involved in the guiding procedure. We aim
to express the pointing uncertainty as a function of the target’s position in helioprojective radial coordinates. All partial
uncertainties/errors that contribute in a significant way to the overall uncertainty are displayed in Table 2. As stated above,
we neglect the errors from the astrometric mappings. We then compare it with actual pointing observations on some moon
features, which serve as reference targets on a spatially extended body.
Before doing that, we introduce the estimated uncertainty of the fiber’s position in the pixel coords. (see Table 2), which
has still to be determined in the future. An isotropic uncertainty is assumed also at this step. Note that, although we use a
yearly averaged Sun radii of r⊙ =965 ′′ for the arcsec - Sun radii conversion, it actually oscillates with an amplitude of 16′′
over the year. The parameter r expresses the unitless distance of the target from the center of the visible Sun’s disk in an
interval [0,1].
First step is to merge the fiber’s position uncertainty and the detected Sun-center’s position uncertainty through standard-
deviation sum, because they both contribute as an isotropic uncertainty (independent of the target’s position on the Sun) to
the overall uncertainty. Each of its components reads:
σoff=
q
σ2
fib +σ 2pos (1)
We map the roll angle uncertainty from Table 2 to the corresponding tangential uncertainty as a function of radial distancer.
The Sun center is the reference point/pole of the linear transformation and is therefore free from this error (see Sec. 6.2.3).
The scaling uncertainty causes a radial error, again depending linearly on the radius.
σtan(r)=sin (σ roll)r r ⊙ (2)
σrad(r)=σ size r(3)
Merging all uncertainties results in the component-wise errors:
σtotal, tan(r)=
q
σ2
off+σ tan(r)2 (4)
σtotal, rad(r)=
q
σ2
off+σ rad(r)2.(5)
†One reason to have measured different values could be the fiber’s shadow affecting the detetion in a non-symmetric way.

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0
5
10
15
Targets radial position relative to total radius
Uncertainty in arc seconds
Fiber
Position
Radial
Tangential
Total
Measured errors
Figure 13: Comparison between measured pointing errors from moon observations (blue points) and analytical uncertainty
function from linear error propagation (black line). The latter results from the partial uncertainties. Their contribution to the
total uncertainty is displayed as a stacked area plot. Each of the blue markers represents a specific target at the lunar surface.
Their mean position and errorbar result from multiple measurements for that target.
The absolute 1σ total distance follows from:
σtotal(r)=
q
σtotal, ang(r)2 +σ total, rad(r)2.(6)
Any of the error components, as well as the absolute σtotal can be expressed as a function of Helioprojective radial (HPR)
coordinates considering that they areϕ-independent and applying:
µ=sin(cos −1(r))=
√
1−r 2.(7)
To compare this function with real measurements, we used contrast-rich features on the moon’s surface as a reference.
A target’s coordinates in (lon,lat )‡ are fed into the guiding system, and several target images are taken. Through com-
parison/correlation with simulated Moon images by NASA Scientific Visualizations Studio’s project ”Dial-a-Moon” (see
Smith et al. (2017) and Sato et al. (2014)), we measure the mean and standard deviation of the pointing error for that target.
Figure 13 shows the pointing error results for 38 moon targets against the radial distance r, along with its error bars in radial
position (horizontal) and in absolute pointing error (vertical). The partial uncertainty’s squares divided by the total error
are plotted as stacked areas. Their sum (black line) represents the total 1 σtotal distance of the pointing error. Near the
Sun-center the fiber position uncertainty dominates the total uncertainty, while the tangential uncertainty grows to be the
largest fraction for targets close to the limb. The radial and (Sun-detection) position errors are comparably small over the
whole range. These systematics will be useful for further pointing improvements in the future. The measured errors from
the Moon observations are in good agreement with the analytic uncertainty function.
Throughout a spatially extended target, the maximal 1 σtotal distance is about 12.00′′. This means even with a 2 σtotal of
24.00′′ we are still well inside the required 32.50′′ of the fiber diameter.
‡Of course, some astrometric transformations had to be adapted to the moon’s selenographic coordinates.

6.4 Detection of solar disk
The aim of the detection algorithm for the solar disk is to provide reliable information about its shape and the position in the
image. The ideal image of the solar disk is an evenly illuminated circle against a black background. However, there are
several aspects changing that ideal image.
•Limb darkeningtowards the border of the solar disk.
•Atmospheric refractionflattens the shape in direction of altitude.
•Optical distortionof the ideal circle to a rotated ellipse (or worse).
•Atmospheric turbulencecauses distortions mainly visible as a wobbling in the contour of the disk.
•Static shadowsin the image caused by the limited size of the fiber-pickup mirror and the hole for the fiber in it.
•Static attenuationin intensity from inhomogeneities at the surface of the fiber-pickup mirror.
• Dynamic shadowscaused by the hole in the Nasmyth mirror and the spider fixing it inside the vertical vacuum tube
and clouds, birds and airplanes in front of the sun.
These effect need to be mitigated by several steps:
• Careful designof the current optical setup makes sure that shadows from the spider only result in a spatially
homogeneous change in the images intensities. We also make sure that always the whole solar disk fits onto the mirror
of the fiber-pickup and thus avoiding cut offs from its limited size.
•Use offlat-field correctionreduces the effect from static attenuation in the image.
• Maskingthe area in the image with the shadow from the hole in the fiber pickup allows ignoring the influence of
those pixel for the detection. Since the spatial movement of the shadow of the hole in the Nasmyth mirror is only
small the mask can cover that area too.
• Thresholdingthe image intensities separates the solar disk from the background and removes the effect from limb
darkening.
•Averagingover multiple images reduces the effect from atmospheric turbulence.
Ignoring clouds, this leaves only the distortion in shape from atmospheric refraction and distortions in the optical path.
For simplicity we assume that both only introduce linear distortions resulting in the shape of a rotated ellipse which we need
to detect. Note however that the nonlinearity introduced by the distortions can be very well non-negligible, especially when
observing low altitudes.
We implement two different detection methods. The first, based on principal component analyses is very simple to
implement and stable in the sense that consecutive detection results never differ by much thus avoiding sudden jumps in the
guiding process. The second method based on edge detection and least squares fit of an ellipse is more accurate but can give
no or completely wrong results for large deviations in the image, for example from clouds.
Both of the methods will be described in more detail in the following:

The principal components based methoduses statistics of the point cloud of the coordinates of each illuminated pixel in
the threshold image to estimate the ellipse parameters.
•The mean of the point cloud is the center of the ellipse.
• For an unrotated ellipse the standard deviation σx and σy of the point cloud is proportional to the major axis a =4 σx
and the minor axisb=4σ y.§
• Principal component analysis gives the direction with largest spread of the point cloud which can be assigned to the
orientation of the ellipse.
Based on this, the implemented ellipse calculation contains the following steps¶.
1. Calculate center of the ellipse as the mean of the point cloud.
2. Calculate the covariance matrix of the mean shifted point cloud.
3. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the covariance matrix respectively give the lengths and directions of the ellipses
axes. Note that the eigenvalues give the standard deviation of the point cloud in the direction of the according
eigenvector and therefore scale with a factor of four to the length of the ellipses axis.
Since all pixels of the solar disk are included in the statistics, the method is rather robust against small deviations from an
ideal rotated ellipse. On the other hand every deviation from the ideal case will introduce an error in the detection result. It
is also not clear how masking of the pixels around the shadows of the fiber and the Nasmyth hole could be handled with this
method.
The edge detection and direct least squares based methodfirst extracts edges from the threshold image using Canny
edge detection (Canny 1986) implemented in the OpenCV library (Bradski 2000). All edge pixel falling into masked areas
are removed. To the remaining points an ellipse is fitted using the method described in Halır and Flusser (1998). While
mathematical justification of the method is not trivial its implementation is easy enough, needing only a few lines of code
with help of modern linear algebra libraries like NumPy (Harris et al. 2020).
The obvious advantage of the method is that masking is easily applied and defects only affect the detection result if they
lie at the contour of the sun. The disadvantages are that getting the parameters of edge detection correct can be difficult and
wrong edges that could be caused by clouds can result in completely wrong detection results. This can make the detection
much more jumpy than the result from the statistical approach.
7. INTEGRATED SUN
7.1 Former setup
In 2014 a first attempt to observe the integrated sun using the siderostat and the FTS has been made. In this setup a 12.5 mm
diameter offaxis parabolic mirror was placed directly below the S2 mirror to form an image of the full solar disc onto a
800 µm fiber which lead to the FTS. This work resulted in the IAG solar flux atlas (Reiners et al. 2016) which showed similar
fidelity to the Kitt Peak FTS atalses (Kurucz et al. (1984) and Wallace et al. (2011)) and consistent line depths compared to
both the Kit Peak and the HARPS (Molaro, P. et al. 2013) solar atlases.
The experimental setup was mainly limited by errors originating from tracking errors. Since we image the full solar disc
onto the fiber at roughly 2/3 of the fiber diameter the coupling efficiency is changing when the disc moves with respect
to the fiber. This mainly concerns the limb areas of the solar disk and we found that this effect can have an amplitude of
several 10 m s−1. In order to improve this the new setup does not image the solar disc onto the fiber head directly but uses an
integration sphere to ensure a stable coupling into the fiber.
§This can be checked by calculating the standard deviation of an ellipse along the major axis with length a as σx =q
1
πa2
R a
0
R 2π
0 (rcos(ϕ)) 2rdrdϕand for the minor axis accordingly.
¶A similar method, using only pixels on the edge of the ellipse, is described in Han Jiandong (2010).

7.2 New setup
The new setup consists a flat mirror (1) (d=50.4 mm, protected silver coating) at 45◦ that is placed directly below the S2
mirror of the siderostat. Therefore we can still use the siderostat to track the sun while the effective mirror size is reduced
from a circular 500 mm to an elliptical mirror with the minor axis of d =
√
50.4 mm. The light is send onto an offaxis
parabolic mirror (2) (d=50.8 mm, EFL=101.6 mm, Thorlabs MPD249-P01). This mirror focuses the light into an integrating
sphere (3) (d=38.1 mm, spectralon coating, entrance hole d=9.5 mm, Ocean Insight FOIS-1) with a fiber exit port where the
fiber (d=800µm, NA=0.39) leading to the FTS is plugged in.
The whole setup is placed inside an aluminium pipe that can be moved by an electric motor in or out of the beam. This
means the telescope guiding can still be used to track the sun while the 45 ◦mirror is always in the center of the beam.
Figure 14 shows a CAD image of the setup.
Figure 14: Movable arm containing the integrated Sun setup: The flat mirror (1) is placed in the center of the beam coming
from the S1 and S2 mirrors of the siderostat. Because no focussing optics are in front of it, the light still contains the full
disc information. An off-axis parabolic mirror (2) is used to focus the light through the entrance hole of the integrating
sphere. The sphere (3) has a fiber exit port (not shown) where the fiber leading to the FTS is plugged in.
7.3 First results
The usage of an integrating sphere leads to a significant loss of light due to the many internal reflection, even with special
coatings light spectralon. Rough estimates with the given geometry of the sphere results in an overall efficiency of the sphere
coupling of 4 × 10−4. At the same time the effective mirror area increased from 491 mm2 to 5733 mm2 compared to the old
setup. Additionally we also increased the performance of the coupling into the FTS by a factor of 5 (see other publication).
In total we lose a factor of about 40 in terms of efficiency. At the same time we also expect to be much less effected by
tracking errors because the integrating sphere essentially mixes all spatial features of the solar disc before coupling it into
the fiber. This will be investigated in the near future.

Ackowledgments
This research used version 2.0.1 (Mumford et al. 2020) of the SunPy open source software package (Barnes et al. 2020), the
Astropy library (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013) (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2018) and NASA’s Scientific Visualization
Studio.
References
Charles H. Acton. Ancillary data services of NASA’s Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility.Planet. Space Sci., 44
(1):65–70, January 1996. doi: 10.1016/0032-0633(95)00107-7.
Astropy Collaboration, T. P. Robitaille, E. J. Tollerud, P. Greenfield, M. Droettboom, E. Bray, T. Aldcroft, M. Davis,
A. Ginsburg, A. M. Price-Whelan, W. E. Kerzendorf, A. Conley, N. Crighton, K. Barbary, D. Muna, H. Ferguson,
F. Grollier, M. M. Parikh, P. H. Nair, H. M. Unther, C. Deil, J. Woillez, S. Conseil, R. Kramer, J. E. H. Turner,
L. Singer, R. Fox, B. A. Weaver, V . Zabalza, Z. I. Edwards, K. Azalee Bostroem, D. J. Burke, A. R. Casey, S. M.
Crawford, N. Dencheva, J. Ely, T. Jenness, K. Labrie, P. L. Lim, F. Pierfederici, A. Pontzen, A. Ptak, B. Refsdal,
M. Servillat, and O. Streicher. Astropy: A community Python package for astronomy.A&A, 558:A33, October 2013. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201322068.
Astropy Collaboration, A. M. Price-Whelan, B. M. SipHocz, H. M. G”unther, P. L. Lim, S. M. Crawford, S. Conseil, D. L.
Shupe, M. W. Craig, N. Dencheva, A. Ginsburg, J. T. Vand erPlas, L. D. Bradley, D. P’erez-Su’arez, M. de Val-Borro,
T. L. Aldcroft, K. L. Cruz, T. P. Robitaille, E. J. Tollerud, C. Ardelean, T. Babej, Y . P. Bach, M. Bachetti, A. V . Bakanov,
S. P. Bamford, G. Barentsen, P. Barmby, A. Baumbach, K. L. Berry, F. Biscani, M. Boquien, K. A. Bostroem, L. G.
Bouma, G. B. Brammer, E. M. Bray, H. Breytenbach, H. Buddelmeijer, D. J. Burke, G. Calderone, J. L. Cano Rodr’iguez,
M. Cara, J. V . M. Cardoso, S. Cheedella, Y . Copin, L. Corrales, D. Crichton, D. D’Avella, C. Deil, ’E. Depagne, J. P.
Dietrich, A. Donath, M. Droettboom, N. Earl, T. Erben, S. Fabbro, L. A. Ferreira, T. Finethy, R. T. Fox, L. H. Garrison,
S. L. J. Gibbons, D. A. Goldstein, R. Gommers, J. P. Greco, P. Greenfield, A. M. Groener, F. Grollier, A. Hagen, P. Hirst,
D. Homeier, A. J. Horton, G. Hosseinzadeh, L. Hu, J. S. Hunkeler, Z. Ivezi’c, A. Jain, T. Jenness, G. Kanarek, S. Kendrew,
N. S. Kern, W. E. Kerzendorf, A. Khvalko, J. King, D. Kirkby, A. M. Kulkarni, A. Kumar, A. Lee, D. Lenz, S. P. Littlefair,
Z. Ma, D. M. Macleod, M. Mastropietro, C. McCully, S. Montagnac, B. M. Morris, M. Mueller, S. J. Mumford, D. Muna,
N. A. Murphy, S. Nelson, G. H. Nguyen, J. P. Ninan, M. N”othe, S. Ogaz, S. Oh, J. K. Parejko, N. Parley, S. Pascual,
R. Patil, A. A. Patil, A. L. Plunkett, J. X. Prochaska, T. Rastogi, V . Reddy Janga, J. Sabater, P. Sakurikar, M. Seifert,
L. E. Sherbert, H. Sherwood-Taylor, A. Y . Shih, J. Sick, M. T. Silbiger, S. Singanamalla, L. P. Singer, P. H. Sladen, K. A.
Sooley, S. Sornarajah, O. Streicher, P. Teuben, S. W. Thomas, G. R. Tremblay, J. E. H. Turner, V . Terr’on, M. H. van
Kerkwijk, A. de la Vega, L. L. Watkins, B. A. Weaver, J. B. Whitmore, J. Woillez, V . Zabalza, and Astropy Contributors.
The Astropy Project: Building an Open-science Project and Status of the v2.0 Core Package.aj, 156(3):123, September
2018. doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f.
Will T Barnes, Monica G Bobra, Steven D Christe, Nabil Freij, Laura A Hayes, Jack Ireland, Stuart Mumford, David
Perez-Suarez, Daniel F Ryan, Albert Y Shih, et al. The sunpy project: Open source development and status of the version
1.0 core package.The Astrophysical Journal, 890(1):68, 2020.
J. M. Beckers and G. D. Nelson. Some comments on the limb shift of solar lines. II - The effect of granular motions.
Sol. Phys., 58:243–261, July 1978. doi: 10.1007/BF00157270.
G. Bradski. The OpenCV Library.Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools, 2000.
M. R. Calabretta and E. W. Greisen. Representations of celestial coordinates in FITS.A&A, 395:1077–1122, December
2002. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20021327.
J. Canny. A computational approach to edge detection.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
PAMI-8(6):679–698, 1986. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.1986.4767851.
N. Capitaine. Definition and realization of the celestial intermediate reference system. In W. J. Jin, I. Platais, and M. A. C.
Perryman, editors,A Giant Step: from Milli- to Micro-arcsecond Astrometry, volume 248, pages 367–373, July 2008. doi:
10.1017/S1743921308019583.

A. Collier Cameron, A. Mortier, D. Phillips, X. Dumusque, R. D. Haywood, N. Langellier, C. A. Watson, H. M. Cegla,
J. Costes, D. Charbonneau, A. Coffinet, D. W. Latham, M. Lopez-Morales, L. Malavolta, J. Maldonado, G. Micela,
T. Milbourne, E. Molinari, S. H. Saar, S. Thompson, N. Buchschacher, M. Cecconi, R. Cosentino, A. Ghedina, A. Glenday,
M. Gonzalez, C. H. Li, M. Lodi, C. Lovis, F. Pepe, E. Poretti, K. Rice, D. Sasselov, A. Sozzetti, A. Szentgyorgyi, S. Udry,
and R. Walsworth. Three years of Sun-as-a-star radial-velocity observations on the approach to solar minimum.MNRAS,
487(1):1082–1100, July 2019. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1215.
S. Couvidat, J. Schou, R. A. Shine, R. I. Bush, J. W. Miles, P. H. Scherrer, and R. L. Rairden. Wavelength Dependence of
the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) Instrument onboard the Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO).Sol. Phys.,
275:285–325, January 2012. doi: 10.1007/s11207-011-9723-8.
D. Deming and C. Plymate. On the apparent velocity of integrated sunlight. 2: 1983-1992 and comparisons with magne-
tograms.ApJ, 426:382–386, May 1994. doi: 10.1086/174074.
D. Deming, F. Espenak, D. E. Jennings, J. W. Brault, and J. Wagner. On the apparent velocity of integrated sunlight. I -
1983-1985.ApJ, 316:771–787, May 1987. doi: 10.1086/165242.
H. P. Doerr.Precision spectroscopy with a frequency-comb-calibrated solar spectrograph. PhD thesis, University of
Freiburg, June 2015.
D. Dravins, L. Lindegren, and A. Nordlund. Solar granulation - Influence of convection on spectral line asymmetries and
wavelength shifts.A&A, 96:345–364, March 1981.
X. Dumusque, I. Boisse, and N. C. Santos. SOAP 2.0: A Tool to Estimate the Photometric and Radial Velocity Variations
Induced by Stellar Spots and Plages.ApJ, 796:132, December 2014. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/796/2/132.
X. Dumusque, A. Glenday, D. F. Phillips, N. Buchschacher, A. Collier Cameron, M. Cecconi, D. Charbonneau, R. Cosentino,
A. Ghedina, D. W. Latham, C.-H. Li, M. Lodi, C. Lovis, E. Molinari, F. Pepe, S. Udry, D. Sasselov, A. Szentgyorgyi, and
R. Walsworth. HARPS-N Observes the Sun as a Star.ApJ, 814:L21, December 2015. doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/814/2/L21.
X. Dumusque, M. Cretignier, D. Sosnowska, N. Buchschacher, C. Lovis, D. F. Phillips, F. Pepe, F. Alesina, L. A. Buchhave,
J. Burnier, M. Cecconi, H. M. Cegla, R. Cloutier, A. Collier Cameron, R. Cosentino, A. Ghedina, M. Gonzalez, R. D.
Haywood, D. W. Latham, M. Lodi, M. Lopez-Morales, J. Maldonado, L. Malavolta, G. Micela, E. Molinari, A. Mortier,
H. Perez Ventura, M. Pinamonti, E. Poretti, K. Rice, L. Riverol, C. Riverol, J. San Juan, D. Segransan, A. Sozzetti, S. J.
Thompson, S. Udry, and T. G Wilson. Three Years of HARPS-N High-Resolution Spectroscopy and Precise Radial
Velocity Data for the Sun.arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2009.01945, September 2020.
Radim Halır and Jan Flusser. Numerically stable direct least squares fitting of ellipses. InProc. 6th International Conference
in Central Europe on Computer Graphics and Visualization. WSCG, volume 98, pages 125–132. Citeseer, 1998.
Han Jiandong. Ellipse detection based on principal component analysis. In2010 International Conference on Computer
Application and System Modeling (ICCASM 2010), volume 9, pages V9–258–V9–261, 2010. doi: 10.1109/ICCASM.
2010.5623040.
Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, St’efan J. van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David Cournapeau, Eric Wieser,
Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk,
Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fern’andez del R’ıo, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre G’erard-Marchant,
Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy, Warren Weckesser, Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant. Array
programming with NumPy.Nature, 585(7825):357–362, September 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2. URL
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.
R. D. Haywood, A. Collier Cameron, Y . C. Unruh, C. Lovis, A. F. Lanza, J. Llama, M. Deleuil, R. Fares, M. Gillon,
C. Moutou, F. Pepe, D. Pollacco, D. Queloz, and D. S´egransan. The Sun as a planet-host star: proxies from SDO images
for HARPS radial-velocity variations.MNRAS, 457:3637–3651, April 2016. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw187.
P. Huke, M. Debus, M. Zechmeister, and A. Reiners. Characterization and calibration of a fourier-transform spectrometer
using a laser frequency comb.J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 36(7):1899–1906, Jul 2019. doi: 10.1364/JOSAB.36.001899. URL
http://josab.osa.org/abstract.cfm?URI=josab-36-7-1899.

A. Jimenez, P. L. Palle, C. Regulo, T. Roca Cortes, and G. R. Isaak. The radial velocity of the sun as a star and the solar
cycle.Advances in Space Research, 6:89–92, 1986. doi: 10.1016/0273-1177(86)90415-1.
Robert L. Kurucz, Ingemar Furenlid, James Brault, and Larry Testerman.Solar flux atlas from 296 to 1300 nm. 1984.
A.-M. Lagrange, M. Desort, and N. Meunier. Using the Sun to estimate Earth-like planets detection capabilities . I. Impact
of cold spots.A&A, 512:A38, March 2010. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913071.
A. F. Lanza, A. S. Bonomo, C. Moutou, I. Pagano, S. Messina, G. Leto, G. Cutispoto, S. Aigrain, R. Alonso, P. Barge,
M. Deleuil, M. Auvergne, A. Baglin, and A. Collier Cameron. Photospheric activity, rotation, and radial velocity variations
of the planet-hosting star CoRoT-7.A&A, 520:A53, September 2010. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014403.
U. Lemke and A. Reiners. The G¨ottingen Solar Radial Velocity Project: Sub-m s−1 Doppler Precision from FTS Observations
of the Sun as a Star.PASP, 128(9):095002, September 2016. doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/128/967/095002.
W. C. Livingston. Magnetic fields, convection and solar luminosity variability.Nature, 297:208, May 1982. doi:
10.1038/297208a0.
J. L¨ohner-B¨ottcher and R. Schlichenmaier. Correlations between sunspots and their moat flows.A&A, 551:A105, March
2013. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201220543.
J. L ¨ohner-B¨ottcher, W. Schmidt, R. Schlichenmaier, T. Steinmetz, and R. Holzwarth. Convective blueshifts in the
solar atmosphere. III. High-accuracy observations of spectral lines in the visible.A&A, 624:A57, April 2019. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201834925.
C. Ma, E. F. Arias, T. M. Eubanks, A. L. Fey, A. M. Gontier, C. S. Jacobs, O. J. Sovers, B. A. Archinal, and P. Charlot. The
International Celestial Reference Frame as Realized by Very Long Baseline Interferometry.AJ, 116(1):516–546, July
1998. doi: 10.1086/300408.
R. C. Marchwinski, S. Mahadevan, P. Robertson, L. Ramsey, and J. Harder. Toward Understanding Stellar Radial Velocity
Jitter as a Function of Wavelength: The Sun as a Proxy.ApJ, 798:63, January 2015. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/798/1/63.
M. Mayor, F. Pepe, D. Queloz, F. Bouchy, G. Rupprecht, G. Lo Curto, G. Avila, W. Benz, J. L. Bertaux, X. Bonfils, Th. Dall,
H. Dekker, B. Delabre, W. Eckert, M. Fleury, A. Gilliotte, D. Gojak, J. C. Guzman, D. Kohler, J. L. Lizon, A. Longinotti,
C. Lovis, D. Megevand, L. Pasquini, J. Reyes, J. P. Sivan, D. Sosnowska, R. Soto, S. Udry, A. van Kesteren, L. Weber,
and U. Weilenmann. Setting New Standards with HARPS.The Messenger, 114:20–24, December 2003.
R. S. McMillan, T. L. Moore, M. L. Perry, and P. H. Smith. Radial velocity observations of the sun at night.ApJ, 403:
801–809, February 1993. doi: 10.1086/172251.
N. Meunier, M. Desort, and A.-M. Lagrange. Using the Sun to estimate Earth-like planets detection capabilities . II. Impact
of plages.A&A, 512:A39, March 2010a. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913551.
N. Meunier, A.-M. Lagrange, and M. Desort. Reconstructing the solar integrated radial velocity using MDI/SOHO.A&A,
519:A66, September 2010b. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014199.
Molaro, P., Esposito, M., Monai, S., Lo Curto, G., Gonz´alez Hern´andez, J. I., H¨ansch, T. W., Holzwarth, R., Manescau, A.,
Pasquini, L., Probst, R. A., Rebolo, R., Steinmetz, T., Udem, Th., and Wilken, T. A frequency comb calibrated solar
atlas.A&A, 560:A61, 2013. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322324. URL https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/
201322324.
Stuart J. Mumford, Nabil Freij, Steven Christe, Jack Ireland, Florian Mayer, V . Keith Hughitt, Albert Y . Shih, Daniel F.
Ryan, Simon Liedtke, David Stansby, David P ´erez-Su´arez, Vishnunarayan K I., Pritish Chakraborty, Andrew Inglis,
Punyaslok Pattnaik, Brigitta Sip˝ocz, Laura Hayes, Rishabh Sharma, Andrew Leonard, Russell Hewett, Alex Hamilton,
Asish Panda, Matt Earnshaw, Nitin Choudhary, Ankit Kumar, Raahul Singh, Will Barnes, Prateek Chanda, Md Akramul
Haque, Michael S Kirk, Sudarshan Konge, Michael Mueller, Rajul Srivastava, Abhijeet Manhas, Yash Jain, Samuel
Bennett, Ankit Baruah, Quinn Arbolante, Michael Charlton, Shane Maloney, Sashank Mishra, Nicky Chorley, Himanshu,
Sanskar Modi, James Paul Mason, Yash Sharma, Naman9639, Monica G. Bobra, Jose Ivan Campos Rozo, Larry Manley,

Agneet Chatterjee, Juanjo Baz ´an, Sarthak Jain, John Evans, Sourav Ghosh, Michael Malocha, Ruben De Visscher,
Rajiv Ranjan Singh, Dominik Sta´nczak, Shresth Verma, Airmansmith97, Ankit Agrawal, Dumindu Buddhika, Himanshu
Pathak, Swapnil Sharma, Arib Alam, Matt Bates, Jongyeob Park, Pankaj Mishra, Jai Ram Rideout, Deepankar Sharma,
Sanjeev Dubey, Mateo Inchaurrandieta, Guntbert Reiter, Dhruv Goel, Sally Dacie, Jacob, Goran Cetusic, Garrison Taylor,
Tomas Meszaros, Erik M. Bray, Arthur Eigenbrot, Serge Zahniy, Lazar Zivadinovic, Utkarsh Parkhi, Thomas Robitaille,
Amogh J, Andr ´e Chicrala, Ankit, Chlo ´e Guennou, Daniel D’Avella, Daniel Williams, Jordan Ballew, Nick Murphy,
Priyank Lodha, Rutuja Surve, Abhigyan Bose, Tom Augspurger, Yash Krishan, neerajkulk, Ishtyaq Habib, Joseph
Letts, Yash Kothari, Duygu Kes ¸kek, honey, Carlos Molina, Ole Streicher, Reid Gomillion, Bernhard M. Wiedemann,
Benjamin Mampaey, Andrew Hill, Kris Akira Stern, Gulshan Mittal, Freek Verstringe, Fionnlagh Mackenzie Dover,
Emmanuel Arias, Brandon Stone, Swapnil Kannojia, Arseniy Kustov, Tannmay Yadav, Tessa D. Wilkinson, Tiago
M. D. Pereira, mridulpandey, Arfon Smith, Trung Kien Dang, Ambar Mehrotra, Adrian Price-Whelan, Abijith B,
yasintoda, Abigail L. Stevens, Yudhik Agrawal, Norbert Gyenge, Micka ¨el Schoentgen, abijith bahuleyan, Matthew
Mendero, Manas Mangaonkar, Mark Cheung, Rajasekhar Reddy Mekala, Kaustubh Hiware, Rishabh Mishra, Kalpesh
Krishna, Juan Camilo Buitrago-Casas, S Shashank, Jaylen Wimbish, James Calixto, Igor Babuschkin, Harsh Mathur,
Shashank Srikanth, jamescalixto, Gulshan Kumar, Norbert G Gyenge, and Sophie A. Murray. Sunpy, July 2020. URL
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3940415.
Andreas Quirrenbach, Pedro J. Amado, Walter Seifert, Miguel A. S´anchez Carrasco, Holger Mandel, Jose A. Caballero,
Reinhard Mundt, Ignasi Ribas, Ansgar Reiners, Miguel Abril, Jesus Aceituno, Javier Alonso-Floriano, Matthias Ammler-
von Eiff, Guillem Anglada-Escude, Regina Antona Jim´enez, Heiko Anwand -Heerwart, David Barrado y Navascu ´es,
Santiago Becerril, Victor Bejar, Daniel Benitez, Concepcion Cardenas, Antonio Claret, Josep Colome, Miriam Cort´es-
Contreras, Stefan Czesla, Carlos del Burgo, Michaela Doellinger, R. Dorda, Stefan Dreizler, Carmen Feiz, Matilde
Fernandez, David Galadi, Rafael Garrido, Jonay Gonz´alez Hern´andez, Josep Guardia, Eike Guenther, Enrique de Guindos,
Juan Guti´errez-Soto, Hans J. Hagen, Artie Hatzes, Peter Hauschildt, Jens Helmling, Thomas Henning, Enrique Herrero,
Armin Huber, Klaus Huber, Sandra Jeffers, Viki Joergens, Enrique de Juan, M. Kehr, Alexis Klutsch, Martin K¨urster,
S. Lalitha, Werner Laun, Ulrike Lemke, Rainer Lenzen, Jean-Louis Lizon, Mauro L´opez del Fresno, Mercedes L´opez-
Morales, Javier L ´opez-Santiago, Ulrich Mall, Eduardo Martin, Susana Mart ´ın-Ruiz, Eduard Mirabet, David Montes,
Juan Carlos Morales, Rafael Morales Mu˜noz, Andres Moya, Vianak Naranjo, Raquel Oreiro, David P´erez Medialdea,
Michael Pluto, Ovidio Rabaza, Alejandro Ramon, Rafael Rebolo, Sabine Reffert, Petra Rhode, Hans-Walter Rix, Florian
Rodler, Eloy Rodr´ıguez, Cristina Rodr´ıguez L´opez, Emilio Rodr´ıguez P´erez, A. Rodriguez Trinidad, Ralf-Reiner Rohloff,
Ernesto S´anchez-Blanco, Jorge Sanz-Forcada, Sebastian Sch¨afer, J¨org Schiller, Christof Schmidt, J¨urgen Schmitt, Enrique
Solano, Otmar Stahl, Clemens Storz, Julian St ¨urmer, Juan Carlos Suarez, Ulrich Thiele, Rainer Ulbrich, Manuela
Vidal-Dasilva, Karl Wagner, Johannes Winkler, Wenli Xu, Maria Rosa Zapatero Osorio, and Mathias Zechmeister.
CARMENES. I: instrument and survey overview. In Ian S. McLean, Suzanne K. Ramsay, and Hideki Takami, editors,
Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy IV, volume 8446 ofSociety of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, page 84460R, September 2012. doi: 10.1117/12.925164.
A. Reiners, N. Mrotzek, U. Lemke, J. Hinrichs, and K. Reinsch. The iag solar flux atlas: Accurate wavelengths and absolute
convective blueshift in standard solar spectra.Astronomy&Astrophysics, 587:A65, Feb 2016. ISSN 1432-0746. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201527530. URLhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201527530.
H. Sato, M. S. Robinson, B. Hapke, B. W. Denevi, and A. K. Boyd. Resolved hapke parameter maps of the moon.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 119(8):1775–1805, 2014. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/2013JE004580. URL
https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/2013JE004580.
S. Schaefer, P. Huke, D. Meyer, and A. Reiners. Fiber-coupling of fourier transform spectrographs. InSociety of Photo-
Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series (submitted), Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, 2020.
P. Kenneth Seidelmann, B. A. Archinal, M. F. A’Hearn, A. Conrad, G. J. Consolmagno, D. Hestroffer, J. L. Hilton, G. A.
Krasinsky, G. Neumann, J. Oberst, P. Stooke, E. F. Tedesco, D. J. Tholen, P. C. Thomas, and I. P. Williams. Report of the
IAU/IAG Working Group on cartographic coordinates and rotational elements: 2006.Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical
Astronomy, 98(3):155–180, July 2007. doi: 10.1007/s10569-007-9072-y.

David E. Smith, Maria T. Zuber, Gregory A. Neumann, Erwan Mazarico, Frank G. Lemoine, James W. Head III, Paul G.
Lucey, Oded Aharonson, Mark S. Robinson, Xiaoli Sun, Mark H. Torrence, Michael K. Barker, Juergen Oberst, Thomas C.
Duxbury, Dandan Mao, Olivier S. Barnouin, Kopal Jha, David D. Rowlands, Sander Goossens, David Baker, Sven Bauer,
Philipp Gl¨aser, Myriam Lemelin, Margaret Rosenburg, Michael M. Sori, Jennifer Whitten, and Timothy Mcclanahan.
Summary of the results from the lunar orbiter laser altimeter after seven years in lunar orbit.Icarus, 283:70 – 91,
2017. ISSN 0019-1035. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2016.06.006. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0019103516302810. Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter - Part II.
Herschel B. Snodgrass and Roger K. Ulrich. Rotation of Doppler Features in the Solar Photosphere.ApJ, 351:309, March
1990. doi: 10.1086/168467.
SOFA. Iau sofa software collection. URLhttp://www.iausofa.org.
L. Wallace, K. H. Hinkle, W. C. Livingston, and S. P. Davis. An Optical and Near-infrared (2958-9250 Å) Solar Flux Atlas.
ApJS, 195(1):6, July 2011. doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/195/1/6.
B. T. Welsch, G. H. Fisher, and X. Sun. A Magnetic Calibration of Photospheric Doppler Velocities.ApJ, 765:98, March
2013. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/765/2/98.