Title: The decay rate of metastable cosmic strings beyond the thin-string approximation
Authors: Valerie Domcke, Yu Hamada
Published: 2026-06-02
Categories: hep-ph, astro-ph.CO, hep-th

Prepared for submission to JHEPCERN-TH-2026-106, OU-HET-1315
The decay rate of metastable cosmic strings
beyond the thin-string approximation
Valerie Domcke a and Yu Hamada b
aTheoretical Physics Department, CERN, 1 Esplanade des Particules, CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzer-
land
bDepartment of Physics, The University of Osaka, Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 560- 0043,
Japan
E-mail:valerie.domcke@cern.ch,yu.hamada@het.phys.sci.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract:In the context of grand unified theories, any cosmic strings present in the post-
inflationary universe are likely to be metastable, with a decay rate set by the spontaneous
creation of monopole pairs on the string. Determining this decay rate is crucial in under-
standing the phenomenology of the cosmic string network, including a potentially observable
gravitational wave background. The bounce action governing this rate has so far only been
determined using the thin string approximation or specific ans¨ atze for the field profiles in the
monopole formation process. Here we solve this problem using classical lattice simulations,
relying only on the inherent symmetries of the problem. Our results indicate a suppression
of the bounce action and hence a faster string decay compared to previous estimates.
arXiv:2606.03008v1  [hep-ph]  2 Jun 2026

Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 A minimal setup for metastable cosmic strings 3
2.1 Monopoles 5
2.2 Cosmic strings 6
2.3 Breaking of infinitely thin strings 7
3 Numerical calculation of bounce solution 8
3.1 Ans¨ atz 9
3.2 Gradient flow with fixed monopole core 10
3.3 Boundary conditions 11
4 Results 12
4.1 Simulation results 12
4.2 Implications for gravitational wave searches 15
5 Conclusions 19
A Rescaled variables 21
B Classical (in)stability 22
C Varying the mass ratio in the U(1) sector 23
D The SGWB from metastable cosmic strings in the thin string approxima-
tion 24
1 Introduction
Cosmic strings are formed in spontaneous symmetry breaking processes in the early universe,
G7→H, if the vacuum manifold of the quotient group features a non-trivial first homotopy
class,π 1(G/H)̸= 1 [1, 2]. The simplest example is the spontaneous breaking of aU(1)
symmetry. Once formed, the cosmic string network evolves to reach the scaling regime, in
which a constant fraction of the energy budget of the Universe is maintained in the cosmic
– 1 –

string network. This is achieved by the (self-)intersection of cosmic strings, which leads to
the formation of cosmic string loops which can decay through the emission of gravitational
waves (GWs). Searches for stochastic gravitational wave backgrounds (SGWBs) [3, 4] and
cosmic microwave background (CMB) observations [5] placeupperbounds on the cosmic
string tension and hence the symmetry breaking scale of about 10 15 GeV.
In the context of grand unified theories (GUTs), several symmetry breaking steps are
often required to reach the Standard Model. This can lead to the formation of metastable
cosmic strings: A first phase transition leading to monopoles is followed by an inflationary
phase which dilutes the monopoles to the point of eliminating them from the observable
Universe. A second phase transition leads to the formation of cosmic strings. The presence of
the monopoles in the theory allows for the spontaneous creation of monopole antimonopole
pairs along the string with a rate [6–8]
Γ∼ µ
2π e−πm2
M /µ ,(1.1)
per unit length of string. Here,m M is the monopole mass andµthe string tension. This
breaks the strings and leads to a decay of the cosmic string network. Ifm 2
M ≫µ, the decay
rate is suppressed and the cosmic string lifetime exceeds the age of the universe, recovering
the usual phenomenology of stable cosmic strings. If the symmetry breaking scales are less
hierarchical,m 2
M ≳µ, the strings may not live long enough to imprint on the CMB (and
are as such not subject to the corresponding bound [5]) and will lead to a GW spectrum
that is suppressed at low frequencies [9], as GWs with low frequencies are generated only at
late times. This is particularly interesting for GW phenomenology, as the SGWB produced
from a metastable cosmic string network provides a remarkably good fit to the tentative
signal observed at pulsar timing arrays [4] and opens up the possibility of a detection at
LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA (LVK) or at third generation ground-based interferometers [10].
However, in the near degenerate casem 2
M ≳µof particular interest, Eq. (1.1) is expected
to provide a particularly poor approximation. The derivation is based on the thin string
approximation withm M the mass of an isolated monopole in vacuum andµthe tension of a
stable cosmic string. In the absence of any scale separation between the width of the string,
the radius of the monopole, and separation of the monopole antimonopole pair at nucleation,
this treatment is no longer justified. The goal of this paper is to provide an accurate expression
for Eq. (1.1) which overcomes this shortcoming. From the discussion above it is clear that
this will crucially impact the expected phenomenology.
Our work builds in particular on Ref. [11], which reformulated the task as the computation
of the bounce action associated with the formation of a monopole in aSU(2) gauge theory.
Using different ans¨ atze (in particular the one proposed in [12]) for the Higgs and gauge field
– 2 –

configurations, the authors derived an upper bound for the bounce action, which provides a
lower bound for the decay rate. Our work goes beyond this by generalizing to the most general
symmetry-restricted ans¨ atz which allows us to recover the thin string limit (1.1) as we increase
the scale separation. This confirms that the solution we find for the field configurations is
indeed the minimal energy one, so that our results are not only an upper bound but provide
the actual value of the decay rate.
Our results show a significant suppression of the bounce action (and hence an increase in
the decay rate) as we move from hierarchical to near degenerate symmetry breaking scales.
This shifts the phenomenologically most interesting parameter space to somewhat larger
values of the ratio of symmetry breaking scales and introduces a new dependence on the
SU(2) gauge coupling. The former facilitates the implementation into a GUT framework,
as achieving two distinct symmetry breaking steps with an intermediate phase of inflation
becomes easier.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces our setup, which
is based on a two-step breaking of anSU(2) gauge symmetry. We revisit the properties of
isolated strings and monopoles in this framework and derivation of the decay rate in the
thin string limit. We then in Sec. 3 turn to the proposed method of computing the bounce
action going beyond the thin string approximation. We discuss symmetries of gauge and
Higgs field configurations. Lattice simulations using gradient flow allow us to numerically
determine the saddle points of the bounce action and infer the string decay rate. Our results
and implications for GW searches are presented in Sec. 4 before concluding in Sec. 5.
Four appendices provide technical details. Appendix A explains the dimensionless vari-
ables used in our numerical simulations. Appendix B discusses the classical (in)stability of
metastable cosmic strings. Appendix C provides results for parameter choices complementary
to those discussed in the main text. In App. D we review the GW spectrum from metastable
cosmic strings in the thin string approximation.
2 A minimal setup for metastable cosmic strings
We first specify a minimal framework in which metastable cosmic strings can form, closely
following the notation of Ref. [11]. The starting point is anSU(2) gauge theory with two
successive stages of symmetry breaking. These are controlled by an adjoint scalar fieldϕ a
(a= 1,2,3) and a doublet scalar fieldH i (i= 1,2),
L= 1
2(Dµϕa)(Dµϕa) + (DµH) †(DµH)− 1
4g2 F a
µνF aµν −V Higgs(ϕ, H).(2.1)
– 3 –

Here,F a
µν is the field strength tensor,gdenotes the gauge coupling, and the scalar covariant
derivatives are defined as
DµH≡∂ µH−i σa
2 Aa
µH , D µϕa ≡∂ µϕa +ϵ abcAb
µϕc ,(2.2)
where theσ’s are the Pauli matrices and the doublet indices are suppressed. The scalar
potential is chosen to realize the required symmetry breaking pattern,
VHiggs(ϕ, H)≡λ

|H|2 −v 2
2
+ ˜λ
 
ϕaϕa −V 22
+γ


ϕ− V
2 1

H

2
,(2.3)
where the dimensionless couplingsλ, ˜λandγare assumed to be positive, and we have
introducedϕ≡ϕ aσa/2. We focus on the hierarchyV > v, so that monopoles are produced
before cosmic strings. The first symmetry breaking step, together with monopole formation,
takes place at the scaleV, whenϕ a develops the vacuum expectation value (vev),
⟨ϕa⟩=V δ a3 .(2.4)
UsingSU(2) gauge invariance, we have oriented the vev along thea= 3 direction without loss
of generality. This reduces theSU(2) symmetry to its diagonalU(1) subgroup, corresponding
to theSO(2) rotations about thea= 3 axis ofSU(2). In this phase, two components of the
adjoint Higgsϕ a become the longitudinal modes of twoSU(2) gauge bosons with massm W .
The remaining spectrum contains one real scalar of massm ϕ and a massless gauge boson
associated with the unbrokenU(1) symmetry,
mϕ =
p
8˜λV , m W =gV .(2.5)
In addition, the last term in Eq. (2.3) (where we have suppressed the doublet indicesi) gives
a large mass to the lower component of the Higgs doubletHasm h2 = √γ V. The symmetry
breaking driven byϕ 3 at the scaleVproduces monopoles, since the second homotopy group
is non-trivial,π 2(SU(2)/U(1))≃Z.
At the second stage, the upper component of the scalar doubletHacquires a vev at the
scalev,
⟨H⟩=
 
v
0
!
(2.6)
thereby breaking the remainingU(1) symmetry and giving rise to cosmic strings. Since the
U(1) charge ofHis±1/2, this also breaks theZ 2 center symmetry ofSU(2). The masses of
the remaining gauge boson and Higgs field are
mγ = g√
2 v , m h1 = 2
√
λv .(2.7)
– 4 –

We do not specify here a concrete dynamical model that realizes these successive sym-
metry breaking steps. The scenario we have in mind (see e.g. [13–15]) consists of two stages
of symmetry breaking separated by a period of inflation. Such an intermediate inflationary
phase dilutes the monopoles produced in the first step, leaving the cosmic strings formed in
the second step stable except for the non-perturbative nucleation of a monopole–antimonopole
pair, which can “break” the string. This differs from the scenario analyzed in Ref. [16], where
the symmetry breaking transitions are driven by thermal or quantum fluctuations.
2.1 Monopoles
For hierarchical scalesV≫v, monopole and string formation can be treated as separate
processes. We first recall this analytically tractable limit, before turning to a numerical study
of nearly degenerate symmetry breaking scales.
As discussed above, the first breaking stepSU(2)→U(1) gives rise to ’t Hooft-Polyakov
monopoles [17, 18]. A static monopole with unit winding number, centered at the origin, is
described by
ϕa =V G(r) xa
r , A a
0 = 0, A a
i = ϵaijxj
r2 F(r),(i, j= 1,2,3),(2.8)
wherer≡
p
x2 +y 2 +z 2. The profile functionsG(r) andF(r) obey the boundary conditions
G(r)→0, F(r)→0 (r→0),(2.9)
G(r)→1, F(r)→1 (r→ ∞),(2.10)
and approach their asymptotic values exponentially asr→ ∞. 1
It is useful to introduce the gauge-invariant field strength of the unbrokenU(1) gauge
field,
F U(1)
µν ≡ 1
V ϕaF a
µν (2.11)
together with the corresponding magnetic field
BU(1)i ≡ εijk
2 F U(1)
jk .(2.12)
Using the asymptotic behaviour at large distances in Eq. (2.10), one finds that the monopole
magnetic field has a hedgehog form,
BU(1)i → − xi
r3 .(2.13)
1Here and in the following, we will not consider the BPS limit ˜λ→0 for whichm ϕ →0.
– 5 –

The corresponding magnetic charge is therefore
Qm ≡
Z
r→∞
dSi BU(1)i =−4π ,(2.14)
wheredS i denotes the surface element of a two-dimensional sphere surrounding the monopole.
The monopole massm M may be written as [19, 20]
mM =c M
4πV
g ,(2.15)
wherec M is an order one factor determined by the particle massesm ϕ andm W . For the
benchmark used below,m ϕ =m W , one hasc M = 1.23768 [21]. More generally, the Bogomolny
bound impliesc M ≥1.
2.2 Cosmic strings
We now consider the Abrikosov-Nielsen-Olesen (ANO) strings [22, 23] produced during the
second symmetry breaking step. In the decoupling limit, we take the vacuum expectation
value ofϕin Eq. (2.4) as fixed, leading toF U(1)
µν =F 3
µν. All particles with masses proportional
toVthen decouple, leaving theU(1) sector containing the gauge fieldA 3 and the complex
scalar fieldh 1. The covariant derivative is
Dµh1 =

∂µ − i
2 A3
µ

h1 .(2.16)
The static string solution along thex 3-axis takes the form (see e.g., Ref. [2])
h1(ρ) =vξ(ρ)e −inφ ,(2.17)
A3
i = 2n ϵijxj
ρ2 (1−f(ρ)),(i, j= 1,2),(2.18)
A3
0 =A 3
3 = 0,(2.19)
wheren∈Zis the string winding number, andξ(ρ) andf(ρ) are profile functions. We
use cylindrical coordinates,φ≡arctan(x 2/x1) andρ≡
p
x2
1 +x 2
2. The two-dimensional
antisymmetric tensor is normalized asϵ 12 = 1. The profile functions satisfy
ξ(ρ)→0,(ρ→0), ξ(ρ)→1,(ρ→ ∞),(2.20)
f(ρ)→1,(ρ→0), f(ρ)→0,(ρ→ ∞).(2.21)
They approach their asymptotic values exponentially forρ≫(gv) −1,(
√
λv)−1. Moreover,
Dµh1 vanishes exponentially in this limit, ensuring a finite string tension.
– 6 –

The winding number determines the magnetic flux carried by the string,
Z
d2x BU(1)
3 =
I
ρ→∞
A3
i dxi =−4πn .(2.22)
Thus, for|n|= 1, the magnetic flux along the string matches the magnetic charge of a
magnetic (anti)monopole.
The string tension can be parameterized as [24, 25]
µ=c S 2πv2 ,(2.23)
wherec S ∼1 is an order one constant depending on the gauge boson and Higgs masses,m γ
andm h1. In the special case used below,m γ =m h1, one hasc S = 1.
2.3 Breaking of infinitely thin strings
Here, we briefly review the conventional estimate of the string breaking rate in the infinitely
thin cosmic string limit [6]. As discussed above, cosmic strings can decay by spontaneous
creation of monopole antimonopole pairs, which we can describe as a tunneling process.
To calculate the tunneling factor, we use the Euclidean path integral method (t=−it E).
In the infinitely thin string limit, the string breaking process may be regarded as a vacuum
decay in 1+1 dimensions. Taking thez-axis to be aligned with the cosmic string, the presence
of the cosmic string along this axis corresponds to the false vacuum, and the absence of string
corresponds to the true vacuum. The monopole plays the role of the domain wall separating
the two vacua.
In Minkowski space, the cosmic string is invariant with respect to Lorentz boosts along the
string, i.e. Lorentz boosts in the (t, z) plane, which correspond to rotations in the Euclidean
(tE, z) plane. We assume that the bounce solution preserves this symmetry, and hence, the
domain wall separating the two vacua (i.e. the monopole worldline) is a circle on the (t E, z)
plane.
The bounce action of the bubble is given by,
SB =m M
Z
worldline
dx−µ
Z
hole
d2S(2.24)
= 2πρ∗
EmM −πρ ∗
E
2µ ,(2.25)
whereρ ∗
E is the radius of the monopole worldline. Maximizing this with respect toρ ∗
E, we
obtain
ρ∗
E = mM
µ ,(2.26)
– 7 –

and hence
S(PV)
B = πm2
M
µ =:πκ ,(2.27)
where the superscript “(PV)” stands for “Preskill-Vilenkin” [6]. Self-consistency of this thin
string limit requiresρ ∗
E to be larger than the string thickness∼1/ √µ, implyingV≫v. The
string breaking rate per unit length is then given by
Γ≃ µ
2π e−S(PV)
B ,(2.28)
with the prefactor first computed in [7]. This decay rate is key to understanding the phe-
nomenology of metastable cosmic strings, and in particular their GW spectrum [9]. Of par-
ticular interest is the region where cosmic strings are sufficiently long-lived to produce GWs
over a wide range of frequencies, while decaying before the decoupling of the CMB so as
to avoid constraints from direct searches for cosmic strings in the CMB. According to the
estimate above, this occurs for √κ∼6−8, which points to a mild hierarchy of scales,V≳v,
and thus the need to go beyond the thin string, or decoupling, limit.
3 Numerical calculation of bounce solution
The goal of this section is to go beyond the thin string approximation reviewed above, which
assumes hierarchical symmetry breaking scales and treats monopoles and strings as isolated
objects. To this end, we will numerically evaluate the bounce action associated with sponta-
neous monopole formation on the string (i.e. string decay) using gradient flow to determine
the Higgs and gauge field profile functions.
Before solving the equations of motion, it is worth mentioning the fact that while the
model contains six parameters (λ, ˜λ, γ, v, V, g), the action only depends on five independent
dimensionless parameters (see Appendix A):
m2
h1
m2γ
,
m2
ϕ
m2
W
, m2
h2
m2
W
, m2
W
m2γ
, g .(3.1)
This allows us to adopt units ofgv= 1 to implement the dimensionful parameters in our
simulations. We further note thatgdoes not affect any dynamics but only changes the
overall value of the action. This implies that the equations of motion depend only on the four
parameters other thang, while we need to account forgwhen evaluating the string decay
rate.
– 8 –

3.1 Ans¨ atz
We assume two symmetries: the rotational symmetry in thex-yplane since the string and
monopole are located on thez-axis, and the Lorentz invariance in thet-zplane, which is
equivalent to the rotational symmetry in thet E-zplane. Thus it is convenient to introduce
two “polar coordinates”
x=ρcosφ, y=ρsinφ(3.2)
z=ρ E cosψ, t E(=−it) =ρ E sinψ(3.3)
withφ, ψ∈[0,2π). These two symmetries should be understood as imposed up to gauge
transformations, and hence the scalar fields can in principle depend on the anglesφand
ψthat would be canceled by gauge fields in gauge-invariant quantities. This is indeed the
case for cosmic strings since their fields have winding phases in two-dimensional space, which
induce finite magnetic fluxes. In the current case, we allow such aφ-dependence to describe
the string onρ= 0 whileψ-dependence should not exist because it would introduce an extra
string-like object located onρ E = 0. This additional assumption simplifies the gauge fields
sinceA ψ = 0 solves its equation of motion.
Within these assumptions, we work with the most general ans¨ atz:
H=v
h
f(ρ, ρ E) +i h(ρ, ρ E)σρ +i d(ρ, ρ E)σφ +i e(ρ, ρ E)σ3
i 
0
1
!
(3.4)
ϕ= V
2

a(ρ, ρE)σρ +b(ρ, ρ E)σφ +c(ρ, ρ E)σ3

(3.5)
Aρ =u 1(ρ, ρE) σφ
2 +u 2(ρ, ρE) σρ
2 +u 3(ρ, ρE) σ3
2 (3.6)
Aφ =u 4(ρ, ρE) σφ
2 +u 5(ρ, ρE) σρ
2 +u 6(ρ, ρE) σ3
2 (3.7)
AρE =u 7(ρ, ρE) σφ
2 +u 8(ρ, ρE) σρ
2 +u 9(ρ, ρE) σ3
2 (3.8)
Aψ = 0,(3.9)
with ⃗A=A ρˆeρ + (Aφ/ρ)ˆeφ +A zˆez where ˆeρ,φ,z are the usual unit vectors in radial, polar and
zdirections, and
σφ ≡ −sinφ σ 1 + cosφ σ2, σ ρ ≡cosφ σ 1 + sinφ σ2 .(3.10)
We have 16 unknown functions in total. 2
2The (0,1) t vector inHis just a choice of gauge. We could start with another unit vector, which is related
to the above one via a gauge transformation, and obtain the equivalent result.
– 9 –

3.2 Gradient flow with fixed monopole core
The bounce solution is a saddle-point of the action. This means that if one considers field-
configuration space, the bounce solution corresponds to a stationary point that extremizes
the action, instead of a minimum or maximum point of the action. Around the solution,
the curvature (second functional derivative of the action) has both positive and negative
values depending on the directions. This leads to a complication since a simple minimiza-
tion/maximization procedure does not work. However, in most bounce solutions in flat space-
time, there is only one direction with negative curvature (called negative mode), and hence
the other directions have positive curvature, so that the bounce is the maximum point along
the direction of the negative mode and is the minimum point for the other directions. Espe-
cially, in the current case, the negative mode corresponds to the shift of the position of the
monopole.3 Once the position of the monopole is fixed, the bounce is a point minimizing the
action within the constrained configuration space.
With these preliminaries, we obtain the bounce solution as follows. We promote the
functions in Eqs. (3.4)-(3.9) to be functions ofρ, ρ E, τwithτbeing a fictitious time called
the flow time. Without loss of generality, we fix the worldline of the monopole to be
a(0, R, τ) =b(0, R, τ) =c(0, R, τ) = 0,(3.11)
with a constantR. This fixes the position of the monopole (ϕ= 0) onto the core of the string
(ρ= 0) atρ E =R. Making use of the symmetries discussed above, we only need to study
the bounce action associated with the formation of a single monopole, where it is understood
that the corresponding antimonopole formation is the symmetric process in−zdirection. We
then solve the gradient flow equation
∂τ X(τ, ρ, ρE) =− δS
δX(τ, ρ, ρ E) (3.12)
withXbeing the functions given in Eqs. (3.4)-(3.9),X={a, b, c, f, h, d, e, u 1,· · ·, u 9}. It is
easy to show that the action decreases during the flow,∂ τ S=− P
X
R
d4x(δS/δX) 2 ≤0.
Once this flow converges,δS/δX= 0, that configuration minimizes the action with the con-
straint (3.11), whose minimum value is denoted byS ∗(R). By performing the same procedure
with differentR, we obtain a functionS ∗(R). The bounce solution is obtained bymaximizing
S∗(R), i.e.,
SB = max
R
(S∗(R)).(3.13)
3This can be seen by explicit computation in the limit of point-like monopoles. We assume here that this
result carries over to extended monopoles. If this assumption were incorrect, our gradient flow would not
converge to non-trivial configurations. Thus the validity of the assumption is verifieda posterioriby obtaining
such solutions.
– 10 –

In this method, we should prepare an appropriate “initial configuration” for the time
evolution (3.12) atτ= 0, to ensure that the flow (3.12) converges. As a good initial config-
uration, we utilize the “primitive ans¨ atz” in Ref. [11], which interpolates between the false
and the true vacua with a tanh-like function. Note that we just start from this configuration
atτ= 0 but do not impose those ans¨ atze during the time evolution. For instance, we have
u1, u2, u3 = 0 atτ= 0 , while we do not impose it duringτ̸= 0 but allow them to be non-zero.
3.3 Boundary conditions
We need to impose correct boundary conditions atρ={0,∞}andρ E ={0,∞}for the
functions given in Eqs. (3.4)-(3.9). The conditions at infinity (ρ=∞andρ E =∞) are
simply given by demanding that the action is finite. In addition, forρ E = 0, the conditions
are somewhat simple since there is noψ-dependence. Thus we impose the Neumann condition
so that the derivatives of all functions vanish atρ E ={0,∞}andρ=∞.
The boundary atρ= 0, i.e. at the core of the string, is more non-trivial. For the
scalar fieldsHandϕwe impose thatφ-dependent parts (h, d, a, b) should vanish (Dirichlet
condition) for regularity while for the other parts (f, e, c) we require the derivatives to vanish
(Neumann condition). On the other hand, the gauge fields are complicated because singular
gauge fields do not necessarily mean a physical singularity; all they need to satisfy is regularity
up to gauge transformations. Thus one should consider gauge-invariant observables, among
which we pick up|D µH|2. Nearρ= 0, one has
|DµH|2 = v2
4ρ2
 
e(ρ, ρE)2 +f(ρ, ρ E)2 
u4(ρ, ρE)2 +u 5(ρ, ρE)2 +u 6(ρ, ρE)2
+O(ρ −1),
(3.14)
from which one gets the Dirichlet conditions,u 4 =u 5 =u 6 = 0 (i.e.A φ = 0) atρ= 0.
Moreover, we require the vector field ⃗Ato be well defined and continuous at the core of the
string. For example, considering a rotation byπaround the string axis,φ7→φ+π, which
implies
ˆeφ 7→ −ˆeφ ,ˆe ρ 7→ −ˆeρ ,ˆe z 7→ˆez ,
σφ 7→ −σ φ , σ ρ 7→ −σ ρ , σ z 7→σ z ,(3.15)
enforces
Aρ(φ+π) =−A ρ(φ)→u 3 = 0,
AρE(φ+π) =A ρE(φ)→u 7 =u 8 = 0.(3.16)
– 11 –

Summarizing, this implies Dirichlet boundary conditions atρ= 0 for
a=b=h=d=u 3 =u 4 =u 5 =u 6 =u 7 =u 8 = 0,(3.17)
while we require differentiable profiles (Neumann boundary conditions) atρ= 0 for all other
functions,
∂ρc=∂ ρf=∂ ρe=∂ ρu1 =∂ ρu2 =∂ ρu9 = 0.(3.18)
The gauge-invariant termF a
µνF µν
a provides a consistency check of our boundary con-
ditions. Inserting the expressions above withu 4(0, ρE) =u 5(0, ρE) =u 6(0, ρE) = 0 (and
consequently∂ ρE u4(0, ρE) =∂ ρE u5(0, ρE) =∂ ρE u6(0, ρE) = 0) yields
F a
µνF µν
a (0, ρE) =

(u1 +∂ ρu5)2 + (u2 −∂ ρu4)2 + (∂ρu6)2 +u 2
7 +u 2
8

/(2ρ2) +O(1/ρ),(3.19)
where we have dropped the argument (0, ρ E) to ease the notation. Cancelling the divergence
atO(1/ρ 2) thus requires
u1 +∂ ρu5 = 0, u 2 −∂ ρu4 = 0, ∂ ρu6 = 0, u 7 =u 8 = 0,(3.20)
atρ= 0. We have checked explicitly that our numerical solutions, obtained by imposing
the boundary conditions Eq. (3.17) and (3.18), fulfill these. One can explicitly check that
Eq. (3.20) also implies that theO(1/ρ) divergence inF a
µνF µν
a is cancelled.
4 Results
4.1 Simulation results
As a benchmark case, we first fix three mass ratiosm h1/mγ,m ϕ/mW , andm h2/mW to be
unity (i.e., degenerate Higgs and gauge boson masses set by the respective symmetry breaking
scale) and effectively reduce the parameter space to the 1D space spanned bym W /mγ. The
bounce solution obtained by our simulations is plotted in Fig. 1, in which the 2D profiles
in (ρ, ρ E) space are translated into 3D (x, y, z) space witht E = 0. The magenta and cyan
regions indicate the string and monopole cores, respectively. The arrows indicate the magnetic
field vectorB U(1)i defined in Eq. (2.12), showing that the magnetic flux along the string is
absorbed by the (anti)monopole.
The calculated bounce actions are shown as empty circles in Fig. 2 for different lattice
spacingsδ(in units of 1/(gv)) andm W /mγ. We have performed simulations withδ=
0.2,0.175,0.15,0.125 and 0.1, three of which are shown in Fig. 2 for the presentation. As
expected, the sensitivity to the lattice spacing is more significant at largerm W /mγ due to
– 12 –

Figure 1: 3D plot of the bounce solution, reconstructed for visualization from the 2D solution in the
(ρ, ρE) space att E = 0. The magenta and cyan regions represent those satisfying|H| 2 <0.2 and
|ϕ|2 <0.2, indicating the string and monopole cores, respectively. The arrows indicate the strength
and directions of the magnetic field vectorB U(1)i. We have takenm W /mγ = 3
√
2 andδ= 0.1 in this
plot. In this case, the monopole-antimonopole separation at nucleation is 2R= 3.5m −1
γ V /v.
the increased scale separation between the string width and the monopole profile. In this
region, our results approach that obtained by the thin string approximation (gray horizontal
line) as we decrease the lattice spacing, which indicates thatδ= 0.1/(gv) is sufficient to
capture all relevant scales in the entire regime shown. For larger values ofm W /mγ, one can
simply rely on the analytical result in the thin string limit.
This resolves the problem encountered in Ref. [11], which found values for the bounce
action significantly above the thin string limit form W /mγ ≫1. The problem was especially
pronounced for the ‘improved ans¨ atz’ discussed there, which did not show the expected para-
metric behaviour and instead was monotonically growing over the entire regime ofm W /mγ
considered. As the authors stated, their results provide an upper bound on the bounce action,
but the deviation from the analytical result in the thin string limit indicated that the solution
found was not the minimal energy one. Here, by imposing no assumptions beyond symmetry
– 13 –

○
○
○
○
○
○
○ ○
○
○
○
○
○ ○ ○ ○ ○
○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
45
50
55
60
65
thin string approx
○ lattice w/δ=0.2
○ lattice w/δ=0.15
○ lattice w/δ=0.1
contlimit
Figure 2: Results for the bounce action as a function of the ratio of the gauge boson masses,
mW /mγ =
√
2V /v, for three different lattice spacingsδin units ofgv. We show also the contin-
uum limit (blue dots with 1σerror bars), which are well approximated by Eq. (4.1), shown as the
orange dotted line.
considerations on the field profiles, this problem is resolved.
The results for different lattice spacings allow us to extrapolate to the continuum limit,
shown in Fig. 2 by the blue dots with 1σerror bars indicating the uncertainty of this ex-
trapolation. This is done by assuming that the deviation from the continuum limit due to
the non-zero lattice spacing is proportional toδ 3, which can be checkeda posteriori. (The
lattice data with the largest spacingδ= 0.2 and 0.175 are not used to obtain the continuum
limit form W /mγ >6.3 since they deviate from theδ 3 scaling, decreasing the overall accuracy
and precision of the extrapolation.) The result for the continuum limit is well fitted by the
following function
SB = m2
W
g2m2γ
5X
i=0
ci
 mγ
mW
i
≡ m2
W
g2m2γ
F(m W /mγ),(4.1)
in which the unknown coefficientsc i’s are determined by a weighted fit as summarized in
Table 1. This fitted functionF(m W /mγ) is plotted as an orange dotted curve in Fig. 2. The
uncertainty of this fitting is quite small and hence not shown in the figure. In order to assist
the fit, here we have also included another data pointS B = 0 form W /mγ ≃1, indicating
the absence of any potential barrier for monopole creation. This corresponds to a classical
instability, and can be calculated by an independent method, see Appendix B and Ref. [26].
– 14 –

c0 c1 c2 c3 c4 c5
61.1 14.8 −308.7 1004.3 −1410.3 638.9
Table 1: Best-fit values ofc i’s in Eq. (4.1).
Eq. (4.1), together with the values for the coefficients given in Tab. 1, is a key result of
this work. It provides the exact solution for the bounce action, and hence the string decay
rate, for the benchmark casem h2 =m ϕ =m W andm h1 =m γ, i.e. degenerate gauge boson
and Higgs masses within each sector, respectively. The asymptotic value of this functionFin
the thin string limit,m W /mγ → ∞, is given by the coefficientc 0 = 61.1±2.4. Notably, this
is consistent with the thin string limit (≃60.5) within the uncertainty, which quantitatively
confirms the above statement that we recover the thin string limit for largem W /mγ.
This method can straightforwardly be extended to (mild) hierarchies between the Higgs
and gauge boson masses. As an example, we show in App. C results for the case that the
mass of theU(1) Higgs boson is twice the gauge boson mass,m h1 = 2m γ. We observe a
qualitatively similar behaviour, approaching the thin string limit for small lattice spacings
and largem W /mγ. Much larger hierarchies become numerically more challenging as they
introduce scale separations in the lattice simulations, but we take these examples as proof of
principle of our methodology which can in principle be adapted to the mass ratios found in
any specific model.
4.2 Implications for gravitational wave searches
A network of cosmic strings evolves by continuously splitting off cosmic string loops from
self-intersecting strings, which in turn decay emitting gravitational radiation. If the cosmic
strings are stable (or have a lifetime longer or comparable to the age of the Universe) this
maintains the string network in the scaling regime, in which a constant fraction of the energy
budget of the universe is stored in the cosmic string network [2]. This leads to SGWB with
an approximately scale invariant spectrum over many decades in frequency [27]. If the cosmic
strings are metastable, there is an additional decay channel through monopole antimonopole
formation, which leads to a suppression of the GW spectrum at low frequencies (corresponding
to GWs emitted from the network at late times) [8, 9]. See App. D for a brief review.
The key parameters determining the GW spectrum are the string tensionµwhich sets
the overall amplitude, and the decay rate, which is determined by the bounce action evaluated
above,
Γ≃ µ
2π e−SB .(4.2)
– 15 –

Figure 3: GW spectrum from metastable cosmic strings (dark blue) for different values ofg, compared
to the thin string approximation (solid gray) and the stable string limit (dotted black). Darker gray
regions are exclusion limits, while lighter gray shaded regions show expected sensitivities. The orange
box indicates the signals in pulsar timing arrays.
We recall that in the thin string limit,
S(P V)
B =πκ=C P V
m2
W
g2m2γ
,withC P V = 4π2 c2
M
cS
≃60.5,(4.3)
where we have usedm W =m ϕ andm γ =m h1 to evaluateC P V . As we have seen above,
taking into account the finite thickness of the string reduces the bounce action,
SB = m2
W
g2m2γ
F(m W /mγ)≡πκ eff ,(4.4)
withF(m W /mγ)≤C P V and henceκ eff ≤κ. This correspondingly enhances the string decay
rate. The earlier decay of the cosmic string network moves the turnover point below which
the GW spectrum is suppressed to larger frequencies. This is illustrated in Fig. 3 for a fixed
value ofGµ= 10 −8 and a fixed value of the bare parameterκ=m 2
M /µ= 8.5 2. We show the
thin string approximation (gray) as well as the result obtained using our numerical results
(blue) for the bounce action (4.1) (for the casem h2 =m ϕ =m W ,m h1 =m γ) for two different
values of the gauge coupling constantg. The impact of the finite string width on the spectrum
is quite dramatic, in particular asgis reduced. We note that the spectrum obtained in the
thin string approximation can be recovered by adjusting the mass hierarchyv/Vto increase
κaccordingly.
– 16 –

Figure 4: Correction to the string decay width due to finite width (solid black and gray), expressed
by parametrizing the bounce actionS B =πκ effin terms of the bare parameterκ, which governs the
dynamics in the thin string limit. The thin string approximation is shown as dashed line. In the
right panel, we have fixedg= 1/
√
2 and show regions of particular phenomenological interest for GW
searches. The PTA, LISA and LVK bands are based on the low-frequency cutoff of the GW spectrum
due to string decay and shown for a reference value ofGµ= 10 −10, i.e. neglecting the logarithmic
dependence onµ. See text and App. D for details.
In other words, the predictions for the GW spectrum taking into account the finite
string width can be obtained from the existing templates in the thin string approximation
by interpretingκasκ eff. This mapping from the model parameters toκ eff is obtained from
Eq. (4.1) and illustrated in Fig. 4, enabling us to translate preferred/excluded regions of the
GW parameter space (in terms ofκ eff) to the bare ratio of scales contained inκ. We show
results both for the benchmark discussed above,m h2 =m ϕ =m W ,m h1 =m γ (black) as
well as the casem h1 = 2m γ (gray) presented in App. C. As we decrease the value ofκ eff,
the lifetime of the cosmic string network is decreased, moving the low-frequency cutoff of
the GW spectrum to larger frequencies. This successively suppresses the signal in the pulsar
timing array (PTA), LISA and LVK bands, as shown in the right panel of Fig. 4 forg= 1/
√
2
(motivated in GUTs to obtain gauge coupling unification). These results can trivially be
rescaled to other values ofg. Values of √κeff ≥9 correspond to effectively stable strings, with
a lifetime longer than the age of the universe.
The implications for the model parameters are illustrated in Fig. 5. For our two ex-
amplesm h1 =m γ andm h1 = 2m γ, we show regions of interest for GW phenomenology in
them W /mγ-gplane. The darker shaded regions show the preferred region obtained when
interpreting the recent hint for an SGWB at PTAs as originating from metastable cosmic
strings. These are obtained in a two-step procedure. First, we use PTArcade [28] to infer the
preferred values of the spectral parametersκ eff andGµbased on the NANOGrav 15-yr data
set [29], as shown in Fig. 10 in App. D. This givesκ eff = 7.7-8.2 after marginalizing overGµ.
– 17 –

This reproduces the results obtained in Ref. [4] when interpretingκ eff =κ. Second, we use
the mapping in Eq. (4.1) to map the preferred regions for the posterior distributions onto the
model parametersm W /mγ andg, marginalizing overGµ. This gives the dark blue shaded
contour in Fig. 5 (labeled by “NANOGrav”). In terms ofκ, the best-fit value of √κeff ≃8
translates e.g. to values of √κ≃9.8 forg= 1/
√
2 andm γ =m h1. The gray shaded region
is the corresponding result in the thin string approximation, i.e. forκ eff =κ. As in the right
panel of Fig. 4, the light blue shaded regions indicate when the signal lies in the LISA (blue)
and LVK (cyan) bands, for a reference value ofGµ= 10 −10.
The role of the gauge coupling in Fig. 5 can be understood as follows. In the thin string
approximation, √κ=m M /√µ∝m W /mγ/g, i.e. a trivialg-dependence arises through the
differentgdependence of the different mass ratios. In the full solution, the parameter rescaling
discussed in App. A makes it convenient to usem W /mγ ∝g √κas dimensionless measure of
scale hierarchy. The deviation of the full solution from the thin string approximation increases
for small scale separations, i.e. for smallκand smallg. The limitsm W /mγ →1 (left panel)
and 1.3 (right panel) correspond to the critical values for the classical instability,F →0 in
Eq. (4.4). However, when taking simultaneously the limitg→0,S B stays finite. This is why
the three blue regions converge aroundg= 0 andm W /mγ = 1 or 1.3, which is not observed
in the thin string approximation sinceF(m W /mγ) =C P V there.
As Fig. 10 in App. D shows, interpreting the NANOGrav signal as originating from
metastable cosmic strings leads to a preferred region in parameter space which exceeds the
O4 exclusion limits from LVK [30] (independent of the microphysical origin ofκ eff).4 There
are however some important caveats. First, the tentative SGWB signal observed at the
different PTAs is currently undergoing scrutiny in the context of the international pulsar
timing array, in particular in view of noise modeling, which may slightly shift the preferred
amplitude (and hence the inferred value ofGµ) to lower values. Second, the assumptions
for the SMBHB population may need to be revisited as astrophysical models are updated to
account for the most recent data. This might allow for an explanation of the PTA signal as
originating partially from SMBHs and partially from metastable cosmic strings, changing the
preferred parameter values for the latter. Third, all contours rely on the prediction of the
spectral tilt of the spectrum as derived in Ref. [9]. While our results on the evaluation of the
bounce do not affect the spectral tilt, the modifications of the breaking mechanism discussed
in Refs. [16] and [31], do. We will return to this point below. Finally, imposing the LVK limits
assumes that the string network has already formed at around 10 8 GeV which corresponds
to the temperature scales probed by ground-based interferometers, which seems a plausible
4See also the analysis of cosmic string model A in Ref. [3], which as the stable limit of the setup discussed
here give similar predictions in the LVK band for parameter choices of interest to the PTA analysis.
– 18 –

Figure 5: Regions of particular interest for GW phenomenology in the model parameter space. The
darker shaded regions show the preferred regions when interpreting the tentative signal at NANOGrav
as originating from metastable cosmic strings. The dark blue band shows the result of this work, while
the gray band shows corresponding results in the thin string approximation. As in Fig. 4, the light
blue and cyan regions indicate when the SGWB from metastable cosmic strings extends to the LISA
and LVK band, respectively. The results are shown form h1 =m γ (left) andm h1 = 2mγ (right) with
in both casesm h2 =m ϕ =m W . The dashed horizontal line indicates a benchmark valueg= 1/
√
2
suggested by the gauge coupling unification.
assumptions for GUT-inspired symmetry breaking processes, but nevertheless remains an
assumption. This discussion emphasizes that current multiband GW observations are probing
and constraining these phenomena, providing a unique window to GUT scale physics.
Our results have interesting implications for GUT model building. Following the recipe
above, the parameter space of a model in terms of couplings and ratio of scales can be mapped
into the phenomenology in the thin string limit, depending only on two parametersκ eff andµ.
However, this parameter space now contains larger ratios of the bare scales, which facilitates
in particular the implementation in hybrid inflation, diluting away the monopoles formed in
the first phase transition before the onset of the second phase transition which forms the
cosmic strings. See e.g. [15, 32–34] for concrete implementations.
5 Conclusions
The arguably phenomenologically most interesting regime of metastable cosmic strings arises
for a mild hierarchy between the non-abelian and abelian symmetry breaking scales, as this
– 19 –

yields cosmic strings with lifetimes which are relevant on cosmological scales and yet shorter
than the lifetime of the Universe. In this regime, however, the thin string approximation,
allowing for an analytical estimate of the string decay rate [6–8], breaks down. Building on
earlier work [11], this paper addresses this shortcoming by developing a method to numerically
compute the bounce action associated with the spontaneous monopole pair creation which
leads to the breaking of cosmic strings.
We solve for the field profiles of the Higgs and gauge fields involved, preserving the
symmetries of the problem and implementing appropriate boundary conditions. Contrary
to [11], we impose no additional constraints on these field profiles, which allows us to find the
minimal energy solution and correctly reproduce the thin string limit for hierarchical mass
scales. For less hierarchical mass scales, we find a decreased bounce action which implies an
increased string decay rate compared to the thin string limit. We demonstrate this for two
choices of the mass spectrum of the non-abelian and abelian sector, but see no obstacles in
extending our method to other choices as long as no large hierarchies within the two sectors
are introduced.
Our results have implications for the target space of GUT models with observable GW
spectra. Compared to the thin string approximation, our results suggest that a given string
lifetime (corresponding to a low-frequency cutoff in the GW spectrum) corresponds to larger
mass hierarchies between the two symmetry breaking scales. In other words, the increased
string breaking rate due to finite width effects can be compensated by a larger mass hierarchy
between monopole massm M and string tensionµ, suppressing the spontaneous creation of the
former, and recovering a similar phenomenology. This can be accounted for by a parameterκeff
which controls the exponential string decay rate and replaces the bare parameterκ=m 2
M /µ.
The mapping between the two is shown in Fig. 4. The larger hierarchy between these scales
simplifies concrete implementations of cosmological metastable string formation, as it gives
more space to the inflationary phases needed between monopole and string formation.
In this context, we note the recent work [16], which pointed out an independent mech-
anism which also increases the string decay rate, due to inhomogeneities on the strings. We
have not taken this into account in the results presented here, but note that this goes in the
same direction as the finite width effect discussed in this paper. This suggests that the final
cosmic string decay rate may be further enhanced.
Ref. [16] moreover pointed out the possibility of an early decay of the cosmic string
network due to thermal monopole production. In the scenario which we have in mind here,
with symmetry breaking processes occurring during and at the end of inflation due to the
dynamics of slowly rolling scalar fields, this effect depends on the details of the reheating
stage and is likely subdominant. It is however noteworthy that this process can be important
– 20 –

in parts of the parameter space relevant for PTA searches, and in these cases, can modify the
spectral tilt of the low-frequency suppression of the GW spectrum [31].
It would moreover be interesting to extend our analysis to the case of metastable string
formation inSU(2)×U(1)→U(1), which can be seen as a minimal implementation of the
breaking pattern arising e.g. in SO(10) GUT theories [14].
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Simone Blasi, Wilfried Buchm¨ uller, Akifumi Chitose, Maxime
Grandjean, Thomas Konstandin, Andrea Mitridate and Kai Schmitz for useful discussions.
The work of Y.H. is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft under Germany’s
Excellence Strategy - EXC 2121 Quantum Universe - 390833306 and by the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant No. JP26K17155.
A Rescaled variables
Instead of using the original Lagrangian (2.1), it is more convenient to factor out the gauge
coupling constant by rescaling the scalar fields:
ϕ→ϕ/g, H→H/g ,(A.1)
which leads to a new action and potential:
S= 1
g2
Z
d4x
1
2(Dµϕa)(Dµϕa) + (DµH) †(DµH)− 1
4 F a
µνF aµν −V New
Higgs(ϕ, H)

,(A.2)
with
V New
Higgs(ϕ, H)≡ λ
g2

|H|2 −g 2v2
2
+
˜λ
g2
 
ϕaϕa −g 2V 22
+ γ
g2


ϕ− gV
2

H

2
.(A.3)
(Note that the covariant derivative does not containgin our notation.) Furthermore, since
the action is a dimensionless quantity, we can take arbitrary units to measure dimensionful
quantities, which does not change the action. Thus we take the unitsgv= 1 in our numerical
calculation. In other words, every dimensionful quantity is measured bygv. Thus effectively
we have
V New
Higgs(ϕ, H) = λ
g2

|H|2 −1
2
+
˜λ
g2

ϕaϕa − V 2
v2
2
+ γ
g2


ϕ− V
2v

H

2
.(A.4)
Note that the overall prefactor 1/g2 in (A.2) does not enter the equations of motion while
gappears only through the combinationsλ/g 2, ˜λ/g2, andγ/g 2, which are rewritten as
λ
g2 = m2
h1
8m2γ
,
˜λ
g2 =
m2
ϕ
8m2
W
, γ
g2 = m2
h2
m2
W
.(A.5)
– 21 –

0 2 4 6 8 10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0 2 4 6 8 10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 6: Classically stable (left) and unstable (right) strings. The stable string survives even at
τ→ ∞while the unstable string starts to decay atτ≃7500 (dashed lines) and eventually disappears
(thick lines).
Noting
√
2V /v=m W /mγ, we have five independent parameters in this model as shown in
Eq. (3.1).
B Classical (in)stability
While our main interest is metastable strings, we note that there is also a classical instability
in parts of the parameter space, indicating the absence of an energy barrier separating the
string and the vacuum configuration. In order to study the classical (in)stability, we can
again perform the gradient-flow algorithm starting from a configuration describing a straight
homogeneous string at the initial flow timeτ= 0.
We impose the following restrictions on the ans¨ atz Eqs. (3.4)-(3.9):
Aρ =A ψ = 0,(B.1)
andρ E-independence of the other functions (i.e., static and translationally invariant alongz
axis), reducing to the one-dimensional system inρdirection. The initial string configuration
is given as
d(ρ, τ= 0) = tanh(ρ), c(ρ, τ= 0) = 1, u 6(ρ, τ= 0) =−2 tanh(ρ) 2 ,(B.2)
while the other functions are set to zero (plus tiny perturbations to trigger the instability) at
τ= 0.
If the string is classically stable, it is also stable against the gradient flow since it is an
algorithm that decreases the static energy at every step. The details of the initial configura-
tions do not matter because they immediately get relaxed to be the correct string profiles.
– 22 –

○
○
○ ○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○ ○ ○
○ ○ ○
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
30
35
40
45
50
55
thin string approx
○ lattice w/δ=0.2
○ lattice w/δ=0.15
○ lattice w/δ=0.1
contlimit
Fit
1σband
Figure 7: Same as Fig. 2 for a different mass ratio in theU(1) sector,m h1 = 2mγ. Compared to Fig. 2,
this figure is based on fewer simulations in different lattice spacings, leading to larger uncertainties in
the extrapolation to the continuum limit and in fitting the coefficients of the function Eq. (4.1), as
shown by the yellow band. This band would be essentially invisible for our results in Fig. 2.
Meanwhile, if unstable, it gradually disappears and we are left with the vacuum configuration.
Thus whether the string survives against the gradient flow tells us whether it is classically
stable or not.
Let us illustrate typical string profiles evolving under the flow. The left panel in Fig. 6
shows the case of a classically stable string. One can see that there exists a string core
corresponding to|H|= 0 atρ= 0 and the magnetic fluxB 3. The right panel in Fig. 6 shows
the case of a classically unstable string, which disappears at the late flow time.
By repeating this with variousm W /mγ, one can obtain its critical value for the stability.
For instance, in the case of parameter choice in Fig. 6 (same as those in Fig. 2), it turns out
to bem W /mγ = 1 as the critical one. One also obtainsm W /mγ = 1.305 form h1 = 2m γ
(parameter choice corresponding to Fig. 7). For more systematic and comprehensive studies
on the classical instability in the same model, see Ref. [26]. We note in particular that the
instability discussed in this appendix corresponds to a complete unwinding of the string,
which proceeds (as we see in the right panel of Fig. 6) through the formation of a Higgs
condensate at the string core. See also Ref. [26] for a related discussion.
C Varying the mass ratio in the U(1) sector
In the main text, we focused our discussion for simplicity on the benchmark casem h2 =
mϕ =m W andm h1 =m γ, i.e. taking the Higgs and gauge boson masses of each symmetry
– 23 –

Figure 8: GW spectrum from metastable cosmic strings in the thin string approximation, for some
exemplary values ofµandκ. Darker gray regions are exclusion limits, while lighter gray shaded
regions show expected sensitivities. The orange box indicates the tentative signal in pulsar timing
arrays. Figure adapted from [9].
breaking step to be degenerate. In this appendix we show an example with a different mass
ratio in theU(1) sector,m h1 = 2m γ to illustrate a few points. Firstly, we highlight that
the method presented in the main text works also in this case. Despite fewer simulations
performed, we can clearly see a convergence towards the thin string limit for largem W /mγ
as we decrease the lattice spacing, see Fig. 7. Our results are also consistently below the thin
string limit, indicating that our configurations minimize the action. Second, we note that
while qualitatively the results are similar to the observations in the main text, the amount
of deviation from the thin string limit does depend on the mass structure of the model. This
is particularly evident in Fig. 4, which shows the effective parameterκ eff controlling the GW
spectrum. We observe that the casem h1 = 2mγ leads to a stronger suppression of the action
and thus to a shorter lifetime for the cosmic strings.
D The SGWB from metastable cosmic strings in the thin string approxi-
mation
This appendix summarizes results obtained in Refs. [9, 10, 13, 32] on the SGWB from
metastable cosmic strings in the thin string approximation. In the main text, we will boot-
strap these by substitutingκ→κ eff to formulate expectations for the SGWB from metastable
cosmic strings beyond the thin string approximation.
– 24 –

The SGWB resulting from a network of cosmic strings can be obtained in the Nambu-
Goto approximation as
Ωgw(t0, f) = 16π(Gµ)2
3H2
0 f
X
k
kPk
Z zi
0
dz′
H(z ′)(1 +z ′)6
◦
n(ℓ, t(z′)).(D.1)
HereH(z) is the redshift dependent Hubble parameter, withH 0 its value today att 0. The
sum extends over the harmonic excitations of the string loops withP k the power emitted
by a single loop. We integrate over all loops of lengthℓ= 2k/f(z ′) such that after red
shifting, they contribute to the spectrum at frequencyf=f(0). The loop number density
◦
n∝exp(−Γℓt) needs to be determined by solving kinetic equations for the string network.
Compared to the spectrum obtained from stable cosmic strings, the key difference in the
appearance of a scale
flow ∼3·10 −9 Hz
50
Γ
3/410−8
Gµ
1/2
exp
n
−π
 κ
4 −16
o
,(D.2)
set by the decay of the cosmic string network through monopole creation. The spectrum
atf > f low is sourced by GWs emitted before the decay becomes significant, and hence we
recover the spectrum familiar from stable cosmic strings. In particular, for loops formed in
radiation domination, we find a roughly scale invariant spectrum with an amplitude of
Ωplateau
gw ≃ 128π
9 0.18 Ωr
 Gµ
Γ
1/2
,(D.3)
where Ωrh2 = 4.15·10 −5 is the density parameter of radiation today. Forf < f low the spec-
trum is suppressed asf 2, reflecting the decay of the cosmic string network. Some exemplary
spectra are shown in Fig. 8. In ΛCDM cosmology, their shape is entirely determined by the
string tension and decay rate, which in the thin string limit are parametrized byµandκ, or
equivalentlyµandm M.
Based on this, we can determine regions in theκ−µparameter space that are of particular
relevance for GW searches. Searches for a scale-invariant SGWB in LIGO put an upper
bound [30]
Ωgw(25 Hz)≤2.8·10 −9 (log uniform prior) (D.4)
Ωgw(25 Hz)≤8.6·10 −9 (linear uniform prior),(D.5)
depending on the choice of prior on the GW amplitude used in the analysis. 5 This implies an
upper boundGµ <3.0·10 −9 (Gµ <3.7·10 −8) for the case of the logarithmic (linear) prior.
5The sensitivity curves shown in Figs. 3 and 8 are taken from [30], and are based on the linear prior.
– 25 –

Figure 9: Regions of interest for SGWB searches from metastable cosmic strings in pulsar timing
arrays, space- and ground-based interferometers in the thin string approximation.
This result was obtained from the full numerical calculation of the spectrum, but agrees well
with the analytical estimate from (D.3). The corresponding exclusion region is marked in
orange in Fig. 9.
Assuming that the tentative signal of an SGWB at PTAs arises from metastable cosmic
strings fixes the amplitude of the SGWB at nHz scales, thus creating a one-to-one relation
betweenκandµ. This is shown by the black curve in Fig. 9 for Ωgwh2(3·10−9 Hz)≃5·10 −10, as
suggested e.g. by [35]. Of course, it should be noted that there are other plausible explanations
of this signal, most notably mergers of supermassive black holes, and that the best-fit value
for the GW strain still comes with sizable error bars. Nevertheless, the black curve gives an
indication of a particularly interesting region of the parameter space.
On the contrary, asκis decreased,f low crosses threshold values which leads to a strong
suppression of the SGWB signal successively in the PTA, LISA and LVK bands. This is shown
by the blue shaded regions in Fig. 9, where we have usedf low = 10−7, 0.1 Hz and 10 3 Hz for
estimates of the maximal frequency detectable in PTA, LISA and LVK, respectively. These
regions appear in the same color coding in Fig. 4 in the main text, where for simplicity we
have dropped the mildGµdependence of the blue regions, and evaluated for concreteness the
corresponding thresholds forκatGµ= 10 −10.
The top blue region in Fig. 9 points to a possible region in parameter space which gives
a signal in the PTA band while not exceeding the LVK limits at higher frequencies. However,
– 26 –

−10 −8 −6 −4
log10Gµ
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
√κ
L VK (log.)
(lin.)
7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0√κ
META-L + SMBHB
META-L
Figure 10: Reconstructed posterior distributions for the parameters of metastable cosmic strings
form h2 =m ϕ =m W , andm h1 =m γ in the thin-string approximation. The blue contours show the
posteriors for metastable cosmic strings as the sole source, the red contours also allow for a contribution
from supermassive black holes based onholodeck[36] (see also Ref. [37]). On the diagonal of the corner
plot, we report the 1D marginalized distributions together with the 68% and 95% Bayesian credible
intervals (vertical lines), while the bottom-left panel shows the 68% (darker) and 95% (lighter) Bayesian
credible regions in the 2D posterior distributions. We construct all credible intervals and regions by
integrating over the regions of highest posterior density. The gray-shaded regions are excluded due to
an overproduction of GWs. This includes also the limit of effectively stable cosmic strings at these
values ofGµ. The region to the right of the orange lines predict a GW amplitude which exceeds the
O4 LVK limit [30]. Figure generated withPTArcade[28].
when performing an actual fit to the NANOGrav 15-yr data set [29], including the infor-
mation on the spectral shape, we find that the O4 LVK exclusion limits rule out the entire
preferred region. This is shown in Fig. 10, which shows the posterior distributions obtained
for the spectral parametersκandGµfrom the NG15 data usingPTArcade[28]. This figure
reproduces well the corresponding figure in Ref. [4], taking into account the more recent lim-
its from LVK. As discussed in the main text, these results can be equally used to constrain
metastable strings beyond the thin string limit by interpretingκasκ eff.
References
[1] T. W. B. Kibble,Topology of Cosmic Domains and Strings,J. Phys. A9(1976) 1387.
– 27 –

[2] A. Vilenkin and E. P. S. Shellard,Cosmic Strings and Other Topological Defects. Cambridge
University Press, 7, 2000.
[3]LIGO Scientific, VIRGO, KAGRAcollaboration,Cosmological and High Energy Physics
implications from gravitational-wave background searches in LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA’s O1-O4a
runs,2510.26848.
[4]NANOGravcollaboration,The NANOGrav 15 yr Data Set: Search for Signals from New
Physics,Astrophys. J. Lett.951(2023) L11 [2306.16219].
[5]Planckcollaboration,Planck 2015 results. XIII. Cosmological parameters,Astron. Astrophys.
594(2016) A13 [1502.01589].
[6] J. Preskill and A. Vilenkin,Decay of metastable topological defects,Phys. Rev. D47(1993)
2324 [hep-ph/9209210].
[7] A. Monin and M. B. Voloshin,The Spontaneous breaking of a metastable string,Phys. Rev. D
78(2008) 065048 [0808.1693].
[8] L. Leblond, B. Shlaer and X. Siemens,Gravitational Waves from Broken Cosmic Strings: The
Bursts and the Beads,Phys. Rev. D79(2009) 123519 [0903.4686].
[9] W. Buchmuller, V. Domcke and K. Schmitz,Stochastic gravitational-wave background from
metastable cosmic strings,JCAP12(2021) 006 [2107.04578].
[10] W. Buchmuller, V. Domcke and K. Schmitz,From NANOGrav to LIGO with metastable cosmic
strings,Phys. Lett. B811(2020) 135914 [2009.10649].
[11] A. Chitose, M. Ibe, Y. Nakayama, S. Shirai and K. Watanabe,Revisiting metastable cosmic
string breaking,JHEP04(2024) 068 [2312.15662].
[12] M. Shifman and A. Yung,Metastable strings in Abelian Higgs models embedded in nonAbelian
theories: Calculating the decay rate,Phys. Rev. D66(2002) 045012 [hep-th/0205025].
[13] W. Buchmuller, V. Domcke and K. Schmitz,Metastable cosmic strings,JCAP11(2023) 020
[2307.04691].
[14] W. Buchmuller,Metastable strings and dumbbells in supersymmetric hybrid inflation,JHEP04
(2021) 168 [2102.08923].
[15] S. Antusch, K. Hinze, S. Saad and J. Steiner,Singling out SO(10) GUT models using recent
PTA results,Phys. Rev. D108(2023) 095053 [2307.04595].
[16] L. Tranchedone, E. Carragher, E. Hardy and N. K. van IJcken,Metastable cosmic strings are
broken at the start,2601.04320.
[17] G. ’t Hooft,Magnetic Monopoles in Unified Gauge Theories,Nucl. Phys. B79(1974) 276.
[18] A. M. Polyakov,Particle Spectrum in Quantum Field Theory,JETP Lett.20(1974) 194.
[19] E. B. Bogomolny and M. S. Marinov,Calculation of the Monopole Mass in Gauge Theory,Yad.
Fiz.23(1976) 676.
[20] T. W. Kirkman and C. K. Zachos,Asymptotic Analysis of the Monopole Structure,Phys. Rev.
D24(1981) 999.
[21] P. Forgacs, N. Obadia and S. Reuillon,Numerical and asymptotic analysis of the ’t
Hooft-Polyakov magnetic monopole,Phys. Rev. D71(2005) 035002 [hep-th/0412057].
– 28 –

[22] A. A. Abrikosov,On the Magnetic Properties of Superconductors of the Second Group,Sov.
Phys. JETP5(1957) 1174.
[23] H. B. Nielsen and P. Olesen,Vortex Line Models for Dual Strings,Nucl. Phys. B61(1973) 45.
[24] C. T. Hill, H. M. Hodges and M. S. Turner,Variational Study of Ordinary and Superconducting
Cosmic Strings,Phys. Rev. Lett.59(1987) 2493.
[25] H. J. de Vega and F. A. Schaposnik,A Classical Vortex Solution of the Abelian Higgs Model,
Phys. Rev. D14(1976) 1100.
[26] S. Blasi, M. Grandjean and A. Mariotti,Metastable strings at PTAs: classical stability analysis,
2605.03003.
[27] P. Auclair et al.,Probing the gravitational wave background from cosmic strings with LISA,
JCAP04(2020) 034 [1909.00819].
[28] A. Mitridate, D. Wright, R. von Eckardstein, T. Schr¨ oder, J. Nay, K. Olum et al.,PTArcade,
2306.16377.
[29]NANOGravcollaboration,The NANOGrav 15 yr Data Set: Observations and Timing of 68
Millisecond Pulsars,Astrophys. J. Lett.951(2023) L9 [2306.16217].
[30]LIGO Scientific, VIRGO, KAGRAcollaboration,Upper Limits on the Isotropic
Gravitational-Wave Background from the first part of LIGO, Virgo, and KAGRA’s fourth
Observing Run,2508.20721.
[31] D. H. Asl and K. Schmitz,New gravitational-wave templates for metastable cosmic strings:
Loop breaking versus network collapse,2604.28097.
[32] W. Buchmuller, V. Domcke, H. Murayama and K. Schmitz,Probing the scale of grand
unification with gravitational waves,Phys. Lett. B809(2020) 135764 [1912.03695].
[33] S. Antusch, K. Hinze and S. Saad,Explaining PTA results by metastable cosmic strings from
SO(10) GUT,JCAP10(2024) 007 [2406.17014].
[34] S. Antusch, K. Hinze and S. Saad,Metastable cosmic strings and gravitational waves from
flavor symmetry breaking,Phys. Rev. D112(2025) 035043 [2503.05868].
[35]NANOGravcollaboration,The NANOGrav 15 yr Data Set: Evidence for a Gravitational-wave
Background,Astrophys. J. Lett.951(2023) L8 [2306.16213].
[36] L. Z. Kelley et al.,in prep., 2023.
[37]NANOGravcollaboration,The NANOGrav 15 yr Data Set: Constraints on Supermassive
Black Hole Binaries from the Gravitational-wave Background,Astrophys. J. Lett.952(2023)
L37 [2306.16220].
– 29 –