Title: Dynamics and detectability of long-lived non-accretion phases for massive black hole binaries in cold, thermally regulating disks
Authors: Christopher Tiede, David O'Neill, Daniel J. D'Orazio
Published: 2026-06-02
Categories: astro-ph.HE, astro-ph.GA

Draft version June 4, 2026
Typeset using LATEXtwocolumnstyle in AASTeX7.0.1
Dynamics and detectability of long-lived non-accretion phases for massive black hole binaries in cold,
thermally regulating disks
Christopher Tiede
 ,1 Da vid O’Neill
 ,2, 1 and Daniel J. D’Orazio
 3, 4, 1
1Niels Bohr International Academy, Niels Bohr Institute, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark
2Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA), Am Campus 1, Klosterneuburg 3400, Austria
3Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Drive, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
4Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA
ABSTRACT
We investigate whether the non-accreting phases found in thin, locally isothermal circumbinary
disks survive when the disk thermodynamics are evolved self-consistently. We present grid-based
hydrodynamics simulations of circumbinary accretion with an energy equation that includes viscous
and hydrodynamic heating coupled to radiative blackbody cooling in the high-Mach number regime.
We find that, although gas accumulates and heats at the far edge of the circumbinary cavity, the regions
that launch accretion streams remain comparatively cold, leading to potentially long-lived suppression
of the binary accretion rate as the large-scale feeding rate is reduced towards the Eddington limit.
This runaway non-accretion problem, however, is weakened relative to locally isothermal solutions.
Despite their low accretion rates, binaries interacting with disks in a non-accreting phase can remain
sufficiently luminous and variable at optical and near-infrared frequencies to be detectable in upcoming
wide-field surveys like LSST and the Roman Space Telescope. Because of the effective truncation of
the surrounding disk, though, such systems are comparatively faint in high energy, photo-ionizing
emission, and may therefore appear as intrinsically X-ray-weak AGN with weak or absent emission
line features. We additionally suggest an update to grid-based sink prescriptions for approximating
mass loss across an unresolved horizon when including an energy conservation equation.
Keywords:Accretion (14) — Active galactic nuclei(16) — Hydrodynamical simulations (767) —
Supermassive black holes (1663)
1.INTRODUCTION
The mergers of galaxies hosting super-massive black
holes are expected to create super-massive black hole bi-
naries (SMBHBs; Begelman et al. 1980; Volonteri et al.
2003). Just as single super-massive black holes interact
with extant reservoirs of galactic gas as standard active
galactic nuclei (AGN; Gaskell 1985; Barnes & Hernquist
1996), many SMBHBs are anticipated to undergo phases
of gas accretion. The community has long sought fea-
tures in AGN emission that signal the presence of an
unresolved inner binary, with the most typical being pe-
riodic variability associated to a binary’s orbital mo-
tion (see e.g., Komossa 2006; Bogdanović et al. 2022;
D’Orazio & Charisi 2023, for reviews). Such features
would be critical for the identification of SMBHBs in
Corresponding author: Christopher Tiede
christopher.tiede@nbi.ku.dk
electromagnetic(EM)surveys(e.g., Grahametal.2015;
Charisi et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020),
enabling both characterization of the full SMBHB popu-
lation and possible multi-messenger detections in gravi-
tational waves from pulsar timing experiments or future
space-based interferometers like LISA.
It is typically assumed that SMBHBs accrete at rates
similar to standard AGN, because, while the rotating
binary potential alters the structure of the inner ac-
cretion flow (Artymowicz & Lubow 1994; Cuadra et al.
2009; Shi et al. 2012), (magneto-) hydrodynamics simu-
lations have demonstrated that gas still falls onto the
component black holes via tidal streams (e.g., Mac-
Fadyen & Milosavljević 2008; Shi & Krolik 2015). This
transfer of mass onto each component BH enables mass
flow in the disk to equilibrate with that onto the bi-
nary (D’Orazio et al. 2013; Miranda et al. 2017; Muñoz
etal.2019). Simulationsthatself-consistentlyevolvethe
heating (shocks, compression, and viscosity) and cooling
arXiv:2606.04082v1  [astro-ph.HE]  2 Jun 2026

2Tiede, O’Neill & D’Orazio
(thermal blackbody radiation) of the solution through
an energy conservation equation, have also generally re-
inforced the facsimile between the average EM appear-
ance of accreting SMBHBs and single SMBHs (Farris
et al. 2015; d’Ascoli et al. 2018; Westernacher-Schneider
et al. 2022; Cocchiararo et al. 2024). However, studies
focusing on the final gravitational wave driven inspiral
phase have noted possible macroscopic signatures like
secular luminosity evolution, late-time X-ray turn-off,
andpost-mergerjetlaunching(Nobleetal.2012;Krauth
etal.2023;Avaraetal.2024;O’Neilletal.2025;Ennoggi
et al. 2025; Zrake et al. 2025)
The majority of the above mentioned work, though,
was performed for disks with relatively large amounts
of pressure support, parametrized through the disk as-
pect ratio,h/r∼0.1. While this value, in standard
disk modeling (Shakura & Sunyaev 1973), is applica-
ble to steady-state disks around stellar mass objects,
the typical aspect ratio around SMBHs would be nearly
two orders of magnitude thinner (see e.g., Appendix A
in Valli et al. 2024; though for qualitatively different
configurations see e.g., Hopkins et al. 2024). Equiva-
lently, in the same disk modeling, if one fixes the central
massM, viscosity parameterα, and aspect ratio, the
functional Eddington fraction of the system scales like
∝(h/r) 5, such that over-estimatingh/rby a factor of
10−100corresponds to dramatic changes in the implied
astrophysical configuration.1
Multiple studies have now demonstrated that the re-
duced pressure support in systems withh/r <0.1
meaningfully alters the circumbinary accretion dynam-
ics (Ragusa et al. 2016; Tiede et al. 2020; Heath &
Nixon 2020; Penzlin et al. 2022; Franchini et al. 2022;
Dittmann & Ryan 2022; Dittmann et al. 2025; Clyburn
& Zrake 2026), and that in the canonical limit ofh/r∼
10−2 −10 −3, accretion onto the binary may function-
ally cease (Tiede et al. 2025; Betancourt et al. 2026).
This truncation could cause SMBHBs to appear elec-
tromagnetically distinct from typical AGN, but it has
been suggested that the extra heat from shocks and
tidal effects in the complex inner accretion flow may
warm circumbinary disks back to the fiducial thickness,
h/r≈0.1(Cocchiararo et al. 2024). However, no study
has yet systematically explored this classically thin limit
with the inclusion of an energy equation.
Inthiswork, wereporthigh-resolutionhydrodynamics
simulations of circumbinary accretion disks withh/r <
0.1that consistently include hydrodynamic heating and
1 The quoted scaling is for a gas-pressure dominated disk with
dominant opacity from electron scattering, but in the free-free
opacity regime, the scaling becomes∝(h/r)20/3.
radiative blackbody cooling. We demonstrate that long-
lived non-accretion phases, observed in isothermal sim-
ulations, persist with this more complete treatment, be-
cause the disk remains cold at its inner-most edge. We
document our numerical approach, system setup, and
single black hole test simulations in Section 2. We eval-
uate the dynamics of binary accretion in such classi-
cally thin disks in Section 3, and we report the asso-
ciated broadband thermal emission properties in Sec-
tion 4. We discuss implications for super-massive binary
populations, ramifications for electromagnetic searches,
numerical limitations, future directions, and our main
conclusions in Sections 5 and 6.
2.NUMERICAL METHODS
2.1.System setup
We follow the general setup from Tiede et al. (2025) in
solving the vertically averaged, 2D compressible Navier-
Stokes Equations for a thin gas disk around a binary of
total massM, semi-major axisa, and orbital frequency
Ωb, with the finite volume codeSailfish(Zrake & Mac-
Fadyen 2024). We consider a disk of surface density
Σin vertical hydrostatic equilibrium with characteristic
Mach number,M ≈(h/r) −1, wherehis the disk scale-
height at radiusr. In addition to conserving mass and
momentum in our solutions, following Westernacher-
Schneider et al. (2022), we evolve an energy equation
that self-consistently tracks the gas heating and cooling.
We adopt an ideal gas equation of state relating the spe-
cific internal energyϵto the vertically integrated pres-
sure,P=ϵΣ(γ−1)with adiabatic indexγ= 5/3. Heat
injection from dissipation is included through a source
term,∇ ·(v·τ)for mid-plane fluid velocityv i and vis-
cous stress tensorτij =νΣ
 
∂ivj +∂ jvi −(2/3)δ ij∂kvk

.
We compute the kinematic viscosityν=αc shthrough
the dimensionless numberαand the local adiabatic
sound speedc s =
p
γP/Σ. We assume that our so-
lution is everywhere optically thick,2 such that energy
losses occur through radiative blackbody cooling at a
rate
Λ = 8
3
σT 4
κΣ ,(1)
whereT= (m p/kb)P/Σis the mid-plane temperature
(assuming a gas density dominated by hydrogen with
massm p),σandk b denote the usual Stefan-Boltzmann
and Boltzmann constants, respectively, and we assume
that the gas opacity is dominated by electron scatter-
ing,κ= 0.4 cm 2 g−1. The cooling term is applied in
2 We verify that this assumption is generally true, although we
examine it in more detail in Section 4

Big binary – cold disk3
a semi-implicit manner as described in Ryan & Mac-
Fadyen (2017).
The outer boundary mimics an infinite accretion disk
with a steady inflow of material,˙M∞, via a buffer term
that smoothly damps the outer solution to the initial
configuration (see Westernacher-Schneider et al. 2022,
for details), and the inner boundaries are characterized
by sink terms that approximate the loss of mass, mo-
mentum, and energy across the (unresolved) horizon of
each black hole. We employ torque-free (or spinless)
sinks (Dempsey et al. 2020; Dittmann & Ryan 2021) of
characteristic radiusr sink = 0.05a, but we implement a
modified energy sink term—compared to that employed
in previous studies evolving an energy equation (e.g,
Wang et al. 2023; Westernacher-Schneider et al. 2023)—
that accounts for the injected azimuthal kinetic energy
typically associated to the application of the torque-free
condition. We refer to these as “adiabatic torque-free
sinks”, and we provide a derivation and demonstration
in Appendix A.
2.2.Disk model
The initial disk setup is that of a circular, Keple-
rian disk corrected for radial pressure gradients, and
inward radial drift velocity associated to˙M∞. The sur-
face density and pressure are given by a gas-pressure
and electron-scattering-opacity dominatedα-disk with
no net angular momentum current (Haiman et al. 2009).
Typically, one selects the central massM, the viscosity
parameterα, and the feeding rate ˙M∞, such that
Σ(r;α, M, ˙M∞) = 2
(9π)3/5
 mp
γkb
4/5 σ
κ
1/5
(2)
×α −4/5(GM)1/5 ˙M3/5
∞ r−3/5
P(r;α, M, ˙M∞) = 1
3πγ α−1(GM)1/2 ˙M∞ r−3/2 ,(3)
and the Mach number profile of the flow can be ex-
pressed
M2(r)≡ − ϕg
c2s
= GMΣ(r)
rγP(r) (4)
for gravitational potentialϕ g corresponding, here, to a
single point mass. We setα= 0.1, but in place of select-
ing ˙M∞, we instead chooseM a ≡ M(a)in the single
central potential, such that the effective accretion rate
at large scales becomes
˙M∞ =4π
r
2
3
 m4
pσ
k4
b γκ
1/2
α1/2(GM)7/4a−1/4M−5
a . (5)
Our initial surface density and pressure profiles are then
Σ(r) = Σa
 r
a
−3/5
&P(r) =P a
 r
a
−3/2
(6)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Σ/Σa
s = 20 t−1
ν
s = 40 t−1
ν
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P/Pa
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
r/rsink
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
vφ/(a Ωb)
analytic
initial
Figure 1.Surface density (top), vertically averaged pres-
sure(middle), andorbitalvelocity(bottom)foradiskaround
a single point mass for two values of the mass removal rate.
Grey-bands indicate the analyticα-disk solutions, and green
lines, the initial profiles.
withΣ a ≡Σ(a;α, M,M a)andP a ≡P(a;α, M,M a).
2.3.Single point-mass solutions
For the described heating and cooling procedures,
these profiles ought to yield steady-state solutions
around a single point mass. We test this by initializ-
ing aM a = 10disk around aM= 100M ⊙ sink region
with an initial cavity of size3a. The lengtha, here,
is an arbitrary normalization and is simply taken to be
large compared to the associated Schwarzschild radius.
We setr sink =aand evolve the disk for a viscous time
at10r sink for two values of the characteristic sink rate
s={20t −1
ν ,40t −1
ν }, where
tν ≡ 2
3
a2
ν(a) = a2Ωb
αγ
Σa
Pa
(7)

4Tiede, O’Neill & D’Orazio
−10 0 10
−10
−5
0
5
10
y/a
Ma = 12
 Ma = 50
 Ma = 80
−2
−1
0
1
log10
(
Σ/Σa
)
−10 0 10
−10
−5
0
5
10
y/a
−2.5
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
log10
(
h/r
)
−10 0 10
x/a
−10
−5
0
5
10
y/a
−10 0 10
x/a
−10 0 10
x/a
1
2
3
4
log10
(
˜Teﬀ
)
[K]
Figure 2.Snapshots after evolution for∼3t ν of surface density, aspect ratio, and normalized effective temperature (˜Teff,
corresponding to a remapping to an Eddington-accreting system described in Section 4) for each Mach number.
is the viscous time atr=a(c.f., Dempsey et al.
2020; and see Appendix A for more detailed discussion).
The associated solutions are illustrated in Figure 1 as
azimuthally-averaged radial profiles of the surface den-
sity, pressure, and rotational velocity, respectively. The
thick grey curves show the analytic solution, and the
light-green line the initial configuration. We observe
that both solutions converge to the analytic disk pro-
files. We adopts= 40t −1
ν for all binary simulations
presented below.
3.SIMULATION RESULTS
We consider a binary of total massM= 106M⊙ with
separationa= 0.001 pc, corresponding to an orbital pe-
riodP b ≃3 yr. We place the binary in a box of total side
length50awith fiducial cartesian grid resolution∆x=
0.015a. We also run higher resolution segments, with
∆x= 0.0075aand0.005a, for convergence testing and
some analyses, as specified below. We explore solutions
for three values of the Mach number,Ma ={12,50,80},
but because we fixα= 0.1, this yields associated vis-
cous times oft ν ={1.5×10 2,2.7×10 3,6.8×10 3}or-
bits, respectively. Because of the very strong depen-
dence of Eq. (5) on Mach number, the corresponding
effective Eddington fractions aref eff ≡ ˙M∞/ ˙MEdd ≃
{1.3×10 5,10 2,10}, where ˙MEdd is the Eddington accre-
tion rate at 10% radiative efficiency.3 Lastly, in order to
3 We comment that our goal is not to characterize the physics
of super-Eddington accretion, but rather to document the rel-
evant changes in binary accretion dynamics as one increases
Ma and approaches the sub-Eddington limit.

Big binary – cold disk5
minimize artifacts from a violent startup-transient, we
fix our coordinate center to the binary center of mass
and adiabatically introduce the secondary component
(similar to the procedure in Duffell et al. 2020) into
the self-similar disk model by linearly increasinglog10(q)
from an Earth-to-Sun mass ratio up to an equal mass
binary over 2000 orbits.
Figure 2 shows snapshots of the solution surface den-
sity, aspect ratio, and re-mapped effective temperature
˜Teff (described in Section 4) for the three fiducial runs
evolved for∼3t ν (corresponding to approximately 500,
10,000, and 20,000 orbits, respectively) at the fiducial
resolution. In the surface density plots, we see that the
cavity becomes increasingly elongated with increasing
Ma. This is consistent with previously documented
behaviors in circular, equal-mass binaries: that cav-
ity semi-major axis grows with decreasing kinematic
viscosity, and that cavity eccentricity grows with in-
creasing Mach Number (e.g., Muñoz & Lithwick 2020;
Dittmann & Ryan 2022; Grcić et al. 2026). Following
the procedure of Dittmann & Ryan (2022), we mea-
sure the cavity semi-major axis and eccentricity pairs
as (4.5a,0.43), (5.6a,0.46), and (7.2a,0.55) in order of
increasing Mach number. AsM a is increased, the re-
jected accretion streams propagating from the binary
towards the cavity apocenter also become increasingly
turbulent. We posit that this results from an increasing
susceptibility to Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH) roll-up due to
(i) a decreased viscous damping of destabilizing modes,
(ii) the increased filamentation of streams (c.f., Tiede
et al. 2025) which shifts the characteristic disrupting
modes to higher wavenumber, and (iii) the longer prop-
agation time in more elongated cavities (Chandrasekhar
1961; Berlok & Pfrommer 2019).
One also observes that the density of the CBD inner
edge, particularly at apocenter, grows with increasing
Ma, while the minidisk density falls. This is consis-
tent with increased accretion suppression with growing
Mach number, such that mass instead accumulates in
a growing—in density and radial size—annulus at the
cavity edge. Here we comment that accretion suppres-
sion is principally a dynamical process governed by the
removal of pressure support with growing Mach num-
ber, and is similarly observed at fixed viscous strengths
(Tiede et al. 2020; Dittmann & Ryan 2022; Tiede et al.
2025). The disk also becomes thicker and hotter at cav-
ity apocenter, generally coincident with the most promi-
nent density enhancement. We discuss in more detail in
the following sections.
3.1.Marginal- and non-accreting phases
During each simulation, we track the total binary ac-
cretion rate through the sink source terms, ˙Mb(t), and
the total torque, ˙Jb(t), exerted on the binary by all cells
in the domain.4 For the time-evolution of the binary
accretion rate, Tiede et al. (2025) found that a one pa-
rameter analytic model characterized by thetorque pa-
rameter,ℓ 0 ≡ ⟨ ˙Jb⟩/⟨ ˙Mba2Ωb⟩(where⟨·⟩denotesanaver-
age over a viscous time) very accurately described˙Mb(t)
for high Mach number configurations (see also Rafikov
2016; Duffell et al. 2024). For the disk solutions consid-
ered here, withν(r)∝r 3/5, this takes the form
˙Mb(t) =
˙M∞
1−ℓ 0 (t/tν)−5/14 ,(8)
and we present a more detailed derivation in Ap-
pendix B. We consider a system to be in steady-state
when⟨ ˙Mb⟩ ≃ ˙M∞, but note that because of the weak
scaling withtwhen−ℓ 0 ≫1, this can require hundreds
to millions of viscous times. In this limit, ˙Mb ≪ ˙M∞,
and we refer to the binary as interacting with the disk
in anon-accreting phase.
Thetop-leftpanelofFigure3showsthetimeevolution
of the binary accretion rate after the start-up transient
for each of the three fiducial runs in time units oftν.
The solid lines illustrate a running average over 2% of
a viscous time, and the faint curves, the un-smoothed
timeseries. The dashed lines of each color indicate the
analytic evolution, Eq. (8), estimated from an empirical
determination ofℓ0. Timeseries of the binary torque per
unit accreted mass for determiningℓ0 are shown in the
bottom-left panel of Figure 3. We refer to this as the
specific torque, and the average value is noted by a hori-
zontal dotted line. We see that, consistent with isother-
mal solutions, while the warmM a = 12system equi-
librates rapidly, accretion is decreasingly efficient with
increasing Mach number. ForM a = 80, this configu-
ration yields a non-accreting phase, while theMa = 50
system can be characterized as marginally-accreting.
Unlike isothermal solutions, however, the average
time evolution of the accretion rate is not precisely
described by the analytic model. While the approx-
imation remains generally good for the steady-state
and marginally-accreting solutions, it appears that ˙M
evolves more quickly than∼t 5/14 in the non-accreting
system. A primary assumption in Eq. (8), demonstrated
for isothermal solutions in Tiede et al. (2025), is that
ℓ0 is a fundamental property of the system and does
4 We additionally compute and include the accretion torque, but
this component is sub-dominant, especially in the limit of in-
terest where ˙Mb < ˙M∞.

6Tiede, O’Neill & D’Orazio
10−2
10−1
100
Accretion rate, ˙Mb/ ˙M∞
M = 10 6 M⊙, P b ≃ 3 yr
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Time, t/tν
10−1
100
101
102
103
Speciﬁc torque, | ˙Jb|/( ˙Mb a2Ωb)
analytic model
average value, ℓ0
10−1
100
Surface density, ⟨Σ/Σa⟩φ
Ma = 12
Ma = 50
Ma = 80
5 10 15 20 25
Radius, r/a
20
40
60
80
100
Mach number, ⟨M⟩φ
disk model
Figure 3.(Left) Timeseries of the binary accretion rate and specific torque magnitude from each of the three fiducial runs
(note that theM a = 12run corresponds to binary outspiral, while the higher Mach runs correspond to binary inspiral). The
dashed-lines in the top panel illustrate the analytic model for ˙Mb(t)computed from the empirical measurement ofℓ 0. The
dotted lines in the bottom panel indicate the measured magnitude of the torque parameterℓ0 from an average over two viscous
times. (Right) Azimuthally-averaged surface density and mass-weighted Mach number profiles. Individual profiles are shown
by light grey lines and the time-averaged values over 500 orbits as solid, colored curves. Dashed lines indicate the reference disk
model for each run.
not change with time (or, equivalently, ˙M). However,
once one includes an energy conservation equation, the
viscous dissipation rate, temperature, and scale height
of the inner annuli all gradually grow during a non-
accretion phase as mass slowly accumulates in the in-
ner disk. For the two-region model of an inner disk
that has relaxed to the binary torque and an outer disk
that retains its self-similar initial condition (see Ap-
pendix B), one can show that the dissipation rate of the
relaxed inner-disk grows proportional to ˙M(t)∼t 5/14.
The associated scale-height, then, grows as a very weak
function of time,h∝ ˙M1/5 ∼t 1/14. Yet, becauseℓ 0
varies strongly withh(or equivalently,M a), even small
changes to the inner scale-height induce a relevant effect.
We posit that this manifests as the modest secular evo-
lution of ˙Jb over the course of theMa = 80simulation
and accounts for the associated slightly faster thant5/14
growth of ˙Mb. We explore further the degree to which
ℓ0 varies as a function of accretion rate in Section 3.3.
3.2.Cold stream formation
Despite the slight deviation from Eq. (8), the mag-
nitude ofℓ 0 and weak growth of ˙Mb(t)still result in
long-lived non-accretion phases for high Mach number
systems. This implies that, despite possible dynami-
cal heating of the inner CBD, the material at stream
launching remains cold. From Figure 2, one sees that
streams are formed near cavity pericenter atr≈1.5a,
while the density enhancement and dynamical heating
effects (for the non-accreting runs) are most prominent
at cavity apocenter. These features are verified in radial
profiles of the CBD surface density and Mach number in
the right-panels of Figure 3. The light grey curves illus-
trate mass-weighted azimuthal averages from individual
simulation snapshots and the colored curves depict the

Big binary – cold disk7
time-average over 500 binary orbits. Dashed lines show
the reference disk model of Section 2.2. Each model
generally maintains the analytic, single point mass so-
lution at large radii, but as one approaches the binary,
theM-profiles show that the CBD is heated above the
single-BH value at its far edge (cavity apocenter) and
cooled below this reference value at its near edge (cav-
ity pericenter; compare with Figure 2). The far side
of the cavity is heated by a combination of the den-
sity pile-up and heating from stream generation that is
advected along the cavity from its pericenter to apocen-
ter. These warm elements at cavity apocenter then cool
efficiently on orbital approach to cavity pericenter, re-
sulting in cold stream formation at local Mach numbers
generally larger thanMa. We note that this cooling is
dominated, not by radiative losses, but by the expansion
of the flow as fluid elements return to cavity pericenter
on eccentric orbits (see Appendix C). As a result, cold
streams do not retain enough internal support to resist
tidal compactification by the binary potential (D’Orazio
etal.2016;Tiedeetal.2022), andonerecoverslong-lived
non-accretion phases in the high-Mach limit.
3.3.Numerical convergence and the runaway
non-accretion problem
Tiede et al. (2025) demonstrated thatℓ 0, and the
associated accretion suppression, ˙Mb/ ˙M∞ ∼(−ℓ 0)−1,
grow exponentially with Mach number in isothermal so-
lutions. As a result, as one approached effective Edding-
ton fractionsf eff →1, the time required for an accret-
ing binary to reach a steady-state rapidly exceeded not
only the binary lifetime, but also a Hubble time. This
behavior was also magnified with increasing resolution.
We refer to this as therunaway non-accretion problem.
To characterize how the problem changes with a more
complete treatment of the energy equation, we plot the
magnitude ofℓ 0 from our simulations as a function of
Mach number in Figure 4. We also explore the degree
to which our simulations accurately resolve stream for-
mation and mass transfer across the binary cavity by
“upsampling” the resolution by factors of 2 and 3, and
measuringℓ 0 over an additional 1000 and 300 orbits,
respectively. We include as a grey curve the highest
resolution results from the comparable isothermal sim-
ulations.
We find that our solutions are generally converged,
with only mild variation from increasing resolution in
theM a = 80solutions. We observe that, compared
to isothermal configurations, the full treatment of the
energy equation results in a more moderate exponen-
tial growth ofℓ0. We compare our data with the func-
tion,∝e 0.085Ma, plotted as a light blue band. For com-
0123456
log10(feﬀ )
20 40 60 80 100 120
Mach number, Ma
100
101
102
103
Torque parameter, |ℓ0|
∆x = 0.015a
∆x = 0.008a
∆x = 0.005a
Steady-state limits
Tiede et al. (2025)
Figure 4.Magnitude ofℓ 0 as a function of Mach number
and resolution. The top axis additionally illustrates the ef-
fective Eddington fractions associated with the disk model of
Section 2.2. Crosses indicate runs initialized with no angular
momentum current (Eqs. 2 & 3), triangles indicate the deter-
mined steady-state limit by guessing the angular momentum
current, and different colors correspond to increasing grid
resolutions. The light blue band is an approximate exponen-
tial fit to the data. The grey curve illustrates the equivalent
isothermal solutions, and the dashed-horizontal line depicts
the critical value above which a binary will merge before it
can “turn-on” (see Section 5.2).
parison, the exponential growth in isothermal solutions
was approximated asln(ℓ 0)∝0.21M a. However, we
compute in Section 5.2—and illustrate as a horizontal,
dashed line—the critical torque parameter above which
a binary will merge before it can achieve an accretion
rate 0.1 ˙M∞. From our reference fitting function, we es-
timate that this transition occurs above a Mach number
of 90, and that as one approaches the limitf eff →1
(see e.g., the mapping on the top axis), binaries accret-
ing from gas-pressure dominated disks will still generally
merge during a non-accreting phase.
However, as noted in Section 3.1, as mass accumulates
in the inner-disk during a non-accreting phase, the scale
height of the disk will grow slowly in time. We estimate
the magnitude of this back-reaction onℓ0 by guessing
the steady-state angular momentum current (following
the procedure of Miranda et al. 2017, Muñoz et al. 2019)
and initializing the disk using the corresponding steady-
state profile (see Appendix B). For each of the higher
Mach numbers, we find setups that settle to accretion
rates within 20% of˙M∞ for∼1000orbits at the fiducial
resolution. We increase the resolution by a factor of 2

8Tiede, O’Neill & D’Orazio
and average over an additional∼300orbits. The asso-
ciated measurements ofℓ0 are illustrated with triangles
in Figure 4. The torque parameter only changes slightly
during the progression to steady-state forMa = 50, but
itdecreasesbyafactorof2−3betweenthenon-accreting
and approximate–steady-state solutions forMa = 80.
These steady-state measurements act as lower-limits to
−ℓ0 when estimating the time evolution from Eq. (8),
and their increasing trend withMa suggests they still
approach the critical value asfeff →1. We give more
direct estimates for which binaries can and cannot “turn
on ” in Section 5.2 below.
4.ELECTROMAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF
TRUNCATED ACCRETION
By evolving an energy equation and tracking the disk
temperature, we can directly compute the thermal emis-
sion generated by the accretion flow. In post-processing,
we treat each cell as having a grey atmosphere and com-
pute the effective temperature of each cell
T 4
eff = 4
3
T 4
τ(ρ, T) ,(9)
for optical depthτand disk densityρ= Σ/(2h). We
compute both the optical depth to scattering,τ es =
κesΣand absorption,τ abs ≈κ absΣ. We estimate
the latter through Kramer’s opacity law,κabs = 5×
1024ρ T −7/2 cm2 g−1. We verify that electron scattering
opacity always dominates our solution in the disk and
approximate the total optical depth asτ=τ es +τ abs.
However, because many cells in the circumbinary cavity
become extremely diffuse, we additionally compute their
effective optical depthτeff =
p
τabs(τes +τ abs)(Rybicki
& Lightman 1986). To compute spectral energy dis-
tributions (SEDs) from our solutions, for all cells that
are thermalized withτeff >1, we sum their differential
specific luminositydLνem =πB νem[Teff]dν em dAfor each
frequencyν em over cell areasdA; withB νem Planck’s
function. We compute the averaged SEDs from snap-
shots of the highest resolution,∆x= 0.005a, simula-
tions taken 10 times per orbit for approximately 50 or-
bits. Because we are interested in the characteristics of
non-accreting (or marginally-accreting) phases, we re-
strict our emission analysis to the Mach 50 and 80 runs.
The SEDs computed directly from each simulation are
illustrated in the top panel of Figure 5. The solid lines
show the average luminosity at each frequency, while
the shaded regions indicate the associated one-standard-
deviation variability region. The SEDs appear generally
consistent with a truncatedα-disk, but with growing
variability with increasing frequency due to the periodic
passage of material near each binary component during
stream formation.
1039
1040
1041
1042
1043
1044
1045
1046
Luminosty, νemLνem [ergs / s]
Roman
LSST
M = 10 6 M⊙, P b ≃ 3yr
Ma = 50
Ma = 80
1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018
Frequency, νem [Hz]
1038
1039
1040
1041
1042
1043
1044
Luminosty, νem ˜Lνem [ergs / s]
fEdd = 1α-disk
Figure 5.Average SEDs with 1σvariability regions com-
puted directly from the simulation data (top), and from
the re-mapping tof Edd = 1(Eq. 10; bottom). Vertical
bands show LSST and Roman observing frequencies and the
grey dashed line illustrates the SED of the equivalentα-disk
around a single BH. Dashed-colored lines show possible sub-
-grid emission associated to anα-disk solution around each
black hole at the measured, respective, accretion rates.
Recall that the effective Eddington fraction of the
Mach 50 and 80 simulations weref eff ≈100 and 10,
respectively. In the bottom panel of Figure 5, we plot
our SEDs after rescaling our fluid quantities (following
the general strategy of Westernacher-Schneider et al.
2022) to a reference system that is accreting at its Ed-
dington rate,f Edd = 1. 5 In particular, because Equa-
tions (2) & (3) are self-similar in ˙M∞, we perform the
map
Σ→ ˜Σ = Σ (fEdd/feff)3/5
P→ ˜P=P(f Edd/feff)
(10)
5 Note, however, that Westernacher-Schneider et al. (2022) only
re-mappedT eff; but because we additionally computeτeff, we
apply the re-mapping to all relevant fluid quantities.

Big binary – cold disk9
in order to compute the re-scaled values,˜Teff and˜τeff.
Herewemakeadistinctionbetweenf Edd, whenreferenc-
ingtheself-similardisksolutions, andf eff whenreferring
specifically to our simulation setups. We compare the
resultant SEDs with that of a standardα-disk around a
106M⊙ black hole withfEdd = 1andα= 0.1, shown as
a grey dashed curve. We see that the non-accreting (and
marginally-accreting) solutions, on average, have much
lower bolometric luminosities than the equivalent single
black hole. Despite this overall reduction, each system
remains relatively luminous at optical and near infrared
(NIR) frequencies corresponding to emission from the
heated region at the far end of the binary cavity (see,
e.g, bottom row of Figure 2 and right panels of Fig-
ure 3). We plot as faint vertical bands the range of
observing frequencies for LSST (LSST Science Collabo-
ration et al. 2009, purple) and the Nancy Grace Roman
Space Telescope (Spergel et al. 2015, light blue). For
the non-accreting solution, the system remains compa-
rably luminous to a single, accreting SMBH at most
of the Roman observing frequencies and the low-end of
the optical LSST bands, but it starts to lose relevant
optical luminosity towards the bluer portion of LSST.
Both solutions also posses variability in both the Roman
and LSST bands—for example at the≈0.2 dexlevel in
the overlap region aroundνem = 5×10 14 Hz—such that
periodicity would likely remain detectable in observed
lightcurves. We make more explicit detectability esti-
mates in Section 5.3.
We additionally comment that these measurements,
especially the non-accreting solution, represent an early
evolutionary phase of the accreting binary. As the in-
ner CBD relaxes to the binary-imposed angular mo-
mentum current, the local dissipation increases com-
pared to the standard, single-BH solution. In the time-
dependent model motivated in Section 3.1 (and de-
scribed in more detail in Appendix B), the effective tem-
perature of the relaxed inner-disk grows, albeit slowly,
asT eff ∝ ˙M1/4
b ∼t 5/56. We therefore expect the SEDs
in Figure 5 to evolve to larger optical/NIR luminosi-
ties as the inner-disk accumulates mass and transmits a
growing net angular momentum current (see also, Kocsis
et al. 2012a,b; Rafikov 2013). The spectral peak should
alsograduallyincreaseinamplitudeandshiftblue-wards
asT eff rises. As a result, however, those annuli con-
tributing most strongly in the optical/NIR (i.e., those
atr em satisfyingk bTeff(rem)∼hν em) will shift to larger
radii where dynamical processes sourcing variability at
the binary orbital period may be less prominent.
Lastly, because we do not resolve down to horizon
scales, we include as colored, dashed lines the omit-
ted emission—implied by the average accretion rates of
Figure 3—integrated in radius from the Schwarzschild
inner-most stable circular orbit of each black hole out
to the sink radius. This assumes that the minidisks
remain radiatively efficient, but as ˙Mb/ ˙M∞ falls, the
circum-single flows become susceptible to transition into
radiatively inefficient solutions with yet lower luminosi-
ties and different spectral characteristics (Narayan & Yi
1994; and see Tiede & D’Orazio 2025 for a discussion of
binaries in such multi-component flows.) This emission
is, expectedly, significant for the marginally-accreting
case, but is only minor in the regions of interest for the
non-accreting solution. We discuss more detailed impli-
cations for electromagnetic searches for SMBHBs in the
following section.
5.DISCUSSION
5.1.Numerical approximation and caveats
We have demonstrated that long-lived binary non-
accretion phases extend to more detailed treatments of
the energy equation, particularly because stream forma-
tion occurs from comparatively cold material. We have
limited our inquiry, though, to classicalα-disk models
dominated by thermal pressure, and a number of pro-
cesses may yet alter the thermodynamic structure of the
inner disk, stream formation, and the existence of non-
accretion phases. In particular, as a binary shrinks its
orbit towards merger, radiation will at some point begin
to dominate the energy content of the inner-CBD and
may qualitatively change this picture (c.f., Cocchiararo
et al. 2025; Tiwari et al. 2025). We have also neglected
the direct inclusion of magnetic fields, which can offer
an additional source of gas support and access to alter-
nate accretion modes (i.e., Most & Wang 2024; Hopkins
et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2025). The presence of magnet-
ically driven turbulence as well as tension and pressure
from ordered magnetic fields will impact stream gener-
ation and the dynamics of mass transfer onto the bi-
nary (e.g., Shi et al. 2012; Ennoggi et al. 2025; Noble
et al. 2021). We have additionally modeled the flow as a
vertically averaged, two-dimensional flow, whereas, de-
spite the increasingly thin nature of the solutions, the
inclusion of a vertical axis may alter the cavity struc-
ture, stream geometry, and gas capture dynamics. The
presence of orbital eccentricity (e.g., Zrake et al. 2021;
D’Orazio & Duffell 2021; Dittmann et al. 2025) or an un-
equal mass binary (e.g., Duffell et al. 2020; Siwek et al.
2023; Dittmann & Ryan 2024) may similarly alter this
mass transfer process.
We have additionally assumed in our cooling prescrip-
tion that the solution is everywhere, locally character-
ized as a blackbody. This approximation, though, does
not generally hold for the lowest-density regions of the

10Tiede, O’Neill & D’Orazio
accretion flow (i.e., the cavity), and in future work, we
plan to modify the cooling function whenτeff ≲1. Sim-
ilarly, in the blackbody cooling, we have adopted a con-
stant electron-scattering opacity when computing the
radiative energy losses; and while we have checked that
this approximation is generally appropriate for the code
temperatures (corresponding with super-Eddington ef-
fective accretion rates), a more detailed treatment of
the gas opacities may also alter the disk structure and
emission in setups that physically correspond to sub-
Eddington accretion. Therefore, our results should be
viewed as isolating the effect of evolving an energy equa-
tion relative to simpler thermodynamic closures, rather
than as a complete model of binary accretion.
5.2.Merger timescales and turn-on conditions
We have established two primary regimes in the evolu-
tion of binaries accreting from high Mach number disks.
At early times, the binary interacts with a truncated
CBD in a non-accreting phase, where˙m≡ ˙Mb/ ˙M∞ ≪
1. At late times, the binary achieves a steady-state
where˙m→1. We refer to the transition between
the two as the binary “turning-on”.6 Whether a binary
reaches steady-state or not—and how long it takes to
merge—depends on if the required turn-on–time is long
orshortcomparedtothebinarylifetime. Theselifetimes
are in turn determined by the torque parameter, which
can be equivalently interpreted as arecycling number:
the average number of times a fluid element interacts
with the binary in an accretion stream—taking a small
amount of angular momentum each time—before it is
accreted. Thus, the larger the torque parameter, the less
efficient the accretion, and the more the binary evolves
per unit accreted mass.
The characteristic merger time for a circular, equal
mass binary accreting at˙mis
a
˙a= 1
8 ˙m

ℓ0 − 3
8
−1
tM ,(11)
wheret M =M/ ˙M∞ is the typical mass doubling time.
However, under the time evolution model of Eq. (8), in
a non-accreting limit with−ℓ 0 ≫1, the merger time
becomes independent of the torque parameter,
a
˙a≈ tM
8
 t
tν
−5/14
.(12)
The inspiral rate, thus, grows over viscous times—in a
manner that depends only on the disk model—as ma-
6 This turn-on roughly corresponds to the phase in which the av-
erage emission transitions from the truncated SEDs computed
in Figure 5 to more standard AGN-like spectra.
terial accumulates in the inner-disk, exerts an increas-
inglylargetorque, andtransmitsaprogressivelygrowing
amount of angular momentum through the disk.
To this point, though, we have approximated the ac-
cretion rate evolution under the assumption thatℓ0 is a
fixed property of the system. However, we have demon-
strated that when one allows the scale-height of the
inner-disk to adjust self-consistently,ℓ 0 evolves slowly
on the order of viscous times (e.g. Figure 3 & 4). As-
suming this evolution mirrors that of ˙M, we model it
phenomenologically as
ℓ0(t) =ℓ 1(t/tν)−p ,(13)
whereℓ 1 is the torque-parameter early in the evolution
(at one viscous time), and generally corresponds to the
values measured in our simulations (e.g., the crosses in
Figure 4). Inverting Eq. (8) for the turn-on timet( ˙m),
and equating it with the associated merger time through
Eqs. (12) & (13) in the limit that−ℓ0 ≫1, defines a
critical value for the torque parameter
|ℓ1,crit | ≈2 −3ξ ˙m−1 (tM /tν)ξ ,(14)
withξ= (14p+ 5)/19, above which a binary will merge
before it can achieve some˙mand turn on.7
The expression forℓ 1,crit, however, depends on the
local viscous time, and thus, changes as the binary or-
bit shrinks. Becauset ν is an always decreasing func-
tion with decayinga, the true limit occurs near the
point where the binary decouples from its accretion
disk due to runaway gravitational wave (GW) emis-
sion (e.g., Armitage & Natarajan 2002). The binary
lifetime from GW evolution ist GW =A −1a4, with
A= 16(GM) 3/(5c5)for an equal mass binary (Peters
1964), and the critical separation below which a binary
can never turn on occurs whentGW =t( ˙m). This occurs
at
acrit ≃10 −5 f −2/13
Edd α−4/13
0.1 M14/13
6 ( ˙mℓ1)70/(247ξ) pc,
where we’ve defined typical valuesα= 0.1α 0.1 and
M/M⊙ = 10 6M6. Choosing a valuep= 1/4, visu-
ally consistent with the data in Figure 3, and evaluating
Eq. (14) atacrit yields
|ℓ1,crit | ≃
 
360 ˙m−1
0.1

f −17/138
Edd α136/345
0.1 M −289/690
6 ,
where we’ve additionally defined the turn on condition,
˙m= 0.1 ˙m0.1. The torque parameter values determined
7 The coefficients ofξcome from our choice of disk model. In
the more general parameterization of Appendix B,ξ= (λ+
p)/(λ+ 1).

Big binary – cold disk11
from our simulations (see e.g., Figure 4) begin to ap-
proachℓ 1,crit as we increaseMa, and setups approach-
ing the limitfeff →1would likely merge before achiev-
ing0.1 ˙MEdd.8 We estimated in Section 3.3 that this
transition occurs forM a ≳90, such that systems with
effective Eddington fractions
feff ≲5.5α 1/2
0.1 M3/4
6 (a/10 −3pc)−1/4
would, in our disk model, merge in a non-accreting
phase.
If a binary merges during a non-accreting phase, be-
cause Eq. (12) evolves explicitly with time, the charac-
teristic merger time is no longer self-similar in˙m. It
instead depends on the binary separation at the onset
of accretion, and integrating Eq. (12) from0.1a0.1 parsec
to merger gives a lifetime,
tmerge ≃(0.4t M)f 3/19
Edd α−4/19
0.1 M −1/19
6 a7/19
0.1 ,
wheret M ≈
 
45 Myr

/ fEdd is the mass doubling time
at 10% radiative efficiency. To visualize which bina-
ries merge before they can turn on, we plot in Figure 6
those curves wheretmerge =t( ˙m)for varying binary sep-
arations (in gravitational radii) and mass supply rates
(in units of the Eddington rate), assuming our approx-
imate fitln(ℓ 1) = 0.085M a −1.7, from Figure 4. Be-
cause we vary ˙M∞, we choose as a turn-on condition
˙Mb = 0.1 ˙MEdd. Shaded regions illustrate those binaries
that can turn-on before merger forα= 0.1andp= 1/4,
and the dashed curves show how these regions change
in the constant−ℓ0 limit, withp= 0. Hatched areas
illustrate where the disk model becomes dominated by
radiation pressure (left, backslash) or self-gravity (right,
forward-slash) for each mass. We find that all massive
binaries require mass supply rates exceeding˙MEdd in or-
der to turn on, but that those with periods of years and
total mass≲10 6M⊙ can turn on prior to merger. How-
ever, all binaries with≳10 7M⊙ in gas-pressure domi-
nated disks will be driven to merger in a non-accreting
phase.
For those binaries that do turn on at some timeton,
and reach a steady-state, from Eq. (11), they will merge
on a timescalet M /(8ℓ0(ton)). This equates to a “mini-
mum bright lifetime” of approximately
0.15f −121/138
Edd
 
ℓ0(ton)/ℓ1,crit
−1
Myr
for fiducial values ofα,M, andp= 1/4. The quantity
ℓ0(ton)can be estimated from the quasi–steady-state so-
lutions (triangles) in Figure 4.
8 We comment that whenp= 0, relevant to isothermal solutions,
ℓ1,crit →ℓ 0,crit ≃80 ˙m−1
0.1f −5/69
Edd α16/69
0.1 M −17/69
6 .
104 105 106 107 108 109 1010 1011
Binary period, Pb [GM/c3]
102 103 104 105 106 107
Binary separation, a [GM/c2]
10−1
100
101
102
Mass supply rate, ˙M∞ [ ˙MEdd]
1 yr
1 yr
1 yr
M = 10 5 M⊙
M = 10 6 M⊙
M = 10 7 M⊙
Figure 6.Regions of binary separation and supply rate
wheret merge exceedst(0.1 ˙MEdd)for three values of the bi-
nary mass withα= 0.1. Solid lines and accompanied shaded
regions are forp= 1/4, while dashed lines indicate the
constant−ℓ0 limit,p= 0. Binaries below each curve will
merge before appearing similar to a standard AGN. Shad-
ed-hatched regions of each color correspond to those where
the disk model becomes radiation pressure dominated (left,
backslash) or unstable to its own self-gravity (right, for-
ward-slash). Vertical dotted lines show 1 year rest-frame
binary periods for each mass.
5.3.Detectability of truncated binary accretion
The SED results of Figure 5 are for a specific bi-
nary configuration, but a general detectability estimate
for massive binaries interacting with a CBD in a non-
accreting phase will vary with the binary mass, pe-
riod, and redshift (z). In order to estimate which
set of systems may be identifiable in time-domain sur-
veys, we compute both single-epoch and periodic de-
tectability estimates for representative bands in the
Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) and the Ro-
man Space Telescope. We approximate the SED of
a non-accreting binary analytically as a truncatedα-
disk and compute the average observed flux density
Fνobs = (1+z)L νem /(4πd2
L)at observer frequencyνobs =
νem (1 +z)−1 and luminosity distancedL(z)in standard
ΛCDM cosmology. We convert this to an AB magnitude
and compare against a single epoch detection thresh-
oldm lim, adoptingm lim = 24for the LSSTi-band and
mlim = 26for the Roman F158 filter.
To assess periodic detectability, we compute the char-
acteristic fractional flux variability,∆Fνobs /Fνobs, from

12Tiede, O’Neill & D’Orazio
105 106 107 108
Binary mass, M [M⊙]
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
Observer period, Pb,o [yr]
LSST i-band
z = 0.1
z = 1
z = 4
105 106 107 108
Binary mass, M [M⊙]
Roman F158
single-epoch
variability
Figure 7.Estimate of detectability for truncated binary accretion that retains periodic variability from the inner disk. Solid
lines illustrate single-epoch flux detectability and dashed lines the possible detection of periodic variability. The black cross
indicates the mass and period corresponding to our simulations. Hatched-shaded regions show where a standardα-disk with
fEdd = 1becomes approximately gravitationally unstable (top) and dominated by radiation pressure atr≃3a(bottom).
the1σdeviations of ourM a = 80SED (i.e., the green
shaded region in Figure 5) and assume that lightcurves
vary periodically at this amplitude. We do not attribute
any characteristic timescale to this variability. In order
to estimate across binary masses and periods, we also
assume that the magnitude of the SED variability is a
fixed function of the disk radius in gravitational radii,
rg, for our reference truncatedα-disk. Because the ef-
fective temperature of anα-disk scales asT eff ∝r −3/4
away from the horizons, the characteristic radius emit-
ting atν em scales asr νem ∝(M ν em4)−1/3 rg as we vary
the binary mass at fixedfEdd. We, therefore, attribute
the1σvariability of our fiducial10 6M⊙ model to its
characteristic emission radius and map this to equiva-
lent values ofr νem /rg as we vary the binary mass and
period. In order to detect the associated flux variability,
we require it to exceed the threshold
∆Fνobs >
 
Fνsen /Fνobs + 0.05

Fνobs ,
withF νsen the survey flux sensitivity, and 5% the as-
sumed minimum detectable variation (Kelley et al.
2021).
We plot in Figure 7 our approximations for both the
single-epoch flux detectability limit (solid lines) and
the variability detection limit (dashed lines) for rel-
evant binary masses and periods at three redshifts.
We ignore limits from the associated survey lifetimes
(about ten years for LSST and two years for the Ro-
man HLTDS). The black cross indicates the binary cor-
responding to our simulations, and color-shaded regions
illustrate those binaries that are both bright and vari-
able enough to be detected at a given redshift. We con-
clude that, in our broad approximation, nearly all rel-
evant massive binaries in the local universe (z≲0.1)
interacting in non-accreting phases remain detectable in
upcoming time domain surveys, while only those with
total mass≳2×10 6M⊙ remain detectable atz≳1. At
larger binary masses, though, the hatched regions in-
dicate where the underlying assumptions of an ionized
disk dominated by thermal pressure break down because
the surrounding disk becomes either unstable under it’s
own self-gravity (light-grey, top) or dominated by radi-
ation pressure (dark-grey, bottom; Haiman et al. 2009,
2022).
We additionally, comment that at large redshift, opti-
cal filters begin to sample the UV turnover in the trun-
cated rest-frame SED, where∆F νobs can exceedF νobs.
In such cases, a binary may not be detectable as a
steady source, but may appear (or disappear) in differ-
ence imaging over a binary period. We plan to explore
the full nature of the periodic variability from our sim-
ulations in follow up work.
5.4.Ionizing fluxes and intermittent accretion episodes
A significant consequence of the truncated, non-
accreting phases considered here is the strong sup-
pression of the high energy continuum emission com-
pared to a standard single black holeα-disk. This
implies that binaries in non-accreting phases, even if
they remain detectable in optical/IR surveys, are in-
trinsically X-ray weak and inefficient at producing the
photo-ionizing radiation required to sustain broad- and

Big binary – cold disk13
narrow-emission line regions typically observed in AGN.
In this sense, binaries interacting with truncated CBDs
in a non-accreting phase may manifest as a form of weak
emission-line quasars (Fan et al. 1999; Diamond-Stanic
etal.2009;Plotkinetal.2010;Wuetal.2011;Meusinger
& Balafkan 2014). This is highlighted by the bottom
panel of Figure 5 where the SED turnover, in this ex-
ample, occurs near the Lyman limit. This turnover
would result in diminished hydrogen recombination line
strengthscomparedtostandard, single-BHAGN,aswell
as a near complete suppression of high-ionization lines.
Systems with larger masses or longer orbital periods
would also experience cutoffs at even lower frequencies
and exhibit further attenuated ionization features.
Moreover, intermittent feeding of the minidisks—as
indicated by the super-orbital-timescale oscillations be-
tween relative high- and low-accretion states in the high-
Ma timeseries of Figure 3—may also suggest that the
ionizing photon flux can vary meaningfully with time.
In particular, the hierarchy of relevant timescales may
provide a plausible route to changing-look–like behav-
ior in truncated binary accretion. Namely, in a rela-
tively high-accretion phase, the supply of material to
the minidisks occurs on comparatively short dynami-
cal times, while the persistence and decay of enhanced
ionizing fluxes from this feeding is regulated by the vis-
cous time in the minidisks (many binary orbits), and
the duty cycle of strong overfeeding may be modulated
on yet longer circumbinary timescales (e.g., by large-
scale non-axisymmetric structures or cavity precession).
We suggest that truncated binary accretion may offer
qualitative connections to both weak-line quasars and
changing-look AGN through its impact on the ionizing
continuum, but we defer a more quantitative analysis to
future work.
6.CONCLUSIONS
We have presented hydrodynamics simulations of cir-
cumbinary accretion onto equal-mass SMBHBs in clas-
sically thin, gas-pressure dominated disks while evolving
an energy equation that includes viscous and hydrody-
namic heating coupled with radiative blackbody cool-
ing. Our goal was to test whether the long-lived non-
accretion phases found in locally isothermal calculations
survive once the inner CBD is allowed to heat, cool, and
self-consistently adjust its scale height.
Our principal result is that non-accretion phases per-
sist for such thin disks when including a treatment
of the energy equation. Although mass pile-up and
stream–cavity interactions heat the CBD near cavity
apocenter, the gas that sources tidal streams originates
from comparatively cold material near cavity pericenter.
The streams therefore remain insufficiently pressure-
supported to resist tidal compactification by the bi-
nary potential, and accretion onto the binary remains
suppressed in the classically thin, high Mach number
limit. We find that the inclusion of an energy equa-
tion moderates the growth of the torque parameter with
increasing Mach number—relative to locally isothermal
solutions—but does not completely assuage the runaway
non-accretion problem. Thus, as the effective Edding-
ton fraction of our gas-pressure dominated disk model
approaches unity,−ℓ0 grows exponentially, accretion is
increasingly suppressed, and the time required for a bi-
nary to “turn on” can begin to exceed the binary’s life-
time.
We find, however, that despite their low accretion
rates, non-accreting systems are not necessarily electro-
magnetically dark. The truncated CBDs have a sup-
pressed bolometric luminosity and a strongly reduced
high-energy, photo-ionizing continuum compared to a
standard single-BHα-disk. For our10 6M⊙ binary with
a few-year orbital period, the heated inner edge of the
CBD can remain luminous at optical and near-infrared
frequencies at low-to-moderate redshifts. As the inner
CBD continues to relax and transmit a growing angular
momentum current, we expect these optical/NIR lumi-
nosities to increase, and the SED peak to shift gradually
blueward. In particular, we find that the non-accreting
solutions can be comparable to, or even brighter than,
equivalent single-BHα-disks in the LSST and the Ro-
manobservingbands, whilegenerallyretainingsufficient
variability for detection as periodic sources. We suggest
that non-accreting SMBHBs need not be absent from
optical/IR surveys, but may instead appear as period-
ically variable, relatively red systems with weak ioniz-
ing continua and an intrinsic lack of X-rays. This pro-
vides a possible connection to weak-line quasars as well
aspotentialchanging-lookphenomenafromintermittent
minidisk feeding.
We also introduce and validate an “adiabatic torque-
free” sink prescription that corrects spurious internal-
energy losses associated with torque-free mass removal
in previous energy-evolving simulations. This modifica-
tion yields stable single-BH disk solutions outside the
sink and reduces numerical artifacts that would other-
wisecontaminateminidiskthermodynamicsandinferred
emission in binary calculations.
Several limitations remain. We have considered verti-
cally averaged, un-magnetized, gas-pressure dominated
disks with simplified blackbody cooling and electron-
scattering opacity. Radiation pressure, MHD turbu-
lence, magnetic pressure support, three-dimensional
stream geometry, more realistic opacities, binary ec-
centricity, and unequal mass ratios may all modify

14Tiede, O’Neill & D’Orazio
the inner-disk thermodynamics and stream-capture effi-
ciency. Thesimulationsalsoprobeonlytheearlyviscous
evolution of the non-accreting state, so longer integra-
tions or reduced models will be required to follow the
full transition to steady accretion.
Together, these results motivate future work to under-
stand in more detail the extent to which truncated bi-
nary accretion and long lived non-accretion phases rep-
resent a meaningful mode of binary evolution as it per-
tains to electromagnetic searches for SMBHBs, the rates
and cosmological properties of gravitational wave driven
SMBHB mergers, and the future of multi-messenger as-
tronomy with super-massive black holes.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2023 research and innovation program under Marie
Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 101148364, and
by Sapere Aude Starting grant No. 121587 through the
Danish Independent Research Fund. It was additionally
supported by NSF AAG No. 2511544. CT acknowl-
edges many helpful conversations on binary accretion
at the workshopClimbing Cosmic Peaksthrough the
Sexten Center for Astrophysics Riccardo Giacconi. In
particular, we thank Zoltan Haiman and Massimo Dotti
for discussions on optical time-domain searches; Andrew
MacFadyen, Alessia Franchini, Magdalena Siwek, and
Mark Avara for conversations on binary accretion dy-
namics; Alessandra De Rosa for an insightful question
on ionizing emission; and Jessie Runnoe for slope-side
discussions on AGN broad-line regions. CT addition-
ally thanks Jonathan Zrake for helpful comments on this
manuscript. This work was conceived of, performed,
and written by humans: CT, DON, DJD. Computation
time was supported through the Tycho supercomputer
hosted at the SCIENCE HPC center at the University
of Copenhagen.
Software:Sailfish(Zrake & MacFadyen 2024),
numpy(Harris et al. 2020),scipy(Virtanen et al. 2020),
matplotlib(Hunter 2007),cmasher(van der Velden
2020)
APPENDIX
A.ADIABATIC TORQUE-FREE SINKS
The mass and momentum sink terms around each point massjin our simulations are given, respectively, as
SΣ,j =−sΩ bΣw j (A1)
Sv,j =−sΩ bΣv⋆
j wj (A2)
wheresis the dimensionless sink-rate andw j is a window function defining the strength of the sink as a function of
distance from the sink center. For torque-free sinks,v⋆
j = (v−v j)·ˆ rj +v j, withvthe gas velocity in the inertial
frame,v j the component velocity in the same frame, andˆ rj the radial unit-vector of the coordinate system centered on
binary componentj. In this way, the sinks only remove radial momentum in the frame of each component (Dempsey
et al. 2020; Dittmann & Ryan 2021). We take the window function for the single point mass tests to be
wj = (1−r j/rsink)2 (A3)
whenr j < r sink, and zero otherwise. We adjust this to the smootherwj = exp

−(rj/rsink)4
, applied to all cells in
the vicinity of the sink, for the binary simulations.
For the energy sink function,SE, the commonly employed
¯SE,j =−sΩ bΣ

ϵ+ 1
2 v⋆
j
2

wj (A4)
corresponds to spurious removals (or injections) of internal energy and leads to significant numerical artifacts out to
tens ofr s, demonstrated below. We instead employ an energy sink of the form
SE,j =−sΩ bΣ

ϵ+ 1
2 v⋆
j
2 − 1
2 v†
j
2

wj (A5)
wherev †
j =v−v ⋆
j. To illustrate the difference between the commonly employed term in Eq. (A4) and that implemented
in this work, Eq. (A5), consider a coordinate frame centered on a given binary component such that the local fluid

Big binary – cold disk15
100 101
r/rsink
10−1
100
Σ/Σa
r −3/5
acceleration-free
analytic
100 101
r/rsink
standard torque-free
100 101
r/rsink
adiabatic torque-free
s = 20 t−1
ν
s = 40 t−1
ν
Figure A1.Radial surface density profiles in units ofr sink for simulations around a single point mass for three different sink
implementations and two values of the sink rate each. Each point in the scatter plot represents a single cell, and vertical spread
in the points indicates non-axisymmetry in the solution. This can be additionally visualized in the density snapshots given in
the top right of each panel. The shaded region illustrates the unphysical region interior torsink.
velocity in cylindrical coordinates isu=u rˆr+uφ ˆφ. For sinks that remove mass at some characteristic timetsink =
(sΩb)−1 as
∂Σ
∂t =− Σ
tsink
(A6)
the torque-free condition for the removal of linear momentum is
∂p
∂t =u ∂Σ
∂t + Σ∂u
∂t =− Σ
tsink
u⋆ (A7)
whereu ⋆ ≡u r ˆrensures that the sink only removes radial momentum in its own frame. Therefore, application of the
torque-free condition generally corresponds to an increase in the sink-frame rotational velocity
∂u
∂t =− 1
tsink
(u⋆ −u) = uφ
tsink
ˆφ .(A8)
Assuming that the sink does not alter the specific internal energy of the fluid element, the change in energy is then,
necessarily,
∂E
∂t

ϵ
=ϵ ∂Σ
∂t + 1
2
∂Σ
∂t u2 + Σu· ∂u
∂t (A9)
=ϵ ∂Σ
∂t + 1
2
∂Σ
∂t u⋆2 − 1
2
∂Σ
∂t u2
φ .(A10)
The opposite sign of the final term illustrates how the energy change must include the increased rotational velocity
from the torque-free condition. Therefore, the application of the historically implemented
∂E
∂t →ϵ ∂Σ
∂t + 1
2
∂Σ
∂t u⋆2 ,(A11)
does not, in general, correspond with a preservation ofϵ, and rather leads to spontaneous cooling.
To demonstrate this, we perform a set of simulations following the description in Section 2.3 for three different
formulations ofS E. The first is for an “acceleration free” sink wherev⋆
j →v j in Eqs. (A2) & (A4). The second is the
“standard torque-free” sink given by Eq. (A4), and the third is the “adiabatic torque-free” sink in Eq. (A5). The surface
density for every cell from each of these tests is illustrated as a scatter plot in Figure A1 as a function of radius in
units ofrsink, and the inset shows 2D surface density maps of the solutions. The black dashed curve shows the analytic
power-law dependence. We see that the acceleration free sinks yield smooth axisymmetric solutions (characterized by

16Tiede, O’Neill & D’Orazio
the lack of spread in the scatter plot), but that these deviate from the analytic expectation out to∼10rs due to the
torque applied by the sink from the removal of angular momentum. The spread in the second panel illustrates how the
implicit changes to the gas specific internal energy imposed by Eq. (A4) drive propagating non-axisymmetric waves
into the solution out to≳20r s. In a binary accretion simulation, this would correspond to the entire circum-single
disk, or minidisk, around each binary component, potentially leaving significant imprints in the minidisk morphology,
the measured accretion rate and binary torque, and the implied electromagnetic emission. The final panel, shows our
implementation of Eq. (A5), which remains axisymmetric (with the exception of some small non-axisymmetry from
cat-eye–like features in the fast sink solutions) and accurate for all radii exterior to the sink.
B.TIME-EVOLVING DISK MODEL
We follow the general arguments of Rafikov (2013, 2016) and Tiede et al. (2025) (based more foundationally on
those of Lynden-Bell & Pringle 1974; Pringle 1991; Syer & Clarke 1995; Ivanov et al. 1999). The steady-state surface
density profile for a thin, Keplerian disk transporting mass at a rate˙Mthat has relaxed to angular momentum current
characterized byℓ0 has the radial profile
Σ(r, ℓ0) =
˙M
3πν(r) f(r, ℓ0), f(r, ℓ 0) = 1−ℓ 0
r a
r (A12)
whereais the characteristic scale of the solutions inner-edge where the torque boundary condition is applied. For
localized kinematic viscosity, the dissipation rate per unit area for a Keplerian flow is the usual
D(r) = 3GM ˙M
8πr3 f(r, ℓ0).(A13)
For standardα-disks, one can algebraically solve—as in Eqs. (2) & (3)—for the steady-state disk profiles. Assuming
a self-similar form forν, it would scale generally asν∝(f ˙M) mrn. We will assume thata M, andαremain constant,
but we will allow ˙Mto depend on time, provided it changes slowly compared totν. This yields surface density and
scale height profiles,
Σ(r, t;ℓ 0) = ¯Σ
h
f(r, ℓ0) ˙M(t)
i1−m
r−n (A14)
h(r, t;ℓ 0) = ¯h
h
f(r, ℓ0) ˙M(t)
im/2
r(2n+3)/4 ,(A15)
that vary in time only through˙M. ¯Σand ¯hare constants of proportionality set byα,a,M, and fundamental physical
constants. In our case, for a gas-pressure dominated equation of state and electron-scattering opacity,m= 2/5and
n= 3/5.
Consider now, a two zone accretion flow in which an inner-region has viscously adjusted to angular momentum
currentℓ 0 ˙M, while some outer region has yet to become aware of the inner binary torque. If the outer region initially
carries no net angular momentum current, it has surface density profile¯Σn(r) ˙M1−m
∞ , where we’ve absorbed the radial
dependence into ¯Σn(r)≡ ¯Σr −n. The radius where the two zones meet, the radius of influencerν(t), grows in time
as the binary torque is communicated outwards by viscous stresses. The time-dependence of the radius of influence is
defined implicitly astvisc(rν(t)) =t, wheret visc = 2r2/(3ν). By imposing the time-dependent boundary condition
Σ
 
rν(t), t;ℓ 0

= ¯Σn
 
rν(t)
 ˙M1−m
∞ (A16)
at the radius of influence, and assuming thatℓ0 is constant, Eq. (A14) yields the time evolution for the inner-region
accretion rate
˙M(t) =
˙M∞
f(r ν, ℓ0) =
˙M∞
1−ℓ 0(t/tν)−λ , λ= 1
4−2n .(A17)
Thus, for some radius in the inner-regionrin < r ν, so long as ˙M≪ ˙M∞, the dissipation rate increases proportional to
˙M(t)∼t λ, the scale height grows likeh(rin, t)∼t λm/2, and the effective temperature asTeff(rin)∼t λ/4.

Big binary – cold disk17
−10 0 10
x/a
−10
−5
0
5
10
y/a
Ma = 12
−10 0 10
x/a
Ma = 50
−10 0 10
x/a
Ma = 80
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Λ/Q∇
Figure A2.Ratios of the blackbody cooling rate with the rate of compressional heating. The cream-colored regions
have their energy losses dominated by radiative cooling, while any colored region has its temperature change regulated by
converging/diverging fluid orbits.
C.COOLING RATE COMPARISON
The general picture argued here and in Tiede et al. (2025) is that long-lived binary non-accretion phases occur when
accretion streams form from relatively cold gas. As a result, they lack sufficient transverse pressure support to resist
tidal filamentation and inefficiently deliver mass to individual binary components. We observed that when one allows
the accretion flow to thermally self-regulate, despite the presence of heated material at the far end of the circumbinary
cavity, streams continue to form from relatively cold gas. In our simulations, the two primary methods for cooling
this material orbiting at the cavity edge are radiative blackbody cooling and hydrodynamic expansion. To determine
which regulates the cold stream launching, we plot in Figure A2 the ratio of the blackbody cooling rateΛ(Eq. 1) with
the “compressional heating” rateQ∇ ≡ −P∇ ·v, which equates to cooling when negative. We plot the same snapshots
as in Figure 2 and see that the material that orbits (counter-clockwise) from cavity apocenter to pericenter has it’s
cooling dominated by expansion. We interpret this as the spreading of nested, eccentric fluid orbits in the inner disk.
We verify that the same features are present when comparing with the viscous heating rate, and so it also appears
that the hotspot at cavity apocenter may be due to the convergence of orbiting fluid elements in an “eccentric traffic
jam” (Ragusa et al. 2020). We plan to characterize in more detail the disk eccentricity profiles in future work.
REFERENCES
Armitage P. J., Natarajan P., 2002, ApJL, 567, L9
Artymowicz P., Lubow S. H., 1994, ApJ, 421, 651
Avara M. J., Krolik J. H., Campanelli M., Noble S. C.,
Bowen D., Ryu T., 2024, ApJ, 974, 242
Barnes J. E., Hernquist L., 1996, ApJ, 471, 115
Begelman M. C., Blandford R. D., Rees M. J., 1980,
Nature, 287, 307
Berlok T., Pfrommer C., 2019, MNRAS, 485, 908
Betancourt L., MacFadyen A., Zrake J., 2026, arXiv
e-prints, p. arXiv:2601.00741
Bogdanović T., Miller M. C., Blecha L., 2022, Living
Reviews in Relativity, 25, 3
Chandrasekhar S., 1961, Hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic
stability
Charisi M., Bartos I., Haiman Z., Price-Whelan A. M.,
Graham M. J., Bellm E. C., Laher R. R., Márka S., 2016,
MNRAS, 463, 2145
Chen Y.-C., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 499, 2245
Clyburn M., Zrake J., 2026, MNRAS,
Cocchiararo F., Franchini A., Lupi A., Sesana A., 2024,
A&A, 691, A250
Cocchiararo F., Franchini A., Lupi A., Sesana A., 2025,
arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2508.18349
Cuadra J., Armitage P. J., Alexander R. D., Begelman
M. C., 2009, MNRAS, 393, 1423
D’Orazio D. J., Charisi M., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2310.16896
D’Orazio D. J., Duffell P. C., 2021, ApJL, 914, L21
D’Orazio D. J., Haiman Z., MacFadyen A., 2013, MNRAS,
436, 2997

18Tiede, O’Neill & D’Orazio
D’Orazio D. J., Haiman Z., Duffell P., MacFadyen A.,
Farris B., 2016, MNRAS, 459, 2379
Dempsey A. M., Muñoz D., Lithwick Y., 2020, ApJL, 892,
L29
Diamond-Stanic A. M., et al., 2009, ApJ, 699, 782
Dittmann A. J., Ryan G., 2021, ApJ, 921, 71
Dittmann A. J., Ryan G., 2022, MNRAS, 513, 6158
Dittmann A. J., Ryan G., 2024, ApJ, 967, 12
Dittmann A. J., Ryan G., Combi L., 2025, arXiv e-prints,
p. arXiv:2512.11954
Duffell P. C., D’Orazio D., Derdzinski A., Haiman Z.,
MacFadyen A., Rosen A. L., Zrake J., 2020, ApJ, 901, 25
Duffell P. C., et al., 2024, ApJ, 970, 156
Ennoggi L., et al., 2025, PhRvD, 112, 063009
Fan X., et al., 1999, ApJL, 526, L57
Farris B. D., Duffell P., MacFadyen A. I., Haiman Z., 2015,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society:
Letters, 447, L80
Franchini A., Lupi A., Sesana A., 2022, ApJL, 929, L13
Gaskell C. M., 1985, Nature, 315, 386
Graham M. J., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 453, 1562
Grcić M., D’Orazio D. J., Pessah M. E., 2026, ApJ, 998, 4
Haiman Z., Kocsis B., Menou K., 2009, ApJ, 700, 1952
Haiman Z., Kocsis B., Menou K., 2022, ApJ, 937, 129
Harris C. R., et al., 2020, Nature, 585, 357
Heath R. M., Nixon C. J., 2020, A&A, 641, A64
Hopkins P. F., et al., 2024, The Open Journal of
Astrophysics, 7, 19
Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering,
9, 90
Ivanov P. B., Papaloizou J. C. B., Polnarev A. G., 1999,
MNRAS, 307, 79
Kelley L. Z., D’Orazio D. J., Di Stefano R., 2021, MNRAS,
508, 2524
Kocsis B., Haiman Z., Loeb A., 2012a, MNRAS, 427, 2660
Kocsis B., Haiman Z., Loeb A., 2012b, MNRAS, 427, 2680
Komossa S., 2006, Mem. Soc. Astron. Italiana, 77, 733
Krauth L. M., Davelaar J., Haiman Z.,
Westernacher-Schneider J. R., Zrake J., MacFadyen A.,
2023, MNRAS, 526, 5441
LSST Science Collaboration et al., 2009, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:0912.0201
Liu T., et al., 2019, ApJ, 884, 36
Lynden-Bell D., Pringle J. E., 1974, MNRAS, 168, 603
MacFadyen A. I., Milosavljević M., 2008, ApJ, 672, 83
Meusinger H., Balafkan N., 2014, A&A, 568, A114
Miranda R., Muñoz D. J., Lai D., 2017, MNRAS, 466, 1170
Most E. R., Wang H.-Y., 2024, ApJL, 973, L19
Muñoz D. J., Lithwick Y., 2020, ApJ, 905, 106
Muñoz D. J., Miranda R., Lai D., 2019, ApJ, 871, 84
Narayan R., Yi I., 1994, ApJL, 428, L13
Noble S. C., Mundim B. C., Nakano H., Krolik J. H.,
Campanelli M., Zlochower Y., Yunes N., 2012, ApJ, 755,
51
Noble S. C., Krolik J. H., Campanelli M., Zlochower Y.,
Mundim B. C., Nakano H., Zilhão M., 2021, ApJ, 922,
175
O’Neill D., Tiede C., D’Orazio D. J., Haiman Z.,
MacFadyen A., 2025, ApJ, 993, 206
Penzlin A. B. T., Kley W., Audiffren H., Schäfer C. M.,
2022, A&A, 660, A101
Peters P. C., 1964, Physical Review, 136, B1224
Plotkin R. M., et al., 2010, AJ, 139, 390
Pringle J. E., 1991, MNRAS, 248, 754
Rafikov R. R., 2013, ApJ, 774, 144
Rafikov R. R., 2016, ApJ, 827, 111
Ragusa E., Lodato G., Price D. J., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 1243
Ragusa E., Alexander R., Calcino J., Hirsh K., Price D. J.,
2020, MNRAS, 499, 3362
Ryan G., MacFadyen A., 2017, ApJ, 835, 199
Rybicki G. B., Lightman A. P., 1986, Radiative Processes
in Astrophysics
Shakura N. I., Sunyaev R. A., 1973, A&A, 24, 337
Shi J.-M., Krolik J. H., 2015, ApJ, 807, 131
Shi J.-M., Krolik J. H., Lubow S. H., Hawley J. F., 2012,
ApJ, 749, 118
Siwek M., Weinberger R., Hernquist L., 2023, MNRAS,
Spergel D., et al., 2015, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1503.03757
Syer D., Clarke C. J., 1995, MNRAS, 277, 758
Tiede C., D’Orazio D. J., 2025, ApJ, 995, 68
Tiede C., Zrake J., MacFadyen A., Haiman Z., 2020, ApJ,
900, 43
Tiede C., Zrake J., MacFadyen A., Haiman Z., 2022, ApJ,
932, 24
Tiede C., Zrake J., MacFadyen A., Haiman Z., 2025, ApJ,
984, 144
Tiwari V., Chan C.-H., Bogdanović T., Jiang Y.-F., Davis
S. W., Ferrel S., 2025, ApJ, 986, 158
Valli R., et al., 2024, A&A, 688, A128
Virtanen P., et al., 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261
Volonteri M., Haardt F., Madau P., 2003, ApJ, 582, 559
Wang H.-Y., Bai X.-N., Lai D., 2023, ApJ, 943, 175
Wang H.-Y., Most E. R., Hopkins P. F., 2025, arXiv
e-prints, p. arXiv:2508.16855
Westernacher-Schneider J. R., Zrake J., MacFadyen A.,
Haiman Z., 2022, PhRvD, 106, 103010
Westernacher-Schneider J. R., Zrake J., MacFadyen A.,
Haiman Z., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2307.01154
Wu J., et al., 2011, ApJ, 736, 28

Big binary – cold disk19
Zrake J., MacFadyen A., 2024, Sailfish: GPU-accelerated
grid-based astrophysics gas dynamics code, Astrophysics
Source Code Library, record ascl:2408.004
Zrake J., Tiede C., MacFadyen A., Haiman Z., 2021, The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 909, L13
Zrake J., Clyburn M., Feyan S., 2025, MNRAS,
d’Ascoli S., Noble S. C., Bowen D. B., Campanelli M.,
Krolik J. H., Mewes V., 2018, ApJ, 865, 140
van der Velden E., 2020, Journal of Open Source Software,
5, 2004