Title: The Heuristic Approach to General Relativity in the Laplace-Beltrami Formalism
Authors: Noah M. MacKay
Published: 2026-05-31
Categories: gr-qc, astro-ph.HE, math-ph

The Heuristic Approach to General Relativity in
the Laplace-Beltrami Formalism
Noah M. MacKay
ORCID ID: 0000-0001-6625-2321
Institut f¨ ur Physik und Astronomie, Universit¨ at Potsdam,
Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24/25, 14476 Potsdam, Germany
E-mail:noah.mackay@uni-potsdam.de
2 June 2026
Abstract.The Laplace-Beltrami formalism, in which the Ricci tensor in the Einstein
field equations (EFEs) is formulated at leading-order in terms of the partial-differential
Laplace-Beltrami operator, was previously applied to coalescing compact binaries
(CCBs) generating gravitational waves (GWs). Supposing that the CCB is an effective
singular body – a hollow mass-shell – that follows a Kerr metric Ansatz, the EFEs
were approached variationally such that the Ansatz geometric signature dictates the
energetic output viaG µν = 8πGT µν. For the CCB mass-shell representation, the
generated GW energy is treated as radiated surface energy viaE:=T 00V. This
surface energy yielded a close approximation to the cataloged GW coalescence energy,
as previously shown in past comparisons. Given this success, it is logical to ask whether
the Laplace-Beltrami formalism can be applied to other general relativistic systems,
whether “simple” or “perturbative”, beyond CCBs.
This heuristic work focuses broadly on the EFEs themselves under the Laplace-
Beltrami formalism, considering all differential orders up to second-order. This namely
includes a deeper analysis on the variational methodology employed on the EFEs in
the second-order sector, utilized in previous works, and the benchmark analysis of
the lower first- and zeroth-order terms. This all-order report utilizes representative
examples and select metric Ans¨ atze to explore the formalism’s practicality and its
limitations; this is shown that the first-order decomposition showcases heuristically
the mechanics of vector and scalar fields upon a curved spacetime.
Keywords: General relativity, Laplace-Beltrami formalism
Submitted to:Class. Quantum Grav.
arXiv:2606.01129v1  [gr-qc]  31 May 2026

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR2
1. Introduction
In November 1915, Albert Einstein derived his field equations to general relativity, which
double as the field equations to gravitation [1]. While the motivation was to, namely,
generalize his 1905 special relativity theory to account for forms of acceleration, general
relativity was able to explain much of the discrepancies in astronomy at the time –
those which Newtonian gravity had either failed to reconcile or considered impossible,
perhaps nonsensical. These include the precession in Mercury’s perihelion [2], and the
bending of starlight by intermediating gravitational signatures (e.g. the Sun’s) between
the source and the observer. The latter notion was strengthened by Arthur Eddington’s
1919 solar eclipse images [3]. These solutions required the novel-at-the-time picture
of gravitation as the inherent curvature in spacetime sourced by resting astronomical
bodies. The instantaneous strength of gravity of a local body, as measured by outside
observers, is therefore gauged by the instantaneous deepness of the spacetime potential
well that body generates.
The Einstein field equations (EFEs) describe the gravitational interaction as the
spacetime curvature caused by energy-momentum sources, and they read as follows
(usingc= 1):
Rµν − 1
2 Rgµν + Λgµν =:G µν + Λgµν = 8πGTµν.(1)
The left-hand side encodes the warped geometric response sourced by the energy-
momentum sourceT µν, in the shorthand known as the Einstein tensorGµν. The Einstein
tensor is linearly constructed from the metricg µν and Ricci curvatureR µν tensors,
and the Ricci trace scalarR=g µνRµν, whereg µν is the inverse metric tensor. For
completeness, the Einstein tensor is accompanied by the additive cosmological term
Λgµν, which was originally introduced by Einstein to permit a static universe. While
the static universe notion was disproven by Edwin Hubble’s discovery of an expanding
universe [4, 5], Λ remains a central component of modern cosmology, in particular within
the standard ΛCDM model despite discrepancies such as the Hubble Tension. However,
more local systems often neglect this contribution; in this work we neglect Λg µν.
Systematically, the EFEs are a collection of coupled, nonlinear equations. The
geometry embedded inG µν depends on (besides the metric and Ricci tensors) relevant
Christoffel symbols Γ α
µν, and one computesG µν generally by directly following the
standard hierarchy in the EFEs (i.e. meticulously following the chaing µν →g µν →
Γα
µν →R µν →R→G µν). Known solutions to the EFEs, e.g. Schwarzschild [6, 7],
Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff (TOV) [8, 9], and Kerr [10, 11, 12], were obtained via
this meticulous chain by first assigning a well-defined energy-momentum source for
Tµν: either vacuumT µν = 0 [6, 7, 10, 11] or perfect fluidT µν = (ϵ+p)u µuν +pg µν
[8, 9]. Other solutions to the EFEs include Kerr-Newman for a rotating, charged
mass [13, 14], Vaidya for a stationary mass either emitting or absorbing dusts [15, 16],
and Friedmann-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) for a homonegeous and isotropic
universe described as a perfect fluid [17, 18, 19, 20].

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR3
The exact treatment of general relativity works best for “simple” astrophysical
systems, mainly pertaining isolated, static / rotating bodies. These include e.g. black
holes (BHs) [6, 7, 10, 11], with more detailed analyses since 1916 having involved precise
techniques such as differential topology [21] and modern contemporary approaches (e.g.
black branes and fuzzballs in string theory), and neutron stars (NSs) [8, 9], with added
rotations described by the Hartle-Thorne metric [22, 23] and tidal distortions caused
by Regge-Wheeler gauged metric perturbations [24, 25]. However, more generally,
an exact analyical treatment of the EFEs (i.e. following the streamlined hierarchy)
becomes intractable for more complicated, “perturbative” astrophysical systems. This
has motivated several complementary approaches, such as the 3+1 decomposition in
numerical relativity via the Arnowitt-Deser-Misner (ADM) formalism [26] and heuristic
analysis of spacelike singularities through the Belinksi-Khalatnikov-Lifshitz (BKL)
conjecture [27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32].
One example of such a perturbative system described by the EFEs is (rather
famously) two-body, quadrupolar gravitational wave (GW) sources, which in nature
are well understood to be coalescing compact binaries (CCBs). This coalescence
complicates the otherwise simple, circular GW-forms to incorporate dynamic post-
Newtonian (PN) [33] and perturbative post-Minkowskian (PM) [34] corrections. Past
the PN regime, CCBs undergo the inspiral-merger-ringdown (IMR) process, where
the waveform intensifies with a dynamic frequency and amplitude enhancement, until
reaching the maximum peak at the coalescence timet C. Past coalescence, ignoring tidal
deformations, the waveform dampens and stiffens into a zero flat-line.
A very successful, state-of-the-art procedure to describe CCBs (semi-)analytically is
the effective one-body (EOB) model [35], namely mapping CCBs onto an effective one-
body problem and essentially depicting inspiral with a “marble in a funnel” picture.
The associating energetics is described by the EOB Hamiltonian [35, 36, 37], which
is extractible conventionally from the EFEs. However, the EOB picture particularily
relies on calibration with numerical relativity and input source parameters deduced
by Bayesian analysis of detected signals. Despite the accuracy generated by the
EOB Hamiltonian and the framework’s integration into GW analysis, computing the
Hamiltonian’s energy eigenvalue and the respective waveform families is computationally
(and temporally) expensive due to the inherent complexities of CCBs.
Returning to the subject of geometric analyses, the independent analysis by Chow
and Knopf [38] (i.e., their lemma 3.32) suggests that, in appropriate coordinate settings,
the Ricci tensor may be expressed schematically as the partial-differential Laplace-
Beltrami operator acting on the metric, supplemented by lower-order terms:
Rµν ≃ − 1
2∆LBgµν + (lower order terms).(2)
The operator ∆LB is the Laplace-Beltrami operator, and when the metric is well-defined
and has a non-zero determinant, it can be written in a coordinate expression (i.e. in

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR4
the Christoffel symbol-free form) as:
∆LB = 1√−g ∂α
 √−gg αβ∂β

,(3)
where √−g=
p
−det(gµν). This observation has motivated a Laplace-Beltrami-based
reformulation of the EFEs, where the Ricci tensor is expressed at face-value by this
operator. This notion was explored in the context of CCBs in Ref. [39] and expanded
upon in Ref. [40]. In this context, the geometric content of the theory is recast in terms
of differential operators acting directly on the metric components. Thus, one adopts a
methodology analogous to the quantum-mechanical variational method to approach the
EFEs:
(i) A physically sensible metric Ansatzg µν (a known solution to the EFEs) under
a relevant choice of coordinates are inserted into the Laplace-Beltrami operator,
uniquely defining it.
(ii) Each component of the same metric Ansatz is fed into the uniquely-defined operator,
extracting leading-order geometric contributions that define the corresponding
(effective) Ricci tensor component. In this manner, the number of non-zero
components in the effectiveR µν is at most the number of components in the metric
Ansatz tensor.
(iii) These can then be interpreted as the corresponding (effective) energy-momentum
content, constructingT µν component-wise. One must be aware that such
identifications are effective descriptions and approximations, rather than as exact
tensorial relations.
However, the new hierarchal chain of the EFEs in this formalism is slightly more
streamlined,g µν →g µν →R µν →R→G µν →T µν. This completely bypasses the
Christofel symbols, such that the inherent first-differential order behavior of Γ α
µν is
readily nestled inside the Laplace-Beltrami operator.
For e.g. CCBs approached in [39, 40], the effective one body picture was
reinterpreted from the “marble in the funnel” perspective to a compact-body mass-
shell: a Kerr-like body with a constant reduced mass measure, a shrinking diameter and
increasing rotational velocity across coalescence. Coalescence ends at the “innermost”
shell radius ofρ= 2GM, and the shell’s surface energy eigenvalue encoded asT 00 can
approximate the energy released as GWs. Given the mass-shell model qualitatively
mimics a Kerr-like object, it follows the Kerr metric Ansatz. Following the new
hierarchal chain through the Laplace-Beltrami formulation of the Ricci tensor, one yields
c.f. [39, 40] the coalescence energy eigenvalue of
E(tC)≃0.826νµ
 
1−5.276β 2
C

,(4)
whereν:=µ/Mis the reduced mass ratio andβ C is the speed ratio depending on the
normalized rotation speed of the CCB at coalescence (i.e., at the moment of merger).
This energy eigenvalue shows thatE∝νµ, and the above formula for coalescence energy
has so far agreed well with the energy radiated from noteworthy GW events cataloged in

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR5
Refs. [41, 42, 43, 44, 45]. It is the success of this formalism for CCBs and the alignment
between model predictions and observation that has motivated this current study.
Provided the moderate success of the Laplace-Beltrami formalism when applied to
this CCB mass-shell model, a natural question is whether this formalism can be applied
to other general relativistic systems. After the introduction of the formalism in Section
2, we look broadly at the EFEs themselves, while applying Ansatz metrics with hopes
to recover conventional insight as well as offer new information. After the analysis, we
make concluding statements in Section 6 with a scope of the possible directions to take
this formalism.
2. The Laplace-Beltrami Formalism
In perturbative quantum mechanics, the variational method estimates the energy
eigenvalue of an impossible, perturbative Hamiltonian by assuming an Ansatz
wavefunction, computing the expectation value of the Hamiltonian, and minimizing it to
approximate the energy at the ground state. For complicated general relativistic systems
whereby their energetics are inherently perturbative, we adopt a similar philosophy.
We begin with a well-defined metric, under a choice of coordinates, with a non-zero
determinant as our Ansatz, and apply differential operations that are inherent in the
Christoffel symbols and the Ricci tensor. Using the EFEs, we construct the associated
energy-momentum tensorT µν component-wise, such as the energy densityT 00 that
embeds the energy eigenvalueE=T 00V.
Schematically, the Ricci tensor obeysR∼∂Γ + ΓΓ and the Christoffel symbols
satisfy Γ∼g −1∂g. Thus, we claim that the Ricci tensor behaves qualitatively like a
Laplacian operator acting on the metric tensor:R∼ ∇(g −1∂g)∼ ∇ 2g, where∇ ∼∂+Γ
is the covariant derivative. This interpretation is consistent with lemma 3.32 from Chow
and Knopf [38], which expresses the Ricci tensor as a covariant Laplacian, followed by
lower-order terms defined here:
Rµν ≃ − 1
2∆LBgµν + 1
2 ∇(µVν) +A µν,(5)
The operator ∆LB is defined as Eq. (3), whose form is distinctly coordinate-compatible.
Specific expressions for the operator are therefore dependent on the choice of coordinates
in the metric Ansatz.
The lower-order terms include respectively a first-order covariant derivative of a
rank-1 vectorV ν (where∇ (µVν) =∇ µVν +∇ νVµ is a symmetric combination) and a
zeroth-order auxiliary rank-2 tensorA µν. It should be noted that Appendix A in Ref.
[39] introduces the first-order term without the 1/2 scaling. In this work, this scaling
is introduced, as it would prove essential in the respective first-order analysis and to
correct any unnecessary overcounting. In the Christoffel symbol-free form motivated by
∆LB, the covariant gradient of a rank-ntrial tensorf a1...an
b1...bn can be defined as
∇µf a1...an
b1...bn = 1√−g ∂ν √−ggµνf b1...bn
a1...an

.(6)

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR6
Note that the metric tensor is introduced in the parentheses above, which comes at
the cost of swapped indices for the trial tensorf a1...an
b1...bn . This revision enforces the
convention of metric compatibility, shouldf b1...bn
a1...an =g µν (i.e.,f a1...an
b1...bn =g µν), whereby
∇µgµν =∇ µgµν = 0. This is given byg µνgµν ∈N(i.e., 4 for a 3 + 1 spacetime) and
gµαgµβ =δ β
α , whereby the coordinate-based derivative of an integer is zero. This is
independent on the choice of coordinates.
One should note that, while∇ µgµν = 0 is enforced for first-order covariant
gradients, the second-order Laplacian is purely coordinate-dependent and nontrivial
for individual metric tensor components. Even for metric Ans¨ atze whereR µν =
0 conventionally, the second-order Laplace-Beltrami formalism allows for non-zero,
effective values inR µν, provided the components ofg µν are distinctly coordinate
dependent. This is particularly useful for approximating our desired quantites for a
complicated system, constructing its effective energy-momentum tensor component-
wise.
The corresponding Ricci scalar in the Laplace-Beltrami formalism is
R=− 1
2 gµν∆LBgµν +∇ µVµ +A,(7)
implyingg µν∇µ =∇ ν andg µνAµν =A. This form, being a scalar, is manifestly
coordinate-independent, which enables us the freedom to choose a particular metric
Ansatz and choice of coordinates that best fits our particular scenario. By implementing
Eqs. (5) and (7) into the Einstein tensor and neglecting Λg µν, we arrive at a natural
decomposition ofG µν in the Laplace-Beltrami formalism:
2nd−Order :G (2)
µν =− 1
2∆LBgµν + 1
4
 
gµν∆LBgµν

gµν,(8a)
1st−Order :G (1)
µν = 1
2 ∇(µVν) − 1
2 (∇µVµ)g µν,(8b)
0th−Order :G (0)
µν =A µν − 1
2 Agµν,(8c)
Gµν = 8πGTµν ⇒
2X
i=0
G(i)
µν = 8πG
2X
i=0
T (i)
µν .(8d)
2.1. Bianchi Identity Sanity Check
A natural verification of the formalism is upholding the Bianchi identities and the
concurrent energy-momentum conservation. GivenG µν ∝T µν via Eq. (1) as well
as Eq. (8d), standard general relativity enforces the vanishing covariant derivative on
both sides of the EFEs. Through∇ µGµν = 0, one has the reduced Bianchi identity of
the form
∇µRµν = 1
2 ∇νR,(9)
with∇ µgµν = 0 readily implied. To verify that the reduced Bianchi identity remains
satisfied within this Laplace-Beltrami formalism, we must briefly address the leading
second-order part of the decomposition. It should be noted that the Laplace-Beltrami

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR7
operator acts explicitly on our choice of Ansatz metric component-wise in a coordinate-
dependent form, provided as Eq. (3), which can therefore provide nontrivial results. In
this sanity check, the Laplacian operator is treated in its coordinate-independent form
∆LB :=∇ α∇α to verify general covariance and metric compatibility. By this caveat,
the leading second-order term naturally vanishes. Therefore, only the lower-order terms
remain; equating both sides of the Bianchi identity therefore gives the following:
1
2 ∇µ∇(µVν) +∇ µAµν = 1
2 (∇ν∇µVµ +∇ νA) (10)
⇒ ∇ µ∇(µVν) =∇ ν∇µVµ and∇ µAµν = 1
2 ∇νA.
One can see readily that the Bianchi identity is satisfied for the zeroth-order
auxiliary tensorA µν. For the first-order term, one can utilize the symmetric combination
to yield an emergent Laplace-Beltrami operator acting on the 4-vector:
∇µ∇µVν := ∆LBVν =∇ ν∇µVµ − ∇µ∇νVµ.(11)
The right-hand side can be expressed as a commutator of covariant derivatives acting
onV µ:
∇ν∇µVµ − ∇µ∇νVµ =g µρ[∇ν,∇ ρ]Vµ =g µρRσµνρ V σ,(12)
where the rightmost expression follows from the definition of the Riemann tensor. As
gµρRσµνρ defines the Ricci tensorR σν, the first-order Bianchi identity in the Laplace-
Beltrami formalism gives a curvature-coupled, inhomogeneous wave-like equation for
the 4-vector:
∆LBVν =R σν V σ.(13)
The derivation of Eq. (13) is truly a unique recovery, as it shows a background-
dependent wave equation of a rank-1 vector being the product of the curvature coupling
to that same vector – equivalent to an eigenvalue expression. IfV ν were regarded as an
independent dynamical quantity, this relation would describe the propagation of a spin-
1 field on a curved manifold, or alternatively a natural geometric origin for an emergent
rank-1 field associated with curvature. In any case, Eq. (13) is an equation that holds
for anyone’s choice of metric Ansatz and coordinate system. As a trade-off, one’s choice
of metric Ansatz and coordinates ultimately influences the structure of the equation.
E.g., for a vector field in flat vacuum, wherebyg σν =η σν andR σν = 0 (even in
the Laplace-Beltrami formalism), we recover the standard d’Alembertian wave equation
with no source:
□Vν = 0.(14)
This vector wave equation is the conventional equation for massless, spin-1 fields,
e.g. the photon field in quantum electrodynamics and the gluon field in quantum
chromodynamics. Therefore, this vector in the flat vacuum must obey the Lorentz
gauge∂ µV µ =∂ µVµ = 0, imposing two degrees of freedom that are transverse to the
axis of propagation.

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR8
Given this massless form, mass emerges otherwise on the right-hand side of Eq. (14).
As it is seen in Eq. (13), the respective right-hand side is the same vector field coupled to
the Ricci curvature tensor. Therefore, in this first-order Laplace-Beltrami formalism, the
emergence of mass is associated with the presence of a non-zero Ricci contribution. This
upholds the conventional understanding of Ricci curvature signatures being sourced by
localized mass. This Ricci contribution is either conventionally obtained via the EFEs or
effectively computed in the second-order Laplace-Beltrami formalism. One must note
that, if opting for the effective Laplace-Beltrami computation ofR µν ∝∆ LBgµν, the
associating Laplace-Beltrami operator must be consistent with the one applied on the
vector field.
On the other hand, to address Eq. (13) upon a curved vacuum, where the Laplace-
Beltrami operator depends on our choice of metric Ansatz, our approach to treatR σν
on the right-hand side rests in either: (i)R σν = 0 in following convention of (curved)
vacuum spacetimes, (ii) specifically introduce components ofR σν ∝∆ LBgσν via the
2nd-order equation to solve forV ν component-wise, or (iii) effectively describingR σν in
terms of the Weyl curvatureC σµνρ that energy directly warps. In any case, the curved-
background wave equation reads as an eigenvalue equation, depending on the avenue
we choose among (i)–(iii).
3. Second-Order Laplace-Beltrami
One observes from Eq. (8a) thatG µν ∝g µν (dropping the Latin index for the order),
with the Laplace-Beltrami operator and Ricci scalar specifically defined given our choice
of Ansatz metric. E.g., when finding the energy eigenvalue of our given system,G00 ∝g 00
for any choice of metric Ansatz, whereby we determineT 00 =G 00/(8πG) as well as
E=T 00V. For instance, given a CCB viewed from a luminosity distanceD≫L, if
we assume it to be a spinning, compact object, our choice of Ansatz metric is the Kerr
metric [10, 11, 12] in Boyer-Lindquist coordinates. This was done in Refs. [39, 40]
to derive the surface energy of this Kerr-like CCB as the approximated emitted GW
energy, in Ref. [40] to specifically derive Eq. (4). In this work, we repeat the methods
previously used, but we impose various scenarios and new metric Ans¨ atze as a proof of
concept. This is to test both the useful applications of the formalism and the limitations
where the formalism may not be sensible to use.
3.1. On One’s Choice of Coordinates
Given the coordinate-dependence in the Laplace-Beltrami operator via Eq. (3), the
definitions of both the Ricci tensor in this formalismR µν ∝∆ LBgµν and the Ricci scalar
heuristically constructed asR∝g µν(∆LBgµν) are ultimately dependent on the choice
of coordinates. The choice of coordinates, for many cases, comes hand-in-hand with
the underlying choice of metric Ansatz. E.g., the Schwarzschild and TOV metrics are
written under spherical coordinates, describing a spherical body, and e.g. the Minkowski

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR9
and flat FLRW metrics are written under Cartesian coordinates. It is important to note
the impact of coordinate systems in this Lapalce-Beltrami formalism, as certain choice of
coordinates would lead to unphysical divergences, such as those previously encountered
in Refs. [39, 40] under Boyer-Lindquist coordinates (based on spherical coordinates).
Provided e.g. a general yet diagonal Cartesian- and spherical-coordinated metric:
Cartesian :ds 2
Cart. =g 00dt2 +g 11dx2 +g 22dy2 +g 33dz2,(15a)
Spherical :ds 2
Sph. =g 00dt2 +g 11dr2 +g 22dθ2 +g 33dϕ2,(15b)
the Laplace-Beltrami operator ∆ LB is expanded as follows:
∆LB = 1√−g

∂x0
√−gg00∂x0

+∂ x1
√−gg11∂x1

(16)
+∂ x2
√−gg22∂x2

+∂ x3
√−gg33∂x3

.
Here, (x 0, x1, x2, x3) is the coordinate system used in the metric, i.e. (t, x, y, z) for
Cartesian or (t, r, θ, ϕ) for spherical, and √−g=
p
−det(gµν) is metric-specific and
typically coordinate-dependent. The Ricci tensorR µν in the Lapalce-Beltrami formalism
is constructed component-wise, by feeding the coordinate-dependent metric components
gii, i= 0,1,2,3 into the operator and evaluating the relevant coordinate derivatives.
The Ricci scalarR=g µνRµν is simply the trace:
R∝
3X
i=0
gii
√−g

∂x0
√−gg00∂x0

+∂ x1
√−gg11∂x1

(17)
+∂ x2
√−gg22∂x2

+∂ x3
√−gg33∂x3

gii.
We see readily for e.g. the Minkowski metric:ds 2 =−dt 2 +dx 2 +dy 2 +dz 2, that
g00 =−1 andg jj = 1 (j= 1,2,3) obtain: (i) the d’Alembert wave operator from the
Laplace-Beltrami operator, and (ii)R µν = 0 provided integer metric components. A
trival Ricci tensor due to a flat metric, even in this formalism, remains true to the
nature of flat spacetimes.
However, we turn our attention to spherically-coordinated metrics. Asg 33 ∝sin 2 θ
typically under spherical coordinates, this leads tog 33 ∝csc 2 θthat is present in the
g33R33 contribution in the trace. In the Laplace-Beltrami formalism, i.e. as found in Ref.
[39], this contribution is divergent along the polesθ= 0, π, leading to the entire scalar
value ofRto be divergent. One may be tempted to designate a value ofθto be e.g.
π/2 to maintain convergence. However, this designation is only relevant for test-particle
dynamics under the influence of the spherical source (e.g. orbital mechanics near a
Schwarzschild body). Here, in this context of describing the spherical source itself, we
have to consider full-angular integration, and such evaluations must be finite. One might
also be tempted to omit the divergent term altogether, to “sweep it under the rug,” but
this is physically nonsensical. Thus, as demonstrated in Refs. [39, 40], one would turn to
using effective Ricci scalars as a means of analytical completeness. Options for effective
Ricci scalars include e.g. the conventional Ricci scalar of the metric, and a curvature

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR10
surrogate in terms of the Kretschmann scalarK=R µναβ Rµναβ (as pursued in [39, 40]).
The need of a surrogate scalar, so far, is only presistent for spherical-coordinated metric
Ans¨ atze.
I remind, even for metric Ans¨ atze whereRµν = 0 conventionally, the second-order
Laplace-Beltrami formalism allows for non-zero, effective values inR µν, provided the
components ofg µν are distinctly coordinate dependent. This is particularly useful for
approximating our desired quantites for our system of interest, constructing its effective
energy-momentum tensor component-wise.
3.2. Example I: The Schwarzschild Metric Ansatz
Consider a resting, compact object with massmthat qualitatively obeys the
Schwarzschild metric [6, 7] in ingoing Eddington-Finkelstein (EF) coordinates [46, 47]
– to avoid coordinate singularities –, written here as
ds2 =−f(r)dv 2 + 2dvdr+r 2dΩ2.(18)
Here,dΩ 2 =dθ 2 + sin2 θdϕis the solid angular element,dv=dt+dr ∗ =dt+dr/f(r)
is an ingoing horizon coordinate that removes the coordinate singularity atr= 2Gm,
andf(r) = (1−2Gm/r) is a Schwarzschild potential function.
It might seem counter-intuitive to analyze BHs, or more broadly Schwarzschild
bodies, in the Laplace-Beltrami formalism. However, we want to verify in this framework
that, generally, the energy eigenvalue of a resting object follows the mass-energy relation
E=mat its surface. This is, logically, no different for a BH; provided the introductory
works on Hawking radiation [48, 49], the BH’s mass-energy relation at the horizon scale
r= 2Gmis related with heat flow, enabling one to derive the formulae for BH entropy
S∝A BH/4 and temperatureT∝1/m.
One can find the determinant of the Schwarzschild metric in EF coordinates to
be det(g µν) =−r 4 sin2 θ(exactly equal to the metric determinant under spherical
coordinates), and the Ricci scalar under this metric isR= 0. As expected, the
Schwarzschild metric is a vacuum solution for static BHs, from whichR µν = 0
conventionally. However, we define via Eq. (5) nontrivial effective values inR µν,
particularly in theR 00 component viag 00. Conveniently, all metric elements depend
only onrandθ, however the choice of coordinates slighly complicates the Schwarzschild-
metric Laplace-Beltrami operator:
∆LB
Schw.EF = 1√−g
h
−∂ v
√−g 1
f(r) ∂v

+∂ v
 √−g∂r

+∂ r(√−g∂v) (19)
+ 1
r2 ∂θ(√−g∂θ)
i
,
where √−g=r 2 sinθ. Recalling thatdv=dt+dr/f(r), we define∂ v =∂ t +f(r)∂ r, and
given the relevant metric entries do not depend ont, we write effectively∂ v →f(r)∂ r:
⇒∆ LB
Schw.EF = 1
r2 sinθ

sinθ∂ r(r2f(r)∂ r) +∂ θ(sinθ∂ θ)

.(20)

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR11
Using Eq. (5) with Eq. (20), one can straightforwardly computeR 00 to be non-zero:
R00 = 2G2m2
r4 .(21)
In approaching the Ricci scalarR, we are presented the three choices first proposed
in Ref. [39] and mentioned earlier in this work: (i) setR= 0 in accordance to our
vacuum metric Ansatz, (ii) heuristically constructRusing a Laplace-Beltrami trace over
the metric:R∝g µν∆LBgµν, or (iii) define an effective Ricci scalar by leveraging the
optimal curvature content of the nonvanishing Kretschmann scalar:K=R αβµν Rαβµν
[50]. If we adoptR= 0, following convention of the Schwarzschild metric as our used
metric Ansatz, then the energy density contributionT 00 ∝G 00 depends entirely on the
Ricci tensor componentR 00. Suppose we do this, given Eq. (21) is a simple term, we
have
T00 = 1
4π
Gm2
r4 ⇒E=T 00V= 1
3
Gm2
r ,(22)
where, at the horizon radius ofr= 2Gm, we yield the surface energy ofE=m/6.
While this is a factor ofm, it is reduced; we recover the unscaled rest mass energy
E=mat the radial positionr=Gm/3, or one-sixth of the horizon radius, well inside
the BH horizon.
This demonstrates that this variational approach to the EFEs, here in the 2nd-
order formalism, can only approximate well-defined systems close to our expectation.
Of course, this is under the simple assumption ofR= 0, while our other options may
help enhance our accuracy. This is more so the case given e.g. that Eq. (5) can
produce non-zero Ricci tensor entries for the Schwarzschild metric Ansatz beyondR 00
(see footnote‡). In the Kretschmann scalar case, to be specific, we propose a naive
substitution of the Ricci scalar byR∼ −
√
K, which is motivated by dimensional
consistency and by energetic considerations (see footnote§).
In pursuing the second option ofR∝g µν∆LBgµν, there is a fundamental issue in
theg 11R11 contribution of the trace:g 11 :=g rr = 0, thus imposing an explosive term
viag 11 = 1/0. To avoid this, one might impose a constant screening parameterg 11 =ξ
with the smallness condition|ξ| ≪1, such that we avoid explosive divergences. If this is
done, provided readilyR 11 = 0, theng 11R11 = 0 easily, avoiding a 0/0 paradox. Thus,
the Laplace-Beltrami-formulated trace is presented as follows:
R= 2G2m2
r3(2Gm−r) − 8Gm
r3 + 5
r2 − 2 cot2 θ
r2 ,(23)
which, given the cotangent function via theg 33R33 contribution of the trace, diverges
when one performs polar-angular integration overθ∈[0, π]. Because the Ricci scalar
is, namely, a scalar, all angular terms must be integrated over the full range whenever
they are present, such that the energy densityT 00 is enclosed by a spherical volume.
‡That is, except forR 11 in EF coordinates, asg 11 = 0.
§The square-root ofKrestores dimensional consistency withR. The minus sign is introduced
heuristically: primarily to offset the negativity ofg 00 inG 00, thereby yielding a physically reasonable,
positive energy density.

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR12
One would be tempted to omit the divergent term by “sweeping it under the rug,” but
this is physically nonsensical as it is part of the traceg µνRµν.
For the Schwarzschild metric, independent on one’s choice of coordinates, the
Kretschmann scalar is non-zero:
K= 48G2m2
r6 ; (24)
being that this is readily positive and the Ricci scalar contribution in the Einstein
tensor is negated, proposing a heuristic modification whereR eff =−
√
Kallows us to
explore theadditivecurvature-induced contributions toG 00 =R 00 −R effg00/2, and how
they play a role in calculating the energy densityT 00 beyond theR 00 minimum. This
substitution leads to an effective expression forG 00 as an expansion in leading orders of
G(a PM expansion):
G00 = G2m2
r4 − 2Gm
r3 f(r)
√
3 (25)
= 2G2m2
r4 + 4
√
3G2m2
r4 − 2
√
3Gm
r3 .
The highest PM order is 2, which here is associated with a typical gravitational field
squared ⃗Γ2 :=G 2m2/r4. Considering only the 2PM terms, we yield an expression for
G00 that is systematically enhanced compared toG 00 ≈R 00 alone:
G2PM
00 = 2G2m2
r4

1 + 2
√
3

.(26)
Here, (1+2
√
3)≃4.4641≈4.5, and recalling the simple assumption ofR= 0 ultimately
led toE=m/6 at the BH horizonr= 2Gm, the energy eigenvalue in this case is
enhanced roughly by a factor of 4.5 (as a fraction, 9/2), or
⇒E= 4πr3
3
1
8πG G2PM
00

r=2Gm
≈ 3
4 m.(27)
This is a better estimate thanE=m/6, reaching roughly three-quarters of the mass-
energy relation at the horizonr= 2Gm. Of course, this is given our choice of coordinates
being Eddington-Finkelstein, rather than Schwarzschild’s original metric in spherical
coordinates. Choosing EF coordinates was an educated choice made out of caution
towards ther= 2Gmcoordinate singularity imposed by the original metric. This
coordinate singularity is imposed by the metric comonentg 11 =f(r) −1, which diverges
atr= 2Gm. However, given thatf(r) had been differentiated, removing the integer
and focusing more on the second, potential-like term, perhaps our choice of coordinates
– while a free choice – might come at the price of a systematically reduced accuracy of
our expected value.
Suppose now we revisit the Schwarzschild metric in standard, spherical coordinates
[6, 7]:
ds2 =−f(r)dt 2 + 1
f(r) dr2 +r 2dΩ2,(28)
to see if a change in coordinate system alters the accuracy of our approximation. With
the metric determinant being det(gµν) =−r 4 sin2 θandR= 0, and given that all metric

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR13
elements depend only onrandθeven still, the Schwarzschild-metric Laplace-Beltrami
operator takes on a compact form:
∆LB
Schw. = 1
r2 sinθ
h
sinθ∂ r
 
r2f(r)∂ r

+∂ θ(sinθ∂ θ)
i
,(29)
and using Eq. (5) with Eq. (29), one can straightforwardly computeR 00 to be exactly
Eq. (21). Therefore, every derivation step that would follow has already been discussed.
Thus,E≈0.75mis as close as we can reach to our expected BH rest energy value of
E=m.
One would be tempted to manually introduce a scaling calibrator to the
Kretschmann scalar surrogate, such thatR eff =−λ
√
K. A scaling calibrator was
introduced in Ref. [39, 40] for the CCB mass-shell model, when it was found that
the unscaled surrogate contributed to overestimated GW energy values beyond what is
cataloged. Thus, the calibrator was imposed to beλ >1 to remedy the geometric
overshoot imposed by the surrogate, adjusting the contribution to be within the
quadrupole regime. In this case, the scaling would beλ <1 to artificially enhance
the inherently optimal geometric overshoot even further. Physically, as Kretschmann
scalars encode the Weyl curvature and any present Ricci curvature, the scalar is readily
optimized to encode the mass-energy curvature. Imposing an artifical enhancer to the
maximal curvature without adding more mass or energy is purely ad hoc, and it should
not be pursued.
After all,E≈0.75mis not a bad estimate. It shows nonetheless that well-defined,
relatively simple cases would be underestimated if this variational approach is used
liberally. The same principle goes for quantum-mechanical variational method, should
one use the method to e.g. solve the Schr¨ odinger equation of a free particle. Thus,
the original convention of solving the EFEs is reserved for “simple” systems, e.g. the
Schwarzschild and TOV solutions. Perturbative systems with added complexity, such as
CCBs generating GWs, or how dark matter (DM) or baryonic matter (BM) may impede
GW propagation, can be addressed with this variational methodology, as discussed in
Ref. [39].
3.3. Example II: The Linearized Metric Ansatz
In conventional GR, linearized metric solutionsg µν →γ µν =g (0)
µν +h µν reveal new
information regarding first-order, linear perturbationsh µν of a given background metric
g(0)
µν . Examples include GWs in flat vacuum, wherebyγ µν =η µν +h GW
µν is the
linearized metric consisting of the flat metricη µν and the GW perturbationh GW
µν ;
and Regge-Wheeler-gauged, spherical harmonic perturbations of the TOV metric:
γµν =g TOV
µν +h RW
µν , withh RW
µν ∝g TOV
µν Ylm(θ, ϕ) also containing radial and angular
perturbation functions [24, 25]. In any linearization case, the perturbation is treated
as a small deviation relative to the background metric,|h| ≪1, which follows that
higher-order terms inh,O(h 2), are neglected.
In the context of the Laplace-Beltrami formalism, linearized metric scenarios were
first discussed in Ref. [39] when regarding CCBs in the vicinity of e.g. dark matter

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR14
(DM) backgrounds. DM presents itself as a natural system to introduce as a metric
perturbation, as DM is collisionless however gravitational. This follows the logic that
DM is not luminous, as it is its namesake, leaving behind a signature along e.g. galaxy
clusters as DM halos. Here, DM perturbations are used as a representative example
for heuristics. However, the formalism under a linearized metric Ansatz is presented
generally for any one’s choice and approach of linearization scheme. If we define the
linearized inverse metric asγ µν =g µν
(0) −h µν to motivateγ µαγµβ =δ α
β and its square-
rooted determinant as √−γ= √−g−h, the generalized Laplace-Beltrami operator
reads as
∆LB
γ = 1√−g−h ∂α
hp
−g−h

gαβ
(0)∂β −h αβ∂β
i
.(30)
Suppose we assume, however naively, that √−g−h≃ √−g(i.e., the determinant
of the perturbation metric does not contribute much due to its smallness conditions
|h| ≪1 andO(h 2)), then the determinant of the perturbed metric is screened to be the
determinant of the background metric. This allows for the operator to be expressed
as a linear but subtractive combination containing the background and perturbed
information:
⇒∆ LB
γ = ∆LB
g − 1√−g ∂α
 √−ghαβ∂β

,(31)
where ∆ LB
g is exactly Eq. (3), written here as a shorthand. Thus, we may write the
explicit operator based on the perturbation metric as ∆LB
h . When the linearized operator
acts on the metricγ µν, we yield
∆LB
γ γµν = ∆LB
g g(0)
µν + ∆LB
g hµν −∆ LB
h g(0)
µν −∆ LB
h hµν,(32)
where ∆LB
h hµν ∼ O(h 2) and thus can be neglected. Therefore, the linearized Ricci tensor
in this Laplace-Beltrami formalism reads as
Rµν =− 1
2
 
∆LB
g g(0)
µν + ∆LB
g hµν −∆ LB
h g(0)
µν

=:R (0)
µν +δR (0)
µν −R (1)
µν ,(33)
where the orders of 0 and 1 in the rightmost linearization denote the perturbation order
nested in the Laplace-Beltrami operator. Thus, at “zeroth order”, the linearized Ricci
tensor reads rather conventionally:R µν →R (0)
µν +δR (0)
µν , whereby the Laplace-Beltrami
operator is defined only by the background metricg (0)
µν .
3.3.1. Gravitational WavesFor perturbations from the flat metric and a non-zero
GW source termT GWS
µν , whereη µν is the background Minkowski metric andh µν is a
perturbation,R (0)
µν = 0 – even in the Laplace-Beltrami formalism –, as ∆ LB
η =□defines
the d’Alembert wave operator and□η µν = 0. Therefore, the non-vanishing contribution
is the perturbed deviation in the Ricci tensor:
δR(0)
µν ≡ − 1
2 □hµν = 8πGT GWS
µν
⇒□h µν =−16πGT GWS
µν .(34)

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR15
The lattermost implication defines the source-on GW equation, under the assumption
of a weak-field limit where, effectively, the background metric is flat. However, in
the conventional sense, this equation holds for a trace-reversed wave function ¯hµν =
hµν −η µνh/2. In the present case, no additional gauges onh µν were made explicit; one
may assign the trace-reversed gauge here as a bookkeeping step:h µν → ¯hµν.
Nonetheless, to solve Eq. (34), either with or without the trace-reversed gauge, we
follow convention comfortably by employing Green’s function to yield an integral form
of the GW function (we inserted here the trace-reversed gauge):
¯hµν(t, ⃗ x) = 4G
Z
T GWS
µν d3⃗ y,(35)
whereT GWS
µν =T GWS
µν (t−D, ⃗ y), withDbeing the luminosity distance between the GW
source and the observer andt−Dbeing the retarded time for the GW to travel towards
the observer. One would then reformulate the integral using Fourier transformation to
obtain i.e. the quadrupole momentQ ij, where the GW function only evolves over time:
⇒ ¯hij(t) = 2G
D
¨Qij.(36)
It is at this point where one assigns the traceless-transverse (TT) gauge out of necessity,
for both the GW function and the quadrupolar source. This yields the very familiar
expression for the TT-gauged GW from a source:
hTT
ij (t) = 2G
D
¨QTT
ij .(37)
3.3.2. CCBs in DM PoolsNow reintroducing the DM example, it is discussed that a
CCB may be influenced by the DM pool it may be submerged in. As a heuristics exercise,
we consider the “zeroth order” linearized Ricci tensor, whereby the Laplace-Beltrami
operator is defined by the Kerr metric Ansatz (should we view the CCB effectively as
a Kerr-like object with a reduced mass measure) under Boyer-Lindquist coordinates,
written here in a compact form due to independence intandϕ[39, 40]:
∆LB
Kerr = 1
Σ sinθ [sinθ∂ r (∆∂r) +∂ θ (sinθ∂ θ)],(38)
where Σ =r 2 +a 2 cos2 θwitha=J/mbeing a spin-dependent length-scale, and
∆ =r 2 −2Gmr+a 2. For the metric Ansatz to describe the CCB, we assert that
the mass measure is the reduced mass:m→µ. As a representative example, one
might write theγ 00 component as a linear combination of the Kerr potential and a DM
potential (using the reduced mass as the rotating mass in the Kerr metric):
γ00 =−

1− 2Gµr
Σ

−Φ DM ≡g Kerr
00 +h DM
00 ,(39)
where ΦDM derives from a chosen DM density profile, e.g. a spikeρDM ≈ρ 0(r/r0)−χ with
1< χ <2.5. For instance, Φ DM = (4πr 3
0/3)GρDM/rto convert the DM density profile

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR16
as a characteristic mass signature. Therefore, through the linearized decomposition, one
recovers the pure Kerr contribution [39, 40]:
R(0)
00 = G2µ2
2Σ4

a4
3
2 + 1
2 cos(4θ)

(40)
+ 4a2

cos(2θ)
 a2
2 −3r 2

−3r 2

+ 4r4

,
and the perturbing, DM contribution:
δR(0)
00 = 2πGρ0
3Σ
 r0
r
χ+3
(1 +χ)
 
a2(χ+ 2) +χr 2 −2Gµr(1 +χ)

.(41)
In order to assume CCBs as Kerr-like objects, the CCB inclination angleι∈[0, π] is
“integrated” over when one distributes an equatorial mass-ring of reduced mass measure
into a hollow shell. Thus, with the inclination angles serving as effective polar angles
θ∈[0, π] we must integrateR (0)
00 andδR (0)
00 over the full range ofθ. This is easily
tractable after we recognize that the CCB’s spin parameter is comfortably below unity:
a <1. Thus, after a Taylor expansion over smallaand polar-angular integration, we
yield
⇒R (0)
00 = 2πG2µ2
r4

1−5 a2
r2

,(42a)
⇒δR (0)
00 = π2Gρ0
3
 r0
r
χ+3
(1 +χ) (42b)
×

2χ+ a2
r2 (χ+ 4) + 2Gµ
r (1 +χ) (a2 −2r 2)
r2

.
The DM-induced deviationδR (0)
00 presents itself as a PM expansion, whereas the Kerr
contribution is of 2PM order. If we discard the 1PM deviation terms, we combine like
terms to obtain the total (00)-th Ricci component:
⇒R 00 = 2πG2µ
r4

µ

1−5 a2
r2

− ρ0r3
0
3
 r0
r
χ
(1 +χ) 2

2− a2
r2

.(43)
It shows in Eq. (43) that the DM contribution systematically acts as a damping
mechanism to both Newtonian-like and the spin-corrected terms. This supposes that any
present DM pool surrounding a CCB supresses the emitted quadrupolar radiation the
CCB generates. And this DM-suppression can be, in principle, measured at coalescence;
suppose we follow the convention of Kerr spacetime whereR= 0 (out of simplicity, and
as a proof of concept), thenT 00 ≈R 00/(8πG) with total energyE=T 00V. For the
coalescence energy wherer= 2GM, definingν:=µ/Mas the symmetric mass ratio,
E(tC) = π
6 ν

µ
 
1−5β 2
C

− ρ0r3
0
3
 r0
2GM
χ
(1 +χ) 2 
2−β 2
C

,(44)
and the difference between the observed radiated energyE(t C) and the unperturbed
energyπνµ(1−5β 2
C)/6 retains the GW energy lost by the DM patch. Since this
difference is calculable, the essential DM profile parametersρ0, r 0, χcan be fitted within
respective, physically relevant ranges. Not only this deduces if any DM was present

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR17
near or around the CCB that sent out GWs, the density profile can be constrained and
defined. And more intriguingly, any non-zero residual of the GW energy due to DM
dampening may further support microscopic or particle-level mechanisms whereby GWs
act as probes on DM [51].
More intricate details to take into further account is the post-Newtonian (PN)
dynamics involved in the inspiral-merger phases of coalescence. It is proposed in Ref.
[40] that PN contributions in coalescence reduce the peak energy purely via the orbital
dynamics, and the more proper formula obtained in Ref. [40] should be used as
the baseline GW energy. This may be subject to a future study, both for heuristic
understanding and to provide a benchmark, should future-generation detectors such as
the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) read signals sourced by supermassive
BHs in galactic centers [52].
3.4. Example III: The Vaidya Metric Ansatz
The Vaidya metric is a solution to the EFEs for a spherically symmetric and static body
that is either emitting or absorbing null dusts (i.e., pools of massless fluid/radiation)
[15, 16]. One system that is famously described by this metric is a static BH undergoing
quantum-mechanical Hawking radiation [48, 49], which we use as a representative
example. Under ingoing EF coordinates, such that the BH horizon falls inward overtime
due to radiative mass-loss, the Vaidya metric reads [53]:
ds2 =−e 2ψ(z)

1− 2Gm(z)
r

dv2 + 2eψ(z)dvdr+r 2dΩ2,(45)
where, definingz=r S/r(r S := 2Gm),
ψ(z)≃ m2
P
m2
0
[g(z)−4αln(z)], α≈3.75×10 −5,(46a)
m(z)≃m

1 + m2
P
m2
0
h(z)

,(46b)
withm P ≡
p
ℏ/Gas the Planck mass,m 0 as the initial BH mass (which is gauged to
be astronomical), andmas the instantaneous BH mass. We can furthermore define the
ratio between the squares of the initial BH and Planck masses as an “initial abundance
number”:
N0 = m2
0
m2
P
,(47)
such that the initial BH’s surface areaA 0 = 16πG2m2
0 is divided intoN 0 quantum BH
surface areas viaA Q = 16πl 2
P [54, 55], wherel P ≡
√
Gℏis the Planck length. The
functionsg(z) andh(z) are polynomials inz, given in Ref. [53] as Eq. (85). If we omit
higher-order terms ofz, given the relevant rangez∈(0,1], we define
g(z)≃β(1−z)(1 +z) (48a)
×

31k5 −18(ξ−k 6) + 6(4f0 −k 3)(73 + 49z)
(1 +z)

,

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR18
h(z)≃β(1−z)(1 +z) (48b)
×

6ξ+ 55k 5 + 18k6 −6(4f 0 −k 3)(23 + 35z)
(1 +z) + 144k4
(1 +z)

,
whereβ= (4 7 ·405π) −1, and the parametersξ,k 3,4,5,6 andf 0 depend on the quantum
spin of the emitted radiation. It is essential to note that the total power output of
Hawking radiation is proposed to consist of 81% neutrinos, 17% photons, and 2%
gravitons [56]. E.g. for photons (spin-1):ξ=−1248,k 3 = 81.80,k 4 =−770.42,
k5 = 65.38,k 6 =−942.18, andf 0 = 2.4346 [53, 57, 58]. Other known values ofξinclude
168 for neutrinos (spin-1/2 particles) and 20352 for gravitons (spin-2) [53]; thef 0 and
kparameters are unknown for neutrinos and gravitons. To achieve a spin-independent
treatment of Hawking radiation, we examine how the functionsg(z) andh(z) impact
the metric analysis agnostically. Sinceξis known for all particle types, we consider only
the term containingξin both functions [59]:
g(z)≈ −18ξβ(1−z)(1 +z),(49a)
h(z)≈6ξβ(1−z)(1 +z) =− 1
3 g(z).(49b)
The common leading factor, 6ξβ, evaluates numerically as 4.84×10 −4 for neutrinos,
−3.59×10 −4 for photons, and 5.86×10 −3 for gravitons. Expanding out the polynomials
and neglecting higher orders ofzdue to smallness, the metric functions read as
ψ(z)≈ − 2
N0
[9ξβ+ 2αln(z)],(50a)
m(z)≈m

1 + 6ξβ
N0

,(50b)
which modifies the Vaidya metric as follows, in terms ofz:
ds2 =−E(z)

1−z

1 + 6ξβ
N0

dv2 + 2E(z)2dvdr+r 2dΩ2,(51a)
E(z) :=
 
e9ξβ z2αN0/4
=εz N0α/2, ε= exp
9
4 ξβN 0α

.(51b)
The modification’s inclusion ofξsuggests a more explicit treatment of spin-dependent
particle types. While the reduced forms of the metric functions are mutual for neutrinos,
photons, and gravitons, the analysis on photons should involve the explicit form of the
polynomials via Eqs. (48a) and (48b), as all parameters are known.
Being that our new choice of metric Ansatz follows the Eddington-Finkelstein
coordinates, we present the Laplace-Beltrami operator in the general form under such
coordinates:
∆LB
EF = 1√−g
h
∂v
 √−gg vv∂v

+∂ v
 √−gg vr∂r

(52)
+∂ r(√−gg rv∂v) +∂ θ(√−gg θθ∂θ)
+∂ ϕ(√−gg ϕϕ∂ϕ)
i
,
however the introduction of the variablez=r S/rslightly complicates the definition
ofdv,dr, and their coordinate partial derivatives. One finds thatdz=−(r S/r2)dr=

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR19
−(z2/rS)dr, such thatdr=−(r S/z2)dz⇒∂ r =−(z 2/rS)∂z. This redefinesdv=
dt+f(r) −1drand∂ v, withf(r)→f(z) = 1−z, asdv=dt−r S(z2(1−z)) −1dzand
∂v =∂ t −((z 2 −z 3)/rS)∂z. Due to smallness inzthrough the coordinate’s relevant range,
we revisedv=dt−r Sz−2dzand∂ v =∂ t −(z 2/rS)∂z. As like the previous Schwarzschild
example, all components are independent on the coordinatetandϕ, allowing us to
effectively define∂ v → −(z 2/rS)∂z and drop the term containingg ϕϕ:
∆LB
EF = 1√−g
h z2
r2
S
∂z
 √−gg vvz2∂z

+ z2
r2
S
∂z
 √−gg vrz2∂z

(53)
+ z2
r2
S
∂z(√−gg rvz2∂z) +∂ θ(√−gg θθ∂θ)
i
,
where √−g=E(z)r 2 sinθwithr=r S/z, and the inverse metric termsg vv, g vr =
grv, g θθ follow from the reciprocal of the coordinate coefficients:
∆LB
Vaidya,EF = z2
E(z)r 2
S sinθ
h
−z 2 sinθ∂ z
 
1−z

1 + 6ξβ
N0
−1
∂z
!
(54)
+ 2z2 sinθ∂ z
 1
E(z) ∂z

+E(z)∂ θ(sinθ∂ θ)
i
.
Solving forR 00, such that we can obtainT 00 under the simple assumptionR= 0, we
obtain a cumbersome expression that can be immensely simplified via a Taylor expansion
for smallz:
⇒R 00 = z2
8r2
S
 
2N0α−N 2
0 α2
−z 2−N0α/2 N0α
2r2
Sε +O(z 3),(55)
and with the simplificationR= 0 for the Ricci scalar, we yield the energy density:
T00 ≈ z2
8πGr2
S

N0α
1
4 − 1
2E(z)

− N 2
0 α2
8

,(56)
and the energyE=T 00VwithV→4π(r S/z)3/3. One can notice that asz→0
(r→ ∞), the energy density diverges due to theE(z) −1 term. Furthermore, the energy
eigenvalueE=T 00Valso diverges due to a large scaling volume. These values would
have otherwise be driven to zero due to a typical potential-like drop-off, and it is at
this point where one might be cautious to proceed any further. On the other hand, for
z= 1 (r=r S), we have a finite energy density and energy eigenvalue at the BH horizon,
recoveringr S = 2Gmfor the energy eigenvalue:
T00 ≈ 1
8πGr2
S

N0α
1
4 − 1
2ε

− N 2
0 α2
8

,(57a)
E≃ 1
3 m

N0α
1
4 − 1
2ε

− N 2
0 α2
8

.(57b)
This imposes an inherent issue: the overweighingN 2
0 contribution is negative. This
suggests that the horizon-level energy of a BH is negative, which is physically impossible
and factually incorrect: BHs donotharbor negative energy. One might be tempted to
“flip the sign,” but this is nonsensical. In this example of metric Ansatz, we must
acknowledge that the energy is paradoxically negative under a direct calculation, and

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR20
we must resort to another alternative to extract a “true”, positive-value calculation.
Namely, we consider the energy flux density:T 10. And given the simplification of
R= 0,T 10 ∝R 10, which is purely determined byg 10 =g rv =E(z) 2 given Eq. (51a).
Solving forR 10 via the Laplace-Beltrami formalism, we recover another cumbersome
expression that we straight-forwardly Taylor expand under a small-zregime:
⇒R 10 = z2
2r2
S
 
2N0α−N 2
0 α2
+ z2E(z)
2r2
S
 
N 2
0 α2 −N 0α

+O(z 3).(58)
The above polynomial is similar in structure toR00, yet there are key details that respect
physical intuition.
Unlike the energy densityT 00, the energy flux densityT 01 vanishes asz→0. The
energy fluxF=T 10A, however, simplifies nicely givenA= 4πr 2 andr∝1/z(readily
considering the overweighingN 2
0 terms):
F ≈ N 2
0 α2
4G (E(z)−1) +O(z).(59)
Thus, asz→0 (r→ ∞), the energy flux (proportional to the power emittedF ∝ P)
is approximately−N 2
0 α2/(4G). This is negative, but one could forgive this as this is
associated with theradiatedpower as measured from a very-far observer. Atz= 1, we
obtain the surface-level energy flux:
F ≡ E
σ ≈ N 2
0 α2ε
4G ,(60)
whereσis the cross-sectional area. We are reminded that, under the Schwarzschild
metric analysis, the energy underR= 0 isE=m/6. Knowing thatN 0 =m 2
0/m2
P ,
suppose we extract one mass measurem 0 and isolatem 0/6→m/6 for the energyE
(see footnote∥). Doing so revises the expression into one for the cross-sectional area:
⇒σ≈ 2
3εα2
ℏ2
Gm3
0
.(61)
Therefore, not only this entails what we previously found under a different metric
Ansatz – namely, the Schwarzschild metric (and one can claim as a result that
E≈0.75mc 2 in the fuller picture) –, we yield a corresponding cross sectionσthat
is infinitesimally small, perhaps unphysically so. Thus, one may view the calculation
ofσas a byproduct of extracting the desired energy expression. However, if taken
seriously as a physical construct, it scales in part by the initial Hawking thermal energy
kBTH ∼ℏ/(Gm 0) and the characteristic reduced Compton wavelengthλ=ℏ/m 0 that,
givenm 0 ∼10 30 kg at the bare minimum, is below the Planck length.
In this particular example, we demonstrated that finding the energy eigenvalue is
not always as straight-forward as intended. This rests, naturally, in the presentation
of the chosen metric Ansatz and how each metric component is defined. In such
scenarios where one’s calculation ofT 00 leads to unphysical implications, other routes to
explore, e.g. a different metric component such as the energy flux density, would provide
∥One might be tempted to extractE=mstraight-forwardly. However, consistency must be
maintained.

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR21
sensible answers and enable us to extract useful information. On the other hand, one
may view this as a limitation to the Laplace-Beltrami formalism, such that in certain
circumstances the energy density could not directly yield the energy eigenvalue.
3.5. Other EffectiveT µν Components
In this Laplace-Beltrami formalism, one can naturally yield other effective components
for the energy-momentum tensor via the non-zero components of a given metric Ansatz.
Other components ofT µν conventionally include the on-diagonal stress componentsT ii
along the spatial axisx i (i= 1,2,3 denotes the 3-spatial coordinates), the 0-th row
momentum densityT i0, the 0-th column energy flux densityT i0, and the off-diagonal
contributionsT ij =T ji that typically involve shearing effects. Of course, the free but
educated choice of metric Ansatz and coordinate-system affects the triviality of certain
components. Suppose we have arbitrary metric Ans¨ atze with cross terms:
Cartesian + Shear :ds 2 =ds 2
Cart. +g ijdxidxj +g jidxjdxi,(62a)
Spherical + Spin :ds 2 =ds 2
Sph. +g 03dtdϕ+g 30dϕdt.(62b)
From this list of select coordinates, and the example Ans¨ atze we discussed,
one can be cetain that the energy densityT 00 is non-zero via the 00-th time-like
componentg 00. Thus, one can expect the stress valuesT ii to be derived from any
non-zerog ii contribution, e.g. under Cartesian and spherical coordinates and their
respective expansions. That is, with the exception being theg 11 component under
Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates (it is zero), resulting to a radial-direction stress
and its corresponding pressure being trival. For the Eddington-Finkelstein-coordinated
Schwarzschild metric, this parallels with the Oppenheimer-Snyder picture of BHs as
being dust-like [60], however one could define an effectively non-zero radial-direction
stress under e.g. the spherical-coordinated Schwarzschild metric. This is given a non-
zerog 11 contribution viag 11 =f(r) −1.
Suppose we pursue this, purely for heuristics. We recall the spherical Schwarzschild
metric via Eq. (28); under the respective Laplace-Beltrami operator given as Eq. (29),
we yield theR 11 expression that relates to the radial stressT 11 =σ rr:
R11 =− 2G2m2
r4

1− 2Gm
r
−2
.(63)
One of the notorious nuances of Schwarzschild’s original, spherical-coordinated metric
solution was the coordinate singularity atr= 2Gm, which is caused by the produced
asymptote within 1/f(r). Because of the coordinate singularity, the effective pressure
determined byR 11 ∝∆ LB
Schw.g11 diverges to rather unphysical proportions. If one chooses
a regulation scheme such thatR 11 is Taylor expanded under smallr/(2Gm) =:x, and
one drives (albeit naively)x→1, we yield:
⇒R 11 =− 1
8G2m2x2 − 1
4G2m2x − 3
8G2m2 − x
2G2m2 +O(x 2).(64)
Should one have allowed additional orders ofxinto the expansion, one can see that
drivingx→1 indeed leads to a divergence – not one via an asymptote in the function,

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR22
but rather via a non-convergent summation of terms. For completeness, should one
drivex→0 towards the geometric singularity, there exists only one convergent term
hidden by the vanishing and infinite divergences:−3/(8G 2m2).
On the other hand, returning tox→1, if we allow a cutoff at e.g.O(x 2), one
obtains a convergent value that is nonetheless reflective on the choice of cutoff order:
lim
x→1
R11 =− 5
4G2m2 +O(x 2).(65)
This defines the radial stressσ rr to be negative (i.e., pointing radially inward), once we
include the Kretschmann scalar contribution:
σrr =− 1
32πG3m2
h
5 + 4
√
3
i
≈ − 3
8πG3m2 .(66)
This shows that the pressure, defined by the average stress via the generalized trace
formula:
P=− 1
n
nX
i=1
σii,(67)
in which typically n = 3 in 3-space, is non-trivial. Furthermore, this stress component is
inward-pointing, towards the geometric singularity, and it is dependent on 1/m 2. That
is, the largeness of the BH mass gauges the smallness of the resulting pressure, effectively
recovering dust-like null pressure for astrophysical BHs (i.e., the Oppenheimer-Snyder
picture).
One can make the logical intuition that, given the stress is inward-pointing, the
respective pressure is associated with either: (i) the trapped surface topology introduced
by Roger Penrose [21], or (ii) the cause behind the gradual inward drag of the BH horizon
due to Hawking radiation and radiative mass-loss. Through the second intuition, we
can naturally pursue the ideal gas law from this pressure, assuming briefly that the
Schwarzschild metric describes a BH undergoing Hawking radiation (see footnote¶).
We recognize, under the spherical Schwarzschild metric, the other stress components
σθθ, σ ϕϕ viag 22 =r 2 andg 33 =r 2 sin2 θ, respectively, determine a polar- and
azimuthal-angular pressure. One can find under the Laplace-Beltrami formalism that
the corresponding effectiveG 22 andG 33 calculations are of 1PM order, compared to
the 2PM order of Eq. (63). Thus, we discard the 1PM order terms, which only leaves
the effecitve 2PMG 11 component and its associating radial pressureσ rr after Taylor
expansion and settingx→1. From which, we effectively define the total pressure via
Eq. (67), with n = 3 to cover all 3 spatial dimensions:
P≈ 1
8πG3m2 .(68)
ViaP=nk BT(n:=N/Vis the number density andk BTis the system’s thermal
energy) and using the Hawking thermal energyk BTH =ℏ/(8πGm), we calculate the
associating number density for the Hawking radiation:
n≈ 1
ℏG2m = 2
l2
P rS
.(69)
¶This assumption was made in Ref. [59], however under ingoing EF coordinates.

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR23
redefiningr S = 2Gmandl P =
√
ℏG. From the definitionn=N/Vand the effective
BH volumeV= 4πr 3
S/3, the total number of Hawking radiation particles (stored along
the BH surface to be released) follows the expression:
N≈ 8πr2
S
3l2
P
= 2A
3l2
P
.(70)
We remind ourselves that the Bekenstein-Hawking formula for BH entropy is
S=k BA/(4l2
P ), whereAis the BH surface area 4πr 2
S. The ratioA/(4l 2
P ) yieldsπr 2
S/l2
P ,
which our calculation forNscales by a factor of 8/3 = 2.667. Therefore, one can
make the claim that an enhanced (more than double) Bekenstein-Hawking entropy for
BHs is recovered under the demonstrated regulated treatment in the Laplace-Beltrami
formalism. This perserves the statistical-mechanical convention that the entropy roughly
scales by the number of particles in the system:S∼k BN(conventionally by the natural
logarithm of the microstate multiplicity:S=k B ln Ω, whereby ln Ω∼N). One has to
recognize that this scaling enhancement is a byproduct of using the variational and
regulation techniques used to derive this relation.
4. First-Order Laplace-Beltrami
Via Eq. (8b), the EFEs take on a vector gradient form that is strongly background
dependent, presenting itself as a first-order differential equation while maintaining its
tensor-2 ranking. While the EFEs are inherently second-order differential equations, it
is of interest to see if this differential-order promotion is persistent even in the first-order
Laplace-Beltrami formalism. In other words, it is of interest to define the 4-vector as a
covarient gradient of a scalar potential, much like its Euclidian counterpart: ⃗V=− ⃗∇φ.
To do so, we utilize Eq. (13) andR=∇ µVµ.
We contract the Ricci coupling in Eq. (13) with the metricg σν to define the
respective Ricci scalar:
gσν∆LBVν =RV σ,(71)
to which we multiply with the vectorV σ. This is to be contracted by the metric on the
left hand side, and to introduce the inner product||V|| 2 =V σVσ on the right hand side.
The aim is to isolate the Ricci scalar, so that we can equate it toR=∇ µVµ derived in
the Bianchi identity sanity check:
R= 1
||V|| 2 V ν∆LBVν ≡ ∇ νVν.(72)
As we are in a metric-independent treatment, we can freely define ∆ LB =∇ ν∇ν, from
which we define
1
||V|| 2 V ν∇ν∇νVν =∇ νVν.(73)
This cancels out the common∇ νVν, leaving an open operator∇ ν to define a scalar,
e.g. unity. Mathematically, defining any function or quantity with an open operator is
forbidden. I.e. an n-dimensional vector must be defined by the n-dimensional gradient

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR24
of a scalar functionφto appoint direction and dimensionality. Therefore, we introduce
φto close the open operator, which defines furthermore:
V ν∇νφ=V νVν.(74)
If one removes the commonV ν, we define the 4-vector as a 4-gradient acting on a scalar
function:V µ =∇ µφ, andV µ =∇ µφ. Being thatV µ = (V0, ⃗V), we define the 4-vector
components as follows, under any spacetime:
V0 = 1√−g ∂t
 √−gg0νφ

, ⃗V= 1√−g ∂i
 √−gg iνφ

.(75)
E.g., for a flat spacetime whereg µν =η µν and √−η= 1, we yield the expressions (in
theη= diag(−,+,+,+) signature):
V0 =−∂ tφ, ⃗V= ⃗∇φ.(76)
To recover the minus sign for the 3-gradient, one would use the alternative signature
η= diag(+,−,−,−), which is a convention not typically used in GR yet widely used
in particle physics and quantum field theory. One must keep in mind that using the
alternative signature must be consistent for the other order terms, i.e. second and
zeroth.
Providing our obtained definition for the 4-vector as a 4-gradient on a scalar
function, we modify Eq. (8b) such that itbecomesa second-order form:
G(1)
µν = 1
2 ∇(µ∇ν)φ− 1
2 gµν (∇µ∇µφ).(77)
The first term,∇ (µ∇ν)φ, defines the Hessian tensorH µν(φ), which in the first-order
Laplace-Beltrami formalism acts as an effective Ricci tensor. In the second term,
the Laplace-Beltrami operator naturally emerges:g µν (∇µ∇µφ) =g µν∆LBφ. For the
right hand side of the EFEs, 8πGT (1)
µν , the first-order energy-momentum tensor must
be coupled to the scalar functionφfor mathematical completeness, i.e.T (1)
µν =T µνφ
rather simply. Therefore, the EFEs in the first-order Laplace-Beltrami formalism is,
essentially, a second-order differential equation to a scalar field function:
1
2
 
Hµν(φ)−g µν∆LBφ

= 8πGTµνφ.(78)
We can impose further analytical control on this equation by contracting Eq. (78) with
the background metricg µν. Thus, under any choice of metric Ansatz, contracting Eq.
(78) withg µν leads to the following inhomogeneous equation:
⇒ −∆LBφ= 8πGT µ
µ φ,(79)
which takes the form of a Klein-Gordon equation on the given curved spacetime. Much
like Eq. (13), this equation is background-dependent; however, this equation is source-
dependent rather than being curvature-coupled. To remedy this, one would take the
extra step in defining 8πGT µ
µ =G µ
µ , which is conventionally the negated Ricci scalar
−R. To motivate a scalar field equation of motion similar in form to Eq. (13), we yield:
∆LBφ=Rφ.(80)

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR25
As like the second-order Laplace-Beltrami formalism, both ∆ LB andRare defined by
one’s choice of metric Ansatz, with the operator keeping its time-differential terms for
scalar wave propagation andReither defined by the Laplace-Beltrami trace or effectively
via the Kretschmann scalar surrogate.
4.1. Example I: The Flat (Minkowski) Metric Background
For the flat background, we will consider a pure vacuum whereR= 0 conventionally
and an impure yet flat vacuum with a non-zero sourceR=−8πGT µ
µ. Firstly, for a flat
vacuum, Eq. (80) reduces perfectly to a d’Alembert wave equation for a scalar field:
□φ= 0.(81)
This equation recovers the massless Klein-Gordon equation for spin-0 fields, just as how
Eq. (14) takes on a massless Klein-Gordon equation for spin-1 fields. The solution
to this equation straight-forwardly resembles Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin (WKB) plane
waves [61]:
φ(x)∼exp(−ik µxµ),(82)
wherek µ = (ω, ⃗k) is a wave number 4-vector withx µ = (t, ⃗ x) on a flat spacetime.
For the impure yet flat vacuum with a non-zero source, suppose the energy-
momentum trace is screened, e.g.T µ
µ =ϵ 2/(8πG). In this way, the spacetime
background still follows a Minkowski metric Ansatz. The right hand side of Eq. (81) is
here non-zero:
⇒ −□φ=ϵ 2φ.(83)
Purely for heuristics, suppose we define the gaugeϵ= m/ℏ, where m is the particle rest
mass andℏis the reduced Planck constant. This choice of gauge recovers the massive
Klein-Gordon equation:
−ℏ2□φ= m 2φ.(84)
4.2. Example II: The Schwarzschild Background
Under the Schwarzschild metric Ansatz for the background, Eq. (80) reads as
∆LB
Schw.φ=Rφ,(85)
where the time-independent Laplace-Beltrami operator under the Schwarzschild metric
Ansatz is identical under spherical coordinates and EF coordinates. For our scalar
function solution, we must utilize the time-component in e.g. the spherical coordinated
operator to yield wave propagation. As previously suggested, the Ricci scalarR
can either be defined by: (i) the Laplace-Beltrami trace, or (ii) effectively via the
Kretschmann scalar surrogate. As we know that certain Laplace-Beltrami-derived Ricci

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR26
scalars are divergent, such as the spherical-coordinated Schwarzschild case, we consider
the second option, which leads to the following partial differential equation to solve:
1
r2 sinθ
h
− r2 sinθ
f(r) ∂2
t + sinθ∂ r
 
r2f(r)∂ r

+∂ θ(sinθ∂ θ)
i
φ(r, t, θ) (86)
=− 4Gm
√
3
r3 φ(r, t, θ).
We can furthermore gauge the polar angleθto be e.g. at the equatorial planeπ/2; this
gives us the time and radial contributions with sin(π/2) = 1, with the scalar function
now dependent onrandt, such thatφ(r, t)≡B(r)T(t) via separation of variables.
Recalling thatf(r) = 1−2Gm/r, we find the stationary solution forB(r), independent
ont, defined in terms of the hypergeometric 2F1 functions:
B(r)≃3.293a 0
 Gm
r
1.861
2F1

−1.861,−0.8612;−2.722; r
2Gm

(87)
+ 0.2495a1
 r
Gm
1.861
2F1

1.861,2.86121; 4.722; r
2Gm

.
Here,a 0 anda 1 are integration constants. Introducing the non-trivial time contribution
yields a characteristic time-dependent propagator:φ(r, t)∼B(r) exp(iωt).
One recognizes that the hypergeometric functions, regardless of the value oftor
any non-variable arguments, exist withinr/(2Gm)∈(0,1). Therefore, the provided
solution is an interior solution, which becomes wave-like overtime and diverges at the
asymptotesr= 0 andr= 2Gm. For exterior solutions, we must invoke the weak
Schwarzschild limit, such thatr→ ∞asymptotically, wherebyf(r)→1. This revises
Eq. (86) as
⇒
h
−∂ 2
t + 1
r2 ∂r
 
r2∂r
i
φ(r, t) =− 4Gm
√
3
r3 φ(r, t),(88)
from which we yield the real, stationary solution as a Bessel funtion of the first kind:
B(r) = 2a0
4√
3
r
Gm
r J1
 
4
4√
3
r
Gm
r
!
.(89)
The non-zero time contribution once again recovers the time-dependent propagator.
Given the relevant range isr∈[2Gm,∞), one finds thatB(r) is finite atr= 2Gmand
exponentially decays to zero asr→ ∞. In other words, we obtain a wave that decays
into a zero flat-line as our radial coordinate extends to asymptotic flatness. This does
not recover the pure vacuum solution to Eq. (81).
4.3. Example III: A Cartesian Schwarzschild Background
Eq. (89) does not recover the flat-metric planar wave solution asr→ ∞, i.e. on
an ultra-weak Schwarzschild, Minkowskian-like spacetime. This would motivate a new
analysis under a change in coordinate system, as one would recall that the flat metric
is canonically Cartesian. Thus, instead of spherical (or EF) coordinates that yield

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR27
√−g=r 2 sinθ, which is the culprit behind yielding both the hypergeometric and Bessel
function solutions, we consider isotropic Cartesian coordinates [62]:
ds2
Schw.iso =−
2ρ−Gm
2ρ+Gm
2
dt2 +

1 + Gm
2ρ
4
(dx2 +dy 2 +dz 2).(90)
Here, the original radial coordinate is transformed intor→ρ(1 +Gm/(2ρ)) 2, whereρ
is the new radial coordinate. This new radial variable can decompose into the Cartesian
components via the sphere radius expressionρ 2 =x 2 +y 2 +z 2. The inverse metric
gµν is defined by the reciprocal terms of the metric elements, and the determinant is a
polynomial inρ −1: det(g µν) =−2 +G 2m2/ρ2 −G 4m4/ρ4 :=g(ρ −1). Therefore, when
writing the Laplace-Beltrami operator, we essentially have an augmented d’Alembert
wave operator whereby∂ i →∂ ρ:
∆LB
Schw.iso =−
2ρ+Gm
2ρ−Gm
2
∂2
t (91)
+ 1p
−g(ρ−1)
∂ρ
 
p
−g(ρ−1)

1 + Gm
2ρ
−4
∂ρ
!
.
We note that the physical range of the new radial coordinate is withinρ∈(Gm/2,∞),
whereρ=Gm/2 is the transformed horizon scale under isotropic coordinates; this
recoversr= 2Gmunder the old radial coordinate. Forρ→ ∞, the isotropic-
coordinated Laplace-Beltrami operator asymptotically becomes the d’Alembert wave
operator. Considering briefly the stationary solution witht= 0 and no time-differential
contribution, the right-hand side of Eq. (86) needs to be rewritten in terms of the new
radial coordinate:
1p
−g(ρ−1)
∂ρ
p
−g(ρ−1)

1 + Gm
2ρ
−4
∂ρ

B(ρ) (92)
=− 4Gm
√
3
ρ3

1 + Gm
2ρ
−6
B(ρ).
Eq. (92) in itself is a cumbersome ordinary differential equation to solve explicitly.
Taming this requires e.g. regulation schemes under the strong and weak Schwarzschild
limits. Respectively,ρis treated asymptotically as small and large; under the weak
Schwarzschild (large-ρ) limit,
⇒∂ 2
ρBw(ρ) =− 4Gm
√
3
ρ3 Bw(ρ),(93)
which yields a real solution in terms of a Bessel function of the first kind:
Bw(ρ) = a0
2
4√
3
r ρ
Gm J1
 
4
4√
3
s
Gm
ρ
!
.(94)
One finds that the obtained stationary solution is a position-dependent amplitude
modifier for the time-dependent wave propagator, once the time-differential contribution
is recovered and solved for. E.g.,B w(ρ) plateaus at a certain, constant value asρ→ ∞,

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR28
recovering the planar wave profile for an asymptotically flat background. On the other
hand, under the strong Schwarzschild (small-ρ) limit,
⇒∂ ρ
 
ρ2∂ρ

Bs(ρ) =−16
√
3 ρ
Gm Bs(ρ),(95)
which also yields a real solution in terms of the Bessel function:
Bs(ρ) = a0
4
4√
3
s
Gm
ρ J1

8
4√
3
r ρ
Gm

.(96)
We note that the stationary solution itself exhibits a wave-like behavior in the range
ρ∈(Gm/2,∞), where the function tapers off towards zero asρ >1 while maintaining
its profile.
Provided these weak and strong limit solutions, respectivelyB w(ρ) andB s(ρ), one
becomes motivated to stitch these limits together and form a continuous function over all
ρ. If one does this, this could be done either via: (i) a piecewise stitching, or (ii) a linear
combination between the limit solutions, provided that each respective function has
tapering limits and convergences at specific amplitudes. Suppose we pursue the second
option, a choice made to avoid any nonsensical “kinks” in the continuous function; the
time-dependent scalar function upon the isotropic Schwarzschild background reads as
φ(ρ, t) =

Bs(ρ) +B w(ρ)

exp (iωt)≡B(ρ) exp (iωt),(97)
whereρ∈
 Gm
2 ,∞

.
4.4. Discussion
Obtaining the relevant equations of motion upon any curved background, e.g. Eq. (13)
for 4-vectors and Eq. (80) for scalar functions, are reminiscent to previous attempts
to approach quantum field theory in curved backgrounds (for related literature, see
e.g. [63, 64, 65, 66]). Thus, using these background-dependent wave equations, one is
encouraged to define e.g. Feynman rules from these equations, such that one may use
second quantization to Fourier-transform 4-spatial partial derivatives into 4-momentum
variables, and thus any 4-spatial variables into 4-momentum partial derivatives. And
one may do so after designating the relevant background the scalar and vector fields
reside on.
We note the work done in Ref. [66], whereby the authors claimed to have derived
curved spacetime modifications to Feynman diagrams for spin-0 scalar and spin-1/2
spinor particles – spin-1 vector particles were never discussed. However, the analysis
was done under the simplified scenario of local Minkowski coordinates and a weak
Schwarzschild background (r≫2Gm). It is also worth noting that the authors claimed
to have found a generalized form of the Klein-Gordon equation for any background
as their Eq. (2.6) (i.e., a form similar to Eq. (80) with the right hand side instead
containing the particle rest mass m2φwithℏ= 1). However, the authors’ ad hoc Klein-
Gordon generalization (i.e.,□→∆ LB without regard of further curvature implications)

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR29
is naive, even under the case of a weakly-gauged Schwarzschild background. On this
basis, among further critiques formulated in Ref. [67], we reject the claims made in [66].
5. Zeroth-Order Laplace-Beltrami
Via Eq. (8c), the EFEs take on a zeroth-order form, i.e. the Ricci tensor is written in
terms of an auxiliary tensorA µν that is of zeroth-differential order. As a term within
a composition containing inherently second-differential order terms: Eq. (8a) via the
Laplace-Beltrami operator and Eq. (8b) via the covariant divergence of a 4-vector (which
itself is a 4-gradient of a scalar function), one might be tempted to follow the logic that
the zeroth-order term must somehow be of second-differential order for consistency. At
first glance, this appears to impose an incompatibility, asA µν was introduced to be
arbitrary, similarly to the integration constant +C.
This apparent issue can be resolved by recognizing that the auxiliary tensor serves
as an effective gauge/screening mechanism that can constrain e.g. propagating degrees
of freedom. This constraining role becomes more transparent under a transformation to
a symbolic representation, such as in Fourier space. Should e.g.A µν =ϖ 2gµν/2, where
ϖis a constraint parameter with its square containing curvature units, then the Fourier
transformationA µν → eAµν implies the corresponding transformation of the leading
higher-order terms. In local coordinates,∂ α → −ik α, while in generalg µν →egµν; recall
thatk α = (ω, ⃗k) denotes the local 4-wave vector.
If we heuristically treat the “Fourier spacetime” as background-dependent, then
to leading order in a local Fourier representation the physical spacetime covariant
derivatives may be represented non-locally by a background-dependent 4-momentum
vectork α, i.e.∇ α → −ik α non-locally. Under this correspondence, the Laplace-
Beltrami formalism for the Fourier-transformed Ricci tensor takes the following form:
eRµν ≃ 1
2
 
kαkα −ϖ 2
egµν − i
2 k(µeVν),(98)
where the real component contains the mass-shell conditionk αkα −ϖ 2 governing
dispersion. In this sense,ϖmay be interpreted as analogous to a physical mass scale
or a gauge-dependent infrared regulator.
However, we emphasize that this Fourier spacetime description is a representative
device used to elucidate the role of the auxiliary tensor in physical spacetime.
Accordingly,A µν encodes gauge and background information that is otherwise left
implicit in the first- and second-order decompositions previously discussed. This is
while leaving the leading second-order Laplace-Beltrami character of the Ricci tensor
unchanged.
6. Concluding Statements
In this work, we explored in detail the Laplace-Beltrami formalism of the EFEs, whereby
one defines at face-value the Ricci tensor in terms of the Laplace-Beltrami partial

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR30
differential operator. One therefore uses a variational methodology to solve the EFEs
under a choice of metric Ansatz and coordinate system, analogously to solving impossible
Hamiltonians that describe pertrubative quantum-mechanical systems. However, the
focus of this second-order analysis had been on well-known “simple” systems such as
static spherical bodies, and how the Laplace-Beltrami-formulated results compare to
conventional understanding. It is therefore encouraged for future studies to use the
formalism on perturbative extensions to “simple” astrophysical systems, e.g. a rotating
[68, 69, 70] or a bulk-viscous [71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76] FLRW universe, and superfluid
models of mirrored BH interiors [77, 78]. It is of course natural to propose further
analyses on additional perturbative astrophysical systems, either continuing into GWs
and various environmental factors or veering into alternate directions.
Provided the first-order analysis was able to define (i) curvature-coupled wave
equations for 4-vectors (Eq. [13]) and scalar functions (Eq. [80]), and (ii) a rendering of
the EFEs in the structure of a scalar wave equation via Eq. (78), it is of great interest
to pursue each of these routes individually. In the case of the curvature-coupled wave
equations, analyses of quantum- or effective-field theory on curved spacetimes can be
approached using the acquired formulae: the 4-vector equation for spin-1 particles, and
the scalar equation for spin-0 particles. In this endeavor, one may use the second-order
Laplace-Beltrami definition of the Ricci tensor for spin-2 particles, more prominently
gravitons. As for the scalar-function rendering of the EFEs, it is an intellectual curiosity
to explore GR in the context of a manifold dominated by a scalar field, e.g. the
cosmological epoch of the universe when the Higgs field is dominant [79, 80], or direct
analysis of scalar-field DM candidates [81, 82, 83, 84, 85].
Statement Declarations
Conflict of Interest
The author declares no conflicts of interest.
Data Access Statement
As a theoretical study, this work generates no original data.
Ethics Statement
No ethical issues arise, as no test subjects are involved. This paper adheres to academic
integrity.
Funding Statement
This work received no funding.

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR31
References
[1] Einstein A 1915Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin (Math. Phys. )1915, 844
[2] Einstein A 1915Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin (Math. Phys. )1915, 831
[3] Dyson F W, Eddington A S and Davidson C 1920Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A220, 291
[4] Hubble E P 1926Astrophys. J.64, 321
[5] Hubble E 1929Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.15, 168
[6] Schwarzschild K 1916Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin (Math. Phys. )1916, 189
[7] Schwarzschild K 1916Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin (Math. Phys. )1916, 424
[8] Tolman R C 1939Phys. Rev.55, 364
[9] Oppenheimer J R and Volkoff G M 1939Phys. Rev.55, 374
[10] Kerr R P 1963Phys. Rev. Lett.11, 237
[11] Boyer R H and Lindquist R W 1967J. Math. Phys.8(2), 265
[12] Chandrasekhar S (The Mathematical Theory of Black Holes, Oxford Press, 1985) ISBN:
9780198503705.
[13] Newman E T and Janis A I 1965J. Math. Phys.6, 915
[14] Newman E T, Couch E, Chinnapared K, Exton A, Prakash A and Torrence R 1965J. Math.
Phys.6, 918
[15] Poisson E (A Relativist’s Toolkit: The Mathematics of Black-Hole Mechanics, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2004. Section 4.3.5 and Section 5.1.8)
[16] Griffiths J B and Podolsky J (Exact Space-Times in Einstein’s General Relativity, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2009. Section 9.5)
[17] Friedmann A 1924Z. Phys.21, 326
[18] Lemaitre G 1927Annales Soc. Sci. Bruxelles A47, 49
[19] Robertson H P 1933Rev. Mod. Phys.5, 62
[20] Walker A G 1937Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. s2-42, no.1, 90
[21] Penrose P 1965Phys. Rev. Lett.1457
[22] Hartle J B 1967Astrophys. J.150, 1005
[23] Hartle J B and Thorne K S 1968Astrophys. J.153, 807
[24] Regge T and Wheeler J A 1957Phys. Rev.108, 1063
[25] Thorne K S 1998Phys. Rev. D58, 124031
[26] Arnowitt R L, Deser S and Misner C W 2008Gen. Rel. Grav.40, 1997
[27] Belinski V A, Khalatnikov I M, and Lifshitz E M 1971Sov.Phys.Usp.13745
[28] Belinski V A, Lifshitz E M and Khalatnikov M I 1972Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.62, no.5, 1606 [erratum:
1975Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.68, no.5, 1968; erratum: 1975Sov. Phys. JETP41, no.5, 985]
[29] Belinski V A and Khalatnikov I M 1973Sov. Phys. JETP36, 591
[30] Belinski V A and Khalatnikov I M (On the influence of the spinor and electromagnetic fields on
the cosmological singularity, Torino: Rend. Sem. Mat. Univ. e Politec. 35:159-180)
[31] Belinski V A, Khalatnikov I M and Lifshitz E M 1982Adv. Phys.31, 639
[32] Belinski V and Henneaux M (The Cosmological Singularity, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2017)
[33] Blanchet L 2014Living Rev. Rel.17, 2
[34] Damour T 2016Phys. Rev. D94, no.10, 104015
[35] Buonanno A and Damour T 1999Phys. Rev. D59, 084006
[36] Damour T and Nagar A 2011Fundam. Theor. Phys.162, 211
[37] Damour T 2014Fundam. Theor. Phys.177, 111
[38] Chow B and Knopf D (The Ricci Flow: An Introduction, Providence, R.I.: American Mathematical
Society, 2004) ISBN 0-8218-3515-7.
[39] MacKay N M 2025Class. Quant. Grav.42, no.24, 245003
[40] MacKay N M 2026Class. Quant. Grav., in press doi:10.1088/1361-6382/ae72e4
[41] Gravitational Wave Open Science Center (https://gwosc.org/eventapi/html/GWTC/)

Laplace-Beltrami Formalism for GR32
[42] Abbott B P, LIGO Scientific and Virgo,et al.2019Phys. Rev. X9, no.3, 031040
[43] Abbott R, LIGO Scientific and VIRGO,et al.2024Phys. Rev. D109, no.2, 022001
[44] Abbott R, KAGRA, VIRGO and LIGO Scientific,et al.2023Phys. Rev. X13, no.4, 041039
[45] Abac A G, LIGO Scientific, VIRGO and KAGRA,et al.[arXiv:2508.18082 [gr-qc]].
[46] Eddington A S 1924Nature113, no.2832, 192
[47] Finkelstein D 1958Phys. Rev.110, 965
[48] Hawking S W 1974Nature248, 30
[49] Hawking S W 1975Commun. Math. Phys.43, 199 [erratum: 1976Commun. Math. Phys.46, 206]
[50] d’Inverno R 1992
[51] Miller A L [arXiv:2503.02607 [astro-ph.HE]].
[52] Amaro-Seoane P, Aoudia S, Babak S, Binetruy P, Berti E, Bohe A, Caprini C, Colpi M, Cornish N J
and Danzmann K,et al.2013GW Notes6, 4
[53] Abdolrahimi S, Page D N and Tzounis C 2019Phys. Rev. D100, no.12, 124038
[54] Hawking S 1971Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.152, 75
[55] Carr B J and Giddings S B 2005Sci. Am.292N5, 30
[56] Page D N 1976Phys. Rev. D13198
[57] Page D N 1976Phys. Rev. D14, 3260
[58] Jensen B P, McLaughlin J and Ottewill A C 1991Phys. Rev. D43, 4142
[59] MacKay N M 2025Phys. Lett. B870, 139888
[60] Oppenheimer J R and Snyder H 1939Phys. Rev.56, 455
[61] Birrell N D and Davies P C W (Quantum Fields in Curved SpaceCambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1982) ISBN: 978-0-511-62263-2, 978-0-521-27858-4
[62] Choquet-Bruhat Y (’The Schwarzschild spacetime’,Introduction to General Relativity, Black
Holes, and Cosmology, Oxford, 2014; online edn, Oxford Academic, 2024)
[63] Bunch T S and Parker L 1979Phys. Rev. D20, 2499
[64] Bekenstein J D and Parker L 1981Phys. Rev. D23, 2850
[65] Alsing P M, Evans J C and Nandi K K 2001Gen. Rel. Grav.33, 1459
[66] Li B [arXiv:2411.15164 [physics.gen-ph]].
[67] MacKay N M [arXiv:2501.15672 [physics.gen-ph]].
[68] Gamow G 1946Nature158, no.4016, 549
[69] G¨ odel K 1949Rev. Mod. Phys.21, 447
[70] Su S C and Chu M C 2009Astrophys. J.703, 354
[71] Brevik I and Grøn Ø [arXiv:1409.8561 [gr-qc]].
[72] Choudhuri A 2015Phys. Scr.90055004
[73] Srivastava M and Singh C P 2018Astrophys. Space Sci.363, no.6, 117
[74] Hu J and Hu H 2020Eur. Phys. J. Plus135, no.9, 718
[75] Arora S, Pacif S K J, Parida A and Sahoo P K 2022JHEAp33, 1
[76] Singh S S, Kumrah L, Alam M K, Singh L K and Devi L A 2024Can. J. Phys.102, no.1, 61
[77] Hayden P and Preskill J 2007JHEP09120
[78] Manikandan S K and Jordan A N 2018Phys. Rev. D98, no.12 124043
[79] Calmet X, Kuntz I and Moss I G 2018Found. Phys.48, no.1, 110
[80] Steinwachs C F 2020Fundam. Theor. Phys.199, 253
[81] Sahni V and Wang L M 2000Phys. Rev. D62, 103517
[82] Matos T and Urena-Lopez L A 2000Class. Quant. Grav.17, L75
[83] Matos T and Urena-Lopez L A 2001Phys. Rev. D63, 063506
[84] Alcubierre M, Guzman F S, Matos T, Nunez D, Urena-Lopez L A and Wiederhold P 2002Class.
Quant. Grav.19, 5017
[85] Bernal A and Guzman F S 2006Phys. Rev. D74, 063504
[86] Boehm C, Chu X, Kuo J L and Pradler J 2021Phys. Rev. D103, no.7, 075005