Title: gr8stars II : judgement day for spectroscopic parameter model systematics
Authors: Alix Violet Freckelton, Annelies Mortier, Megan Bedell, Michael Cretignier, Jared R. Kolecki, Andreas J. Korn, Sérgio G. Sousa, Maria Tsantaki, John M. Brewer, Lars A. Buchhave, Guy R. Davies, J. I. González Hernández, Sam Morrell, Martin B. Nielsen, Vera Maria Passegger, Andreas Quirrenbach, Arpita Roy, Nuno C. Santos, A. Suárez Mascareño, Christopher Allan Watson, Lily L. Zhao
Published: 2026-06-04
Categories: astro-ph.SR, astro-ph.EP, astro-ph.IM

MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025) Preprint 5 June 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.2
gr8stars II : judgement day for spectroscopic parameter model systematics
Alix Violet Freckelton1
 ★, Annelies Mortier1
 , Megan Bedell2
 , Michael Cretignier3
 ,
Jared R. Kolecki4
 , Andreas J. Korn5
 , Sérgio G. Sousa6,16
 , Maria Tsantaki7
 , John M. Brewer8
 ,
Lars A. Buchhave9
 , Guy R. Davies1
 , J. I. González Hernández10,11
 , Sam Morrell12
 ,
Martin B. Nielsen1
 , Vera Maria Passegger13,10,11,14
 , Andreas Quirrenbach15, Arpita Roy16
 ,
Nuno C. Santos6,17, A. Suárez Mascareño10,11
 , Christopher Allan Watson18
 , Lily L. Zhao19
 †
1 School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK
2 Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA
3 Department of Physics, University of Oxford, OX13RH Oxford, UK
4 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
5 Division of Astronomy and Space Physics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 516, SE-75120 Uppsala, Sweden
6 Instituto de Astrofísica e Ciências do Espaço, Universidade do Porto, CAUP, Rua das Estrelas, 4150-762, Porto, Portugal
7 INAF – Osservatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri, Largo E. Fermi 5, 50125 Firenze, Italy
8 Department of Physics and Astronomy, San Francisco State University, 1600 Holloway Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94132, USA
9 DTU Space, Technical University of Denmark, Elektrovej 328, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
10 Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias, E-38205 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
11 Universidad de La Laguna, Dept. Astrofísica, E-38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
12 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK
13 Subaru Telescope, National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, 650 North A‘ohoku Place, Hilo, HI 96720, USA
14 Hamburger Sternwarte, Gojenbergsweg 112, D-21029 Hamburg, Germany
15 Landessternwarte, Zentrum für Astronomie der Universität Heidelberg, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
16 Astrophysics & Space Institute, Schmidt Sciences, New York, NY 10011, USA
17 Departamento de Fisica e Astronomia, Faculdade de Ciencias, Universidade do Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal
18 Astrophysics Research Centre, School of Mathematics and Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, BT7 1NN, UK
19 Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
Many areas of astrophysics, including exoplanetary studies, rely on precise and accurate stellar parameters. This demands that
uncertaintiesontheseparameterstrulyreflectallbiasesandsystematics.Withinthissecondworkofthegr8starscollaboration,
we take a set of 585 bright FGK dwarfs with high resolution, high signal-to-noise ratio spectra from the SOPHIE spectrograph.
We determine stellar effective temperature, surface gravity, and metallicity using five different spectroscopic methods for each
star, with an additional method used for comparisons. We find a typical scatter of 76 K in𝑇eff, 0.14 dex inlog𝑔, and 0.07 dex
in[Fe/H]. These deviations are significantly larger than the average precision error on these parameters. We furthermore use
isochrone fitting to determine mass, radius, and age for all 585 stars, using input from all results. We use the radii determined
by SED fitting in the firstgr8starspaper as a comparison to our isochronal radii from this work, in addition to comparing
the isochronallog𝑔to spectroscopiclog𝑔. The scatter in mass and radius from the use of different spectroscopic methods is
investigated and propagated to exoplanetary parameters. The induced fractional uncertainties in planetary radius (≲3 %) and
mass (≲5%) are found to be below those typically found in the literature. We estimate a lower limit on planetary equilibrium
temperature fractional uncertainty of≈4%, a noise floor that is currently not sufficiently represented in the literature.
Key words:techniques: spectroscopic – stars: atmospheres – stars: fundamental parameters – stars: solar-type
★ E-mail: axf859@student.bham.ac.uk
†NASA Sagan Fellow
1 INTRODUCTION
Solar-like stars, defined in this work as FGK main-sequence stars,
play the vital role of the host stars in the search for and study of
Earth-like exoplanets. To date, no ‘Earth twin’ exoplanet – being
an Earth-like planet orbiting a solar-like star with an orbital period
©2025 The Authors
arXiv:2606.06234v1  [astro-ph.SR]  4 Jun 2026

2Freckelton et al.
on the order of Earth’s – has been identified. Many studies (e.g.
Robertson et al. 2014; Meunier et al. 2015; Fischer et al. 2016;
Suárez Mascareño et al. 2017; Faria et al. 2020; Zicher et al. 2022;
Al Moulla et al. 2023; Santos et al. 2025) demonstrate that the lack
of such a discovery is likely not due to an inherent lack of Earth
twins, rather instead due to limitations in the disentangling of small
planetary signals from the signals of solar-like stars.
Ongoingprojects,suchastheEXPRES100EarthsSurvey(Brewer
et al. 2020) on the Lowell Discovery Telescope (Levine et al. 2012;
DeGroff et al. 2014) and the NEID Earth Twin Survey (Gupta et al.
2021, 2025), in addition to upcoming missions such as the Terra
HuntingExperiment(THE)(Halletal.2018)onHARPS-3(Thomp-
son et al. 2016),PLATO(Rauer et al. 2014, 2025), and the Second
EarthInitiativeontheSecondEarthSpectrographontheMPG/ESO
2.2m telescope (2ES; Stürmer et al. (2024)), aim to overcome the
current hurdles in instrumentation to kickstart the discovery and
characterisation of Earth twins. In the firstgr8starspaper (Freck-
elton et al. (2025), henceforth GR8-1), we introduced our sample of
5645 bright, main sequence FGKM stars that form thegr8stars
catalogue, and published homogeneously derived stellar parameters
for all Northern-hemisphere targets with available high resolution
spectra.
Theincreasingprecisionofmodern,high-resolutionspectrographs
has in turn increased the demand for precise and accurate stellar
parameters. However, it has been established that quoted precision
uncertaintiesoftenfailtorepresenttheextentofsystematiceffectsin
spectroscopicanalyses.Therehavebeennumerousstudiesthatshow
thesignificantsystematicsintroducedinstellarparametersbytheuse
of different methodologies, model atmospheres, analysis pipelines,
and line lists (see e.g. Hinkel et al. 2014, 2016; Jofré et al. 2019;
Tayar et al. 2022). Such systematics frequently exceed the quoted
uncertainties indicating that they present a fundamental limitation
in the derivation of stellar parameters. With this context in mind,
we must carefully treat the definition of stellar parameter precision.
Instead,agreementbetweenindependentspectroscopicmethodsmay
provide a more realistic uncertainty estimate than internal precision
errors.
Thecharacterisationofspectroscopicsystematicshasbeeninvesti-
gatedthroughpreviouscollaborativeendeavours.ThroughtheGaia-
ESO survey, multiple analysis pipelines were combined to derive
stellar parameters with realistic uncertainties (e.g. Smiljanic et al.
2014; Worley et al. 2020, 2024). Studies using theiSpecframework
investigatecontrolledcomparisonbetweendifferingtechniques(e.g.
Blanco-Cuaresma 2019; Casamiquela et al. 2017, 2026). Addition-
ally, large-scale analyses such as thePASTELcatalogue (Soubiran
etal.2016),andinvestigationsofhomogeneousparameterdetermina-
tion (e.g. Jofré et al. 2014; Heiter et al. 2015) highlight how diverse
literature methodologies are, and the agreement expected between
them. Further to this, comparisons of spectroscopic surveys for a
commonsetofstars(e.g.Hegedűsetal.2023)reinforcethepresence
of systematic offsets between both observations and methods.
Despitethebreadthofstudiesperformedthroughouttheliterature,
gaps still remain. Particularly, studies often rely on heterogeneous
data sets, differing instrumental qualities, or samples that may only
partially overlap. Consequently, there is a necessity for analyses in
whichmultiplestate-of-the-artmethodsareappliedtothesamesetof
high-qualityspectra.Thisallowsfortheisolationofdifferencesaris-
ingsolelyfromsystematicdifferencesinmethodology.Furthermore,
although spectroscopic systematics in terms of atmospheric stellar
parametershasbeenwidelydiscussedthroughouttheliterature,their
propagation to further derived parameters such as stellar mass, ra-
dius,andage,isnotfullyquantified.Thisisparticularlyimportantin
thecontextofexoplanetstudies,asuncertaintiesinstellarparameters
directly propagate to the planetary mass, radius, and density.
In thegr8starscatalogue, we see a uniquely suited framework
forsuchinvestigations.WhileinGR8-1wepresentedhomogenously
derivedstellarparametersforalargesampleofbrightFGKMdwarfs,
which is essential for a variety of applications, the data set does not
fully capture the systematic uncertainties introduced by modelling
choices. In this second paper, the focus is on quantifying these sys-
tematics.
A subset of 585 FGK dwarfs observed solely with the SOPHIE
spectrograph is employed in this work. We apply multiple indepen-
dent spectroscopic analysis techniques spanning a range of method-
ology, model choices, and assumptions, to each of these stars. By
comparing the resultant stellar atmospheric parameters, we are able
to characterise the agreement between these methods and establish
estimates for the scatter introduced by methodological differences.
This allows for us to place reliable constraints on the limits of pre-
cision in spectroscopic analysis, and to assess the suitability of typi-
callyquoteduncertaintiestoreflecttruelevelsofagreementbetween
independent methods.
Thegr8starscatalogue is fully described in Section 2 in terms
of its selection, and context in the wider fields of exoplanetary and
stellarphysics.Section3describesthespectroscopicandphotometric
data used in this work, along with the instruments employed for the
observations. Section 4 details the methods used to determine all
setsofstellarparameterspresentedinthiswork,withtheresultsand
comparisons explored in Section 5. Section 6 explores the effects of
scatter in stellar parameters on the parameters of hosted exoplanets.
We conclude our findings in Section 7.
2 GR8STARS
Thegr8starscatalogueisacollectionof5645bright,FGKMstars.
AspartofGR8-1,wepublishedhomogeneouslyderivedatmospheric
parameters for 1716 targets in the Northern sample, in addition to
photometricstellarparametersforalltargetsintheNorthernsample.
We aim to assemble, and make publicly available, a full comple-
ment of uniformly formatted, high resolution spectra, in addition to
homogeneously derived stellar atmospheric parameters for all 5645
stars.
AsdetailedinGR8-1,threerequirementswereusedintheselection
of thegr8starscatalogue, with the addition of a declination cut of
≥ −15 ◦ to select the Northern sample that GR8-1 investigates. The
firstsuchrequirementisthatallofthestarsarebrighterthanaGband
magnitude of 8, meaning archival and future observations will be to
ahighSNR(signal-to-noiseratio)standard.Thefocusofgr8stars
on FGKM dwarfs required both earlier type main-sequence stars
and giants/subgiants to be excluded. We achieved these exclusions
by requiring the Gaia BP-RP colour to be at least 0.6. We used the
Dartmouth isochronesand masstracks (Dotter etal. 2008)to ensure
our catalogue does not include evolved stars, as detailed in GR8-1.
GR8-1 published the first data set as part ofgr8stars, the main
product of which was the uniformly-formatted spectra and homoge-
neous stellar atmospheric parameters1. Effective temperature (𝑇eff),
surface gravity (log𝑔), metallicity ([Fe/H]), microturbulent veloc-
ity (𝑣mic), macroturbulent velocity (𝑣mac), and projected rotational
velocity (𝑣sin𝑖 ★) were provided as part of the GR8-1 data set for
all stars with available spectra. Thegr8starscatalogue provides a
1 https://zenodo.org/records/15441644
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

gr8stars II : judgement day3
robust and extensive resource for the stellar and exoplanet commu-
nities, with plans to extend to all targets in the catalogue through
period spectroscopic archive searches and observing proposals.
3 DATA
As described in GR8-1, spectra were taken with 6 different high-
resolutionspectrographsaspartofgr8stars.Forourmethodcom-
parison in this work, we use only the spectra from the SOPHIE
spectrograph. This was done to ensure no scatter is introduced by
the use of different instruments. The SOPHIE spectrograph covers
the most stars in the current version of the catalogue. We addition-
allyremovedspectroscopicbinaries,variablestars(aspertheirmain
SIMBADobjecttype),andtargetswith𝑣sin𝑖 ★,asmeasuredbyPAWS
(Freckelton et al. 2024) in GR8-1, larger than 10km s−1. These cuts
were made to ensure we limit the amount of blended spectral lines,
whichseverelyimpacttheequivalentwidths(EW)method,andspec-
tral features induced by variability.
TheSOPHIEspectrograph(Spectrographepourl’Observationdes
PhénoménesdesIntérieursstellairesetdesExoplanètes),onthe1.93
mreflectortelescopeattheObservatoireHauteProvence,hasawave-
length coverage of 387.2 nm to 694.3 nm (Perruchot et al. 2008;
Bouchy et al. 2009). As part ofgr8stars, we use only observa-
tionsconductedintheHighResolution(HR)mode,witharesolving
power of𝑅≈75000. Of the 1286 targets observed with SOPHIE
in thegr8starscatalogue, 585 can be classified as single, slow-
rotating stars by using the SIMBAD object classifications and lim-
iting𝑣sin𝑖 ★to 10km s −1 as measured by Freckelton et al. (2025).
This is the subset analysed in this paper.
4 STELLAR ANALYSIS METHODS
4.1 Spectroscopic Methods
Within this work, we employ six different state-of-the-art spectro-
scopic analysis methods. Reflecting the variety in analysis methods
intheliterature,thesesix spannotonlydifferentmethodologies,but
also differing atmospheric models, spectral line lists, and assump-
tions. A summary of the methods and their properties can be found
in Table 1.
4.1.1 ARES+MOOG
The atmospheric stellar parameters (𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H]and,𝑣 mic)
were derived using the ARES+MOOG methodology described in
Santos et al. (2013); Sousa (2014); Sousa et al. (2021). For this we
usedARESv2 2 (Sousaetal.2007,2015)toconsistentlymeasurethe
EW of selected iron lines for each stellar spectrum, across the en-
tirewavelengthrange.Forthis,weusedtheironlinelistpresentedin
Sousaetal.(2008),however,whenwefindatemperaturethatislower
than 5200K, we switch the list of lines to one that is more appro-
priate for cooler stars (Tsantaki et al. 2013). The best spectroscopic
parameters are found by converging into ionisation and excitation
equilibrium. In this process, it is used for a grid of Kurucz model
atmospheres (Kurucz 1993) and the radiative transfer code MOOG
(Sneden 1973). We also derived a more accurate trigonometric sur-
face gravity using theGaiaDR3 data following the same procedure
as described in Sousa et al. (2021).
2 ARESv2canbedownloadedathttps://github.com/sousasag/ARES
4.1.2 FASMA
FASMA3 (Tsantaki et al. 2018, 2020) uses the radiative transfer
code MOOG (version 2019, Sneden 1973) to compute synthetic
spectraon-the-flyanddeterminestellarparametersthroughaLeven-
berg–Marquardt,non-linear,least-squaresoptimisation.Theadopted
linelistismostlycomprisedofironlinesfromTsantakietal.(2018),
in the wavelength regions 5399 – 5619 Å and 6470 – 6790 Å. The
atomiclinedata,namelytheoscillatorstrengths,wereobtainedfrom
the line list of theGaia-ESO survey (Heiter et al. 2021). For the rest
of the lines, we kept the atomic data obtained either from the VALD
database (Ryabchikova et al. 2015) or calibrated empirically from
observed spectra (of the Sun and Arcturus, see Tsantaki et al. 2018
for details). The damping parameters are based on the ABO theory
(Barklem et al. 2000) when available, or in any other case, we used
the Unsold approximation (Unsöld 1955). FASMA performs local
normalisation for the adopted intervals and a cleaning process for
cosmic rays before matching with the synthetic spectrum. We used
the standard solar abundances from Asplund et al. (2009) internally
adopted by MOOG, except for iron, for which we adopted A(Fe)
= 7.45dex. The model atmospheres are the grids of the MARCS
libraries (Gustafsson et al. 2008). The uncertainties on the stellar
parameters are derived from the covariance matrix constructed by
thenon-linearleast-squaresfit.FASMAdelivers𝑇 eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H],
and𝑣sin𝑖 ★while microturbulence and macroturbulence are refined
in a second iteration based on empirical calibrations from Tsantaki
et al. (2013) and Doyle et al. (2014), respectively.
4.1.3 Metal Pipe
Metal Pipe ( Beta v1.5.14, Kolecki & Weiss 2026) is a C++ and
Python framework that derives stellar abundances using line-by-line
spectral synthesis. To get stellar parameters (𝑇eff andlog𝑔), it fits
a star’s photometry to MIST isochrone models (Dotter 2016) of a
given input metallicity (to start, Metal Pipe assumes a metallicity
of [M/H] = 0). It then interpolates an appropriate model atmosphere
fromagridofPhoenixmodels(Husseretal.2013).Usingthismodel
atmosphere, MOOG (versionnov2019,Sneden 1973) is called to
generate synthetic spectral lines, which are fit to the observed stellar
spectra using a weighted𝜒 2 minimisation algorithm. Metal Pipe
operates on the entire wavelength range of the spectra.
First, Metal Pipe fits only iron lines. If the output metallicity (de-
rivedfromsyntheticspectralfittingofironlines)doesnotmatchthe
input metallicity (the metallicity of the model atmosphere), the pro-
cess iterates. Metal Pipe interpolates a new model atmosphere with
ametallicitymatchingthelastoutputvalue(i.e.theinputmetallicity
of the next iteration is based on the output metallicity from the pre-
viousiteration).Again,MetalPipefitstheironlinestogetanoutput
metallicity and tests whether it is consistent with the input value.
This iteration continues until convergence is reached.
Once [Fe/H] is converged, it fits alpha-enhancement ([𝛼/Fe]), us-
ing a similar method with calcium and titanium lines. Once both
[Fe/H] and [𝛼/Fe] are converged, it fits a number of other elements
as specified by the user. At the time of writing, Metal Pipe supports
fitting for abundances of C, O, Na, Mg, Al, Si, S, Ca, Ti, and Fe.
3 https://github.com/MariaTsantaki/FASMA-synthesis
4 https://github.com/kolecki4/Metal-Pipe
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

4Freckelton et al.
Analysis Code Method Type Free Parameters RadiativeTransferCode Line List Model Atmosphere
ARES+MOOG Equivalent Widths 𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H],
𝑣mic
MOOG Sousa et al. (2008),
Tsantaki et al. (2013)
Kurucz (Kurucz 1993)
FASMA Spectral Synthesis 𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H],
𝑣sin𝑖 ★
MOOG Tsantaki et al. (2018) MARCS
Metal Pipe Spectral Synthesis 𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H],
𝑣sin𝑖 ★
MOOG Linemake(Placcoetal.
2021)
Phoenix
PA WS Equivalent Width +
Spectral Synthesis
𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H],
𝑣mic,log𝑔
WIDTH,SPECTRUM SPECTRUM ATLAS9
webSME Spectral Synthesis 𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H],
𝑣mic,𝑣 mac,𝑣sin𝑖 ★
Wehrhahn et al. (2023) Gaia-ESO MARCS
YARARA Equivalent Widths and
Machine Learning
𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H] N/A Cretignier et al. (2024) N/A
Table 1.A summary of the key components of each spectral analysis code employed for this work, in the configurations used here.
4.1.4 PAWS
AtmosphericparametersweredeterminedaspartofGR8-1usingthe
PAWSpipeline,introducedbyFreckeltonetal.(2024).Thestellarpa-
rameterspresentedinthisworkasderivedbyPA WSaredirectlytaken
from GR8-1.PAWSuses theiSpecframework (Blanco-Cuaresma
et al. 2014; Blanco-Cuaresma 2019) to employ both the curve-of-
growth EW and spectral synthesis methods. For both methods, we
used the ATLAS9 model atmospheres (Kurucz 2005). Initial stel-
lar parameters (𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H],𝑣 mic) were determined using the
EW method with theWIDTHradiative transfer code (Sbordone et al.
2004).Thissetofinitialparameterswasusedasaninputtothespec-
tral synthesis method, employing theSPECTRUMradiative transfer
code (Gray & Corbally 1994) to determine the final stellar atmo-
sphericparameters(𝑇 eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H],𝑣 mic,𝑣 mac,𝑣sin𝑖 ★).Spectral
synthesisaspartofPAWScoversthewavelengthrange480-680nm,
using theSPECTRUMline list based on the NIST atomic database
(Ralchenko 2005).
4.1.5 webSME
SME (Spectroscopy Made Easy) is a well-established radiative-
transfer and fitting code originally coded in IDL and C++ (Valenti
& Piskunov 1996; Piskunov & Valenti 2017). It runs an adapted
and updated version of the line-formation code SYNTH (Piskunov
1992)onapre-computedgridofplane-parallelorsphericalMARCS
model atmospheres (Gustafsson et al. 2008). SME’s frontend and
line-formation wrapper was recently recoded in Python (Wehrhahn
et al. 2023) and is now referred to as PySME.webSME5 is a server-
basedinterfacetoPySMEthatoffersseveralmodes.Weemploytwo
ofwebSME’s modes in the current work: the least-squares fitting
mode and the forward-modelling mode. These, and the additional
modes, are described in Puschnig et al. (A&A, submitted). Output
spectra can be downloaded as fits files for further offline compar-
isons/calculations.
The forward-modelling mode produces a synthetic spectrum for a
given set of input parameters: spectral resolution,𝑇eff,log𝑔, metal-
licity,𝑣 mic,𝑣 mac,𝑣sin𝑖 ★, using one of several predefined line lists
(here the atomic Gaia-ESO line list, Heiter et al. (2021)) and one
of several predefined solar reference compositions (here Asplund
et al. (2021)). As long as the stellar parameters fall within the grid
of MARCS model atmospheres, any combination of parameters can
be simulated. We note in passing that the grid of MARCS model at-
mospheres was computed assuming the solar reference abundances
5 https://websme.chetec-infra.eu
of Grevesse et al. (2007). By assuming Asplund et al. (2021) for
the line-formation abundance zero point, a small inconsistency is
introduced in the calculations.
The fitting mode allows the user to upload a normalised spec-
trum and choose any number of stellar parameters (see above) to be
determined using a least-squares metric. For the present work, we
focus on the determination oflog𝑔from the Mg I𝑏lines assuming
thattheotherstellarparametersareknown(fromrunswiththeother
codesdiscussedinthissection).Whenstrictlyfittingonlythisregion,
changes in Mg abundance can mimiclog𝑔variations, producing a
lineardegeneracy–seeBreweretal.(2015).Toavoidthis,weadopt
atwostepmethodusingwebSME.Initially,thefullspectrumisfitted
with Mg abundance free, constraining it using all spectral informa-
tion. Secondly, we fix the Mg abundance and perform the synthesis
again,limitedtotheregion5000-6000Å.Thisapproachallowsthe
log𝑔to be constrained using a region of the spectrum that contains
the highly sensitive Mg I𝑏lines.
UnlessaspecificMgabundanceiseitherdeterminedorinput,this
procedure rests on the scaling of Mg with overall metallicity which
works best at solar metallicity and may depart from the scaling rela-
tion by as much as 0.2dex for metal-poor thin-disk stars at[Fe/H]
=−0.5(Fuhrmann2004).Forthetestsfocusingonthesixbenchmark
stars,thispotentialbiasisconsideredtobeofminorimportance.The
fitting mode needs to make many syntheses and thus takes signifi-
cantly longer to produce output than the forward-modelling mode.
4.1.6 YARARA
YARARA is a post-processing methodology initially designed to
extractmorepreciseradialvelocitiesbytheanalysisofspectratime-
series (Cretignier et al. 2021, 2023). A by-product of the code is
the production of a master stellar spectrum free of most known in-
strumental systematics, including telluric lines. In this context, the
pipeline has been recently upgraded (Cretignier et al. 2024) in or-
der to derive the stellar atmospheric parameters6 (namely𝑇 eff,log𝑔
and[Fe/H]). For this work, we did not apply the YARARA correc-
tions on SOPHIE spectra, but only used the atmospheric parameter
retrieval recipe on them.
Themethodologyreliesontheextractionof16EWsfromdifferent
chemicalspecies(seeAppendixEinCretignieretal.(2024))afterthe
spectra have been continuum normalised by RASSINE (Cretignier
et al. 2020). These spectral lines are all encompassed by the wave-
lengthregion4446–6753Å.Thechoiceofusingseveralspecieswas
6 https://github.com/MichaelCretignier/SNAKY
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

gr8stars II : judgement day5
motivatedbythereleaseofsomedegeneraciesbetweenatmospheric
parameters (Gray 2005). A mapping function𝐹fromR16 toR 3:
𝐹(𝐸𝑊 1, 𝐸𝑊2, ..., 𝐸𝑊 16)=(𝑇 eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H])
wasthenfittedusinganon-linearapproachsuchasmachinelearning
regressions. In order to fit the function𝐹, the full HARPS database
wasreducedtoextracttheEWsandacollectionofseveralcatalogsof
stellar atmospheric parameters was obtained from different methods
and instruments (see references in Cretignier et al. (2024)). Because
the function𝐹was calibrated using HARPS spectra, we first estab-
lishedthescalingcoefficientbetweentheHARPSandSOPHIEEWs
thataccountsforthedifferentspectralresolutionofbothinstruments.
Thecoefficientwasobtainedfromastarthathadbeenobservedwith
both instruments.
By definition, the YARARA predicted parameters can be under-
stood as the average answer that would have been provided by the
cited catalogues/methods. The estimated uncertainties on the differ-
ent parameters were given by the test sample and are±70 K,±
0.07dex,and±0.07dexon𝑇 eff,log𝑔and[Fe/H]respectively.Asa
drawbackofthemethodology,themachinelearningregressorstrug-
gles to predict extreme values for stellar observations that were not
inthetrainingsample(suchasstarscumulatinganomalousvaluesin
𝑇eff,log𝑔or[Fe/H]).
4.2 Isochrone Fitting
Using the stellar atmospheric parameters in conjunction with paral-
laxandmagnitudes,weusedtheisochrones(Morton2015)package
to determine masses, radii and ages for thegr8starstargets by fol-
lowingthemethodologyoutlinedbyMortieretal.(2020).Asinputs,
weused𝑇 effand[Fe/H]fromourspectroscopicanalyses,inaddition
to the Gaia DR3 parallax, 2MASS J, H, and K magnitudes (Skrut-
skie et al. 2006), and AllWISE W1, W2, and W3 magnitudes (Cutri
et al. 2013). Note that we did not include spectroscopiclog𝑔in this
analysis. Although accurate spectroscopiclog𝑔measurements are
achievable, there are potential biases and offsets depending on the
method used at a significance that would be relevant for isochrone
fitting (e.g. Torres et al. 2012; Mortier et al. 2014; Magrini et al.
2022). The use of photometric magnitudes combined with paral-
lax instead provides a more accurate constraint on stellar radius,
and hencelog𝑔. We employed the MESA Isochrones and Stellar
Tracks (MIST, Dotter (2016)) stellar evolution model. In this work
we present both the individual masses, radii, and ages from run-
ningisochroneson the results from each spectroscopic method,
andalsoaninverse-variance-weightedmeanoftheMAP(Maximum
aposteriori)valuesfromallmethods.Thelattershouldautomatically
account for systematic differences between spectroscopic methods,
but still relies on only one set of stellar evolution models which can
have systematics of its own. As a result, this work establishes only a
lower limit on the estimated systematics.
5 STELLAR PARAMETER RESULTS
To understand the systematic differences and accuracies of derived
stellar parameters, we compare here the stellar parameters derived
from the codes to each other, in addition to comparing to literature
results.
Table 2.The typical scatter found from the use of different spectroscopic
methods for stellar𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H], radius, mass, and age.
Parameter Typical Scatter
𝑇eff (K) 76
log𝑔(dex) 0.14
[Fe/H](dex) 0.07
Radius (R⊙) 0.02 (1.22 %)
Mass (M⊙) 0.05 (5.50 %)
Age (Gyr) 2.08 (>100 %)
5.1 Method differences
From all spectroscopic methods, we obtain values for𝑇eff,log𝑔,
and[Fe/H],inadditiontopropagatingthesethroughisochronesto
determineradius,mass,andage.Giventheresultsofallspectroscopic
methods,wecanestimatethetypicalscatteronallsixofthesestellar
parametersthatarisesduetodifferencesinmethodologyandmodels.
To do so, we calculate the median value of each parameter for each
star across all sets of results. Then, for each star, we calculate the
RMSD (Root Mean Square Deviation) across the different methods
fromthismedianvalue.Theoverallscatteristhentakenasthemedian
RMSD across all stars. Table 2 displays the results of this, showing
the typical scatter that we find in𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H], radius, mass,
and age.
The floors in systematic uncertainties identified in Table 2 corre-
spond to approximately 1.22 % in stellar radius, 5.50 % in stellar
mass, and over 100 % in stellar age. These values are, broadly, con-
sistent with the precision requirements forPLATOstellar radius and
mass7. This indicates that spectroscopic method differences alone
are unlikely to represent the dominant limitation in stellar mass and
radiusdeterminationsforPLATOtargets.Incontrasttothis,thescat-
ter in age is substantially larger, demonstrating the strong sensitivity
of isochrone derived ages to scatter in the employed atmospheric
parameters.
5.1.1 Spectroscopic results
The PASTEL catalogue (Soubiran et al. 2016) provides a useful
resource of stellar atmospheric parameters, collating results from a
varietyofsourcesandmethods.Withinthisworkweusethe2020-01-
30versionofthecatalogueforcomparison.Wenotethatthe[Fe/H]
measurements included in the PASTEL catalogue are all directly
fromhighresolution,highSNRspectroscopy,makingthemrelevant
comparison values. The𝑇eff measurements are predominantly from
spectroscopy and photometry, with a small number having𝑇eff de-
termined from interferometry. In terms oflog𝑔, most values result
from the ionisation-equilibrium and parallax methods, however the
PASTEL catalogue does includelog𝑔values determined through
asteroseismology. It is unlikely that any of the stars within this work
have a PASTELlog𝑔measured using asteroseismology, given that
we focus on only FGK dwarfs. Given that the median values of the
atmosphericparameters,andtheirassociateduncertainties,represent
both the consensus and spread in values at the current state of the
field, we expect our results in this work to reflect those from PAS-
TEL.Throughoutthiswork,thePASTELvaluesusedforcomparison
are the median of all PASTEL values for the star. We interpret the
inherent scatter in the PASTEL catalogue as the standard deviation
presentintheresultscollatedforeachtarget.Acrossalltargetsinthis
work with multiple sources of parameters, we see median standard
7 https://platomission.com/2018/06/05/science-performance/
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

6Freckelton et al.
deviationsin𝑇 eff,log𝑔,and[Fe/H]of52K,0.09dex,and0.04dex
respectively in the PASTEL catalogue.
Figure1showshistogramsofthedifferencesbetweenatmospheric
parameters in this work and those from PASTEL, split into𝑇eff,
[Fe/H],andlog𝑔asthetop,middle,andbottomrows,respectively.
For each plot, we would expect an unbiased, accurate method to
produce a histogram of uncertainties that is Gaussian and centred
around 0 difference, with a FWHM (Full Width at Half Maximum)
reflectiveofthetypicaluncertaintiesinthemethods.Thisisobserved
in the majority of cases in Figure 1, with a few notable exceptions.
We show the RMSD, median difference, and median uncertainty for
all results in Table 3.
Observing the difference between𝑇eff derived in this work and
that from PASTEL in Figure 1, the RMSD is between 89 and 102 K
for all targets. This follows investigations performed by Heiter et al.
(2015), in which the PASTEL catalogue was analysed for the Gaia-
ESObenchmarkstars.Fromthis,itwasfoundthatforstarswiththree
ormorespectroscopicdeterminationsof𝑇 effshowedameanstandard
deviation in𝑇eff of∼85 K. We repeat such an investigation for the
starsinthisworkwiththreeormorePASTELentries.Thistotals310
starsfor𝑇 eff,givingamedianspread(maximum–minimum)of131
K.Acrossthe202starswiththreeormorelog𝑔and[Fe/H]entries,
weseeamedianspreadof0.20dexinlog𝑔,and0.12dexin[Fe/H].
Comparing these to the scatter we see in our results through Figure
1 and Table 3, we see that our scatter and that seen in PASTEL is of
a similar magnitude.
InFigure2,weplotthemeanresultsfromallanalysiscodesagainst
thePASTELvaluesfor𝑇 eff,log𝑔,and[Fe/H],respectively.Themost
striking trend here is the systematically lowerlog𝑔values returned
in this work compared to the PASTEL values. Given that PASTEL
results come from various sources, not limited to spectroscopy, we
can assume that this is a spectroscopic effect. The mean difference
between our meanlog𝑔and that from PASTEL is -0.09 dex. How-
ever,thislieswithinthemeanstandarddeviationweseeinourresults
of 0.12 dex, suggesting that uncertainties due to method-dependent
scatter outweigh this systematic underestimation.
WhenweconsiderthemediandifferencesshowninTable3,wesee
thatARES+MOOG,FASMA, andYARARAresults show median
differences at absolute values larger than their respective median
uncertainties. This could indicate a systematic offset, however as
the uncertainties are precision based, and do not account for model
inaccuracies,itislikelythatuncertaintiesadjustedforthiswoulden-
compass the observed median difference. This is further supported
by the fact that bothPA WSandMetal Pipehave median uncertain-
ties reflective of their scatter (RMSD), whereas scatter significantly
outweighs uncertainty forARES+MOOGandFASMA.
Regarding[Fe/H],wecanseefromTable3thattheRMSDislarger
thanthemedianuncertaintyforallresults,indicatingunderestimated
uncertaintiesinallcases.Wecanadditionallyobservethatthemedian
differencebetween[Fe/H]fromARES+MOOGandMetal Pipeand
that from PASTEL is larger than the median uncertainty.
By far the most obvious issues in Figure 1 lie with thelog𝑔. Un-
derestimationoflog𝑔isclearfrombothPA WSandARES+MOOG,
with median differences of -0.22 and -0.16 dex, respectively, ex-
ceeding the median uncertainties in both cases. BothPA WSand
ARES+MOOGalso show RMSD at scales larger than three times
themedianuncertainty,stronglysuggestingthatuncertaintiesareun-
derestimatedfortheresultinglog𝑔.Boththemediandifferencesand
RMSD in the results suggestlog𝑔derived from the spectroscopic
methods within this work requires larger uncertainties than purely
precision based ones, to account for methodological and model dif-
ferences. In terms of𝑇eff and[Fe/H], we see far more significant
standard deviations in our work of 64 K and 0.061 dex respectively,
than their mean differences from PASTEL of 11 K and 0.001 dex.
It is clear that for𝑇eff and[Fe/H], method-to-method scatter is a
significant source of uncertainty.
Wefurtherinvestigatedifferencesbetween𝑇 eff fromthisworkand
that in the PASTEL catalogue in Figure 3 by plotting these against
the PASTEL𝑇eff, coloured by the[Fe/H]from each method. Each
plot is repeated below coloured by the PASTEL[Fe/H], to allow
foranalternativecomparisonindependentofmethod.Foreachcom-
parison of𝑇eff difference to PASTEL𝑇eff, we calculated the Pearson
correlation coefficient(PCC) toidentify any trends.Out ofall meth-
ods,onlyFASMAshowslittle-to-nocorrelation,withaPCCof0.02.
Additionally,ARES+MOOGis the only method showing a positive
correlation, with a value of 0.39. whereasPA WS,YARARA, amd
Metal Pipehave negative correlations of -0.37, -0.35, and -0.40,
respectively. This evaluation suggests thatFASMAdetermines𝑇eff
without bias relative to the PASTEL values across the FGK regime.
Limiting the sample to solar and cooler stars, based on the PASTEL
𝑇eff, the correlations for the latter three results change significantly.
ForPA WSandMetal Pipe, the PCCs become -0.05 and 0.01, re-
spectively, in the solar and cooler regime, suggesting an improved
suitability here as opposed to with hotter stars. Interestingly, the
YARARA𝑇 eff difference becomes positively correlated with PAS-
TEL𝑇 eff at PCC of 0.22.
Figure3additionallyshowstrendswith[Fe/H].Particularlypreva-
lent here are the results fromMetal Pipe. Colouring the points in
thisplotbyboththeMetal PipeandPASTEL[Fe/H]valuesreveals
aninfluenceof[Fe/H]on𝑇 eff,orviceversa.Thisisnotunexpected,
given that changes in one stellar parameter can be at least partially
compensatedbyapparentchangesinanother,particularlywhenusing
small numbers of lines (Gray 2005). High metallicity targets tend to
haveanoverestimated𝑇 effcomparedtoPASTELwhendeterminedby
Metal Pipe, whereas lower metallicity stars see an underestimated
𝑇eff comparedtoPASTEL.Figure3isreplicatedfor𝑇 eff andlog𝑔in
Appendix A.
5.1.2 Isochrone results
AsdetailedinSection4.2,weusedthespectroscopic𝑇 effand[Fe/H],
togetherwithphotometricmagnitudes,todeterminemassandradius
foreachstar,amongstotherparameters.Figure4showshistogramsof
the resulting stellar mass distributions fromPA WS,ARES+MOOG,
FASMA,YARARA, andMetal Pipe, in addition to the mass distri-
bution from the combined isochronal posterior. This shows that our
sample is weighted towards stars heavier than solar, with all distri-
butionspeakinghigherthansolarmass.Thisistobeexpected,given
that the mass tracks used to select the wholegr8starssample (see
GR8-1) retain metal rich F dwarfs, however not metal poor ones.
This biases the F type population, and therefore in part the entire
gr8starspopulation, to heavier stars.
In terms of stellar ages, typical uncertainties on the isochronal
findings are on the order of≈30% (Xiang et al. 2017), owing to the
slow timescales of change of observables. Isochrones for different
ages are very close for main sequence stars. We see these uncer-
tainties reflected in our own results fromisochronesin this work.
The distribution of stellar ages determined throughisochronesand
spectroscopic inputs is shown in Figure 5. The individual distribu-
tionsfromtheuseofdifferentspectroscopicmethodsfollowabroad
shape that peaks towards a region between 1 and 5 Gyr, however
the value of this peak varies significantly between the codes used.
For any given star, we see a typical scatter in the determined age of
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

gr8stars II : judgement day7
Figure1.HistogramsofthedifferencesbetweenresultsfromeachmethodandPASTELfor𝑇 eff,[Fe/H],andlog𝑔.Thestandarddeviation(STD)andmeanof
these histograms is marked on each plot, with a grey dashed line representing 0 in each plot.
Parameter RMSD Median Difference Median Uncertainty
P A+M F Y MP P A+M F Y MP P A+M F Y MP
Δ𝑇 eff (K) 94 94 90 89 101 -8 34 51 -14 -27 105 30 26 70 93
Δ[Fe/H] 0.08 0.10 0.06 0.08 0.12 0.00 0.04 -0.02 -0.02 0.04 0.04 0.02 0.03 0.07 0.01
Δlog𝑔 0.29 0.19 0.17 0.13 0.12 -0.22 -0.16 -0.05 0.01 -0.02 0.12 0.05 0.09 0.07 0.04
Table 3.The RMSD and median difference from the PASTEL values, and median uncertainties on the𝑇eff,[Fe/H], andlog𝑔, forPA WS(P),ARES+MOOG
(A+M),FASMA(F),YARARA(Y), andMetal Pipe(MP).
2.08Gyrsolelyfromtheuseof𝑇 eff and[Fe/H]inputsfromdifferent
spectroscopic methods.
For mass, radius, and age, all difference in results comes from the
scatterin𝑇 effand[Fe/H]fromthespectroscopicmethods.Asshown
in Table 2, we see scatter in mass of 0.05 M⊙, radius of 0.02 R⊙,
andageof2.08Gyr.Itisimportanttocontextualisetheseintermsof
the typical precision uncertainties we see on these parameters using
isochrones.Acrossallofourresults,weseeamedianuncertaintyin
stellar mass of 0.03 M⊙, stellar radius of 0.01 R⊙, and stellar age of
1.66Gyr.Giventhattheseuncertaintiesarelowerthanthescatterwe
observewhenusingspectroscopicinputsfromdifferentmethods,we
suggest that these do not fully reflect the true uncertainties in these
parameters.
5.2 Effective Temperatures
5.2.1 Interferometry
A useful tool for our method comparison is the availability of stellar
parameters for benchmark stars. Soubiran et al. (2024) provide in-
terferometric fundamental𝑇eff and radii measurements for 192 Gaia
FGK benchmark stars. While these measurements have minimal re-
lianceonspectroscopyorevolutionarymodels,theydonotrepresent
completemodelindependence.Thebolometricfluxesusedaredeter-
mined through SED fitting, and limb-darkening models are applied
to the stellar angular diameters. Cross-matching with Soubiran et al.
(2024),wefindasmalloverlapof6targetsthatarealsoinoursample
of 585 stars in this paper.
Figure 6 displays the difference in𝑇eff between the spectroscopic
methods in this work, and the interferometry from Soubiran et al.
(2024) for these six stars. We see overall agreement between all
methods and the interferometric effective temperatures. Across all
methods,themeandifferencefromtheinterferometriceffectivetem-
peratureis78K,sittingcomfortablywithintheinterferometricmean
uncertainty in𝑇eff of 135 K. Considering the differences in𝑇eff be-
tween the methods used in this paper, we see a mean dispersion
across the six stars of 211 K. Soubiran et al. (2016) compare the
fundamental𝑇 eff values for 151 stars to those from photometry and
spectroscopy, finding a median absolute deviation of 96 K. Our re-
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

8Freckelton et al.
Figure 2.The mean value from all spectral analysis codes in this work plotted against the PASTEL value for𝑇eff (left),log𝑔(centre), and[Fe/H](right).
The pink line in all panels represents the one-to-one relationship. Lower panels show the residuals between the data sets. Y axes errors represent the standard
deviation in the results from this work.
Figure 3.Differences in𝑇eff from this work and those from PASTEL, coloured by the[Fe/H]from each method on the top row, and the PASTEL[Fe/H]on
the second row. The top row additionally includes linear regression lines fitted to the data, as well as the Pearson Correlaton Coefficient (PCC) for the five sets
of results.
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

gr8stars II : judgement day9
Figure4.Histogramsofthewhole-samplemassesobtainedusingisochrones,with𝑇 eff and[Fe/H]fromPA WS,ARES+MOOG,FASMA,YARARA,Metal
Pipe, and the combined results. Grey dashed lines indicate the median of each distribution of results.
Figure5.Distributionofstellaragesacrossthesamplefromthiswork.Stellaragesweredeterminedusingisochrones,withresultsfrominputtingspectroscopic
𝑇eff and[Fe/H]fromPA WS,ARES+MOOG,FASMA,YARARA,Metal Pipe, and the combined results. Grey dashed lines display the median age from each
distribution of results.
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

10Freckelton et al.
Figure 6.The difference between spectroscopic and fundamental (interfero-
metric)𝑇 eff for each method applied in this work, for each of the 6 stars in
common with Soubiran et al. (2024).
sults here are therefore within the broad expectations of comparing
spectroscopic to interferometric𝑇eff.
An additional observation from Figure 6 is that for𝛽CVn we
see strong agreement between𝑇eff results from our spectroscopic
methods, however at an offset when compared to the fundamental
𝑇eff from Soubiran et al. (2024). All spectroscopic results are within
60Kofeachotherfor𝛽CVn,henceindicatingthatthespectroscopic
methods agree for this star, however differ somewhat significantly
compared to the interferometric𝑇eff. In terms of other spectroscopic
parameters, we see a standard deviation from the six codes of 0.17
dex inlog𝑔, and 0.18 dex in[Fe/H].
In performing a literature search for𝛽CVn, we found two other
interferometric𝑇 eff measurements. Boyajian et al. (2012) gives a
𝑇eff of 5653±72 K, while Baines et al. (2018) measures 5966±
117 K, both values cooler than the 6013±91 K obtained from
Soubiran et al. (2024). Of particular note is the𝑇eff from Boyajian
et al. (2012) being cooler than both other interferometric values
by over 300 K. Differences in interferometric values could result
from uncertainty in the derivation of angular diameter, or differing
treatments of limb darkening and bolometric flux determination.
Given the small sample size, it is not possible to truly disentangle
systemiceffectsinspectroscopicmethodsfromthosethatareinherent
in the interferometric analysis.
Given the agreement between spectroscopic methods we observe
for𝛽CVn, it is of interest to see if this propagates to including
literature values aside from the interferometry from Soubiran et al.
(2024). Table 4 displays the stellar effective temperature determined
as part of this work, in addition to literature values from interfer-
ometry, spectroscopy, and photometry. We see a general agreement
betweenourresultsandthoseofliteraturespectroscopyandphotom-
etry that suggest the star is cooler than the interferometric methods
of Soubiran et al. (2024) and Baines et al. (2018), however hotter
than that from Boyajian et al. (2012).
Table4.Effectivetemperaturefor𝛽CVnasderivedfromspectroscopyinthis
work,andfrominterferometry,spectroscopy,andphotometryintheliterature.
Source𝛽CVn𝑇 eff (K)
Spectroscopy (This Work)
webSME5872±279
ARES+MOOG5863±20
FASMA5866±19
PA WS5841±101
YARARA5901±70
Metal Pipe–
Literature Interferometry
Soubiran et al. (2024) 6013±91
Boyajian et al. (2012) 5653±72
Baines et al. (2018) 5966±117
Literature Spectroscopy
Mishenina et al. (2015) 5897
Gonzalez et al. (2010) 5806±24
da Silva et al. (2015) 5875±30
Literature Photometry
Luck (2017) 5865
Ramírez et al. (2007) 5779
Casagrande et al. (2011) 5879
5.2.2 SED
AspartofGR8-1,photometric𝑇 effandradiiwereobtainedfollowing
the spectral energy distribution (SED) fitting methodology first ap-
plied by Morrell & Naylor (2019, 2020); Morrell et al. (2025) – see
GR8-1 for a detailed description of how this was used. Comparing
the results from this work to these photometrically derived values
allows for a comparison with𝑇eff that is independent of our own in
terms of both data and models.
A comparison of the𝑇eff from each method in this work to the
SEDresultsisshowninFigure7.ThetoprowofFigure7showsthe
differencebetweenthe𝑇 eff fromeachspectroscopicmethodandthat
from SED fitting, plotted against the SED𝑇eff, and the bottom row
shows the histograms of these differences. Observing the top row,
we see that forPA WS,YARARA, andMetal Pipethere is a nega-
tive trend between the𝑇eff difference and the SED𝑇eff, with PCCs
of -0.49, -0.48, and -0.52, respectively. Restricting to the cooler-
than-solar regime, as in Section 5.1.1, transforms these correlation
coefficients to -0.03, 0.08, and -0.06, respectively. This replicates
the observation that the negative correlation drastically reduces, or
disappearsentirely,whencomparingtothePASTELcatalogueinthe
solar-and-coolerregimeinSection5.1.1,suggestingthatfurthercal-
ibrationforthesemethodsisrequiredforhotterstars.Weagainseea
positive correlation in difference between𝑇eff results when compar-
ingARES+MOOGin Figure 7, as was observed when comparing
to PASTEL, however to a less significant effect with a PCC of 0.26.
When we compare the difference betweenFASMAand SED𝑇eff to
the SED𝑇 eff we see a negative correlation, with a PCC of -0.18.
Given the strong agreement between theFASMA𝑇eff,[Fe/H], and
log𝑔and those from PASTEL shown in Section 5.1.1, this may re-
flect an inherent systematic in the comparison of spectroscopic to
SED fitting results. We additionally see more negative PCCs when
comparingPA WS,YARARA, andMetal Pipe𝑇 eff to SED𝑇eff than
when comparing to PASTEL. Furthermore, although we again see a
positive correlation when comparing theARES+MOOGresults in
Figure7,thisistoasmallermagnitudeat0.26,ratherthan0.39when
comparing to the PASTEL catalogue.
AsexpectedfromobservingthetoprowofFigure7,thehistograms
in the bottom row reveal the difference between spectroscopic and
SED𝑇 eff have a negative peak forPA WS,YARARA, andMetal
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

gr8stars II : judgement day11
Pipe, indicating overall underestimation in𝑇eff compared to SED
results from these methods. Despite the trend observed in the top
row, the histogram forARES+MOOGshows a peak close to 0 K,
indicating the majority of targets have anARES+MOOG𝑇eff that
agrees well with the SED fitting result. The same is observed for the
FASMAhistogram, indicating thatARES+MOOGandFASMAare
themethodsthatproducea𝑇 eff inthebestagreementtoSEDfitting.
5.3 Surface gravity
It is stressed in the literature that spectroscopiclog𝑔often shows
biasesandoffsets(e.g.Sozzettietal.2007;Torresetal.2012;Mortier
etal.2014).Thisis,however,dependentonthespectroscopicmethod,
notabroadlimitationofspectroscopyitself.Withspecialisedanalysis
using extensive wavelength coverage and spectral line constraints,
spectroscopic methods can recoverlog𝑔to within≈0.05 dex of
asteroseismicvalues(Breweretal.2015).Thedisagreementsinlog𝑔
determinedbythemethodsinthisworkreflectthedifferentchoicesin
linelists,modelatmospheres,andspectralcontentemployed.Dueto
this, we selected the 30 targets for which spectroscopiclog𝑔shows
the largest disagreement between spectroscopic method results to
perform comparisons within this section.
5.3.1 Direct Comparisons oflog𝑔
In addition toPA WS,ARES+MOOG,FASMA,YARARA, and
Metal Pipe,weappliedwebSMEtothe30log𝑔discrepantstars.To
save computation time we ran only the region 5000 - 6000 Å within
webSME, with all targets beginning with solar input parameters.
This spectral region includes the Mg I b triplet, known to have high
sensitivity in the wings tolog𝑔via pressure broadening (Valenti
& Fischer 2005; Torres et al. 2012). Given thatwebSMEdirectly
computeslog𝑔fromthisregion,weranitonall30starsinthissec-
tion to provide an additional, homogeneously derived spectroscopic
comparison.
InFigure8,foreachmethodwehaveplottedthedifferenceinlog𝑔
whencomparedtothewebSMEvalueagainstthewebSMElog𝑔for
each of the 30 stars. It is clear from this thatPA WSunderestimates
log𝑔significantly for these targets when compared to thewebSME
results, with the median difference fromwebSMElog𝑔being -
0.57dex,farexceedingthemedianuncertaintyof0.13dex.Toalesser
degree, however still with significance,ARES+MOOG,FASMA,
andMetal Pipealso underestimatelog𝑔compared towebSME,
with median differences of -0.34, -0.28, and -0.24 dex, respectively.
Thelog𝑔values fromYARARAdiffer fromwebSMEresults by a
median value of -0.05 dex, indicating better agreement on average,
however we observe a systematic trend in the relationship between
the difference inlog𝑔and thewebSMEvalue itself. Splitting this
sample into the lower half ofwebSMElog𝑔(≤4.32), we see a
median difference betweenYARARAandwebSMElog𝑔of -0.02
dex. For the higherlog𝑔half, this median difference increases to
-0.18 dex.
5.3.2 Forward Modelling
To further assess the accuracy of the spectroscopiclog𝑔values
returnedbyeachmethod,weusedwebSME’sforwardmodellingca-
pabilities to compare synthesised spectra based on the results to the
observedspectraforall30ofthediscrepantlog𝑔stars.Theforward
modelling takes𝑇eff,log𝑔,[Fe/H],𝑣 mic,𝑣 mac, and𝑣sin𝑖 ★as inputs
for synthesising the spectra. Multiple options are available for the
Table 5.Median chisquared from comparing synthesised spectra generated
with the output of a specific code to the observed spectrum.
Code Median reduced chisquared
PA WS 1.805
ARES+MOOG 1.057
FASMA 1.408
YARARA 1.076
Metal Pipe 1.255
webSME 0.995
line list and solar composition employed in the synthesis – we opted
fortheGaia-ESO(Y,Y|U)atomiclinelist(Heiteretal.2021)andsolar
reference composition from Asplund et al. (2021). We note that this
line list was optimised using the solar composition from Grevesse
et al. (2007). The small scale differences introduced by using a dif-
ferent solar composition here, however, do not impact the relative
comparisons between methods that we perform. All forward mod-
elling was performed within the region 5000 - 6000Å, containing
the Mg I b triplet, rather than the whole spectrum, to save compu-
tation time. Due to the sensitivity of these lines tolog𝑔, inaccurate
log𝑔values would be strongly visible in the synthesised lines not
representing the observed ones.
For results from methods in which not all broadening parameters
(𝑣 mic,𝑣 mac, and𝑣sin𝑖 ★) are determined, we used the inverse vari-
ance weighted mean fromPA WS,FASMA, andwebSMEresults.
ARES+MOOGprovides𝑣 mic for all targets, hence the mean was
only used for𝑣mac and𝑣sin𝑖 ★, whereas all three mean broadening
parameters were required for bothMetal PipeandYARARA.
Weusedareducedchisquaredmetrictodirectlycomparehowwell
the synthesised spectra match the observed one. The result of this is
shown in Figure 10, with the median reduced chisquared from each
codeshowninTable5.Thenatureofthereducedchisquaredisthata
valueof1.0fitsthedatainaccordancewithitsuncertainties,avalue
less than 1.0 is overfitting, and a value larger than one indicates a
poorer fit. As seen in Table 5,webSMEproduces synthetic spectra
fitting best to the observed ones around the Mg I b triplet, whereas
PA WSperforms poorly in this region, confirming the likely largest
inaccuracy in thelog𝑔determined byPA WS.
Giventhatweseemedianreducedchisquaredvaluescloseto1.0in
Table 5 for the EW based methods (ARES+MOOGandYARARA)
we would also expect the EW section ofPA WSto produce a well-
fittinglog𝑔value. Figure 9 displays a box-and-whisker plot of the
log𝑔valuesfromeachcodeinthissampleof30stars,alongwiththe
log𝑔produced by the EW section ofPA WS. Although displaying
a much larger range oflog𝑔values, the results fromPA WSEW
align far more with those fromwebSMEthan the fullPA WSresults,
indicating these may be a more reliable measurement.
5.3.3 Isochronelog𝑔
Asisochronesdeterminesmassandradius,wecanalsoobtainlog𝑔
values from this method. As with Figure 1, we can again compare
to the PASTEL catalogue, allowing systematic trends to be made
apparent. This comparison is shown in Figure 11, with the results of
inputtingtheresultsfromeachcodetoisochronesandthecombined
isochrone posteriors shown through histograms of their difference
from the PASTELlog𝑔. Using these isochronelog𝑔values, the
trendsofFigure1havebeenlargelymitigated.Withinthecontextof
this sample and the spectroscopic methods tested, this indicates that
the combined isochrone posteriors provide the most consistent set
oflog𝑔values. We do, however, note that radii determined through
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

12Freckelton et al.
Figure 7.First row : difference between the𝑇eff derived by each method and the𝑇eff from SED fitting, plotted against SED𝑇eff. The Pearson Correlation
Coefficient(PCC)andregressionlinesareadditionallyincluded.Secondrow:HistogramsofthedifferencesbetweenspectroscopicandSED𝑇 eff,withstandard
deviation (STD) and median values displayed.
Figure 8.Difference between thelog𝑔derived by each spectroscopic method and that fromwebSME, plotted against thewebSMElog𝑔. This covers the 30
stars with the most discrepantlog𝑔from the different spectroscopic methods.
isochrones, and hencelog𝑔, are significantly model dependent and
may not agree with empirical measurements (e.g. Boyajian et al.
2015).
Weadditionallyinvestigatewhethertheuseoftheequivalentwidth
or synthesis methods influences the observed underestimation of
log𝑔. We show results from this in Figure 12. The left hand panel
showsthedifferencebetweenthefullPA WSspectroscopiclog𝑔and
the combined isochronallog𝑔, plotted against thePA WS𝑇eff. The
righthandpanelrepeatsthis,albeitcomparingthe𝑇 eff fromonlythe
EW ofPA WS, rather than the full pipeline. Although large scatter is
seeninbothplots,thereisastrikingnegativecorrelationbetweenthe
difference inlog𝑔from EW and the stellar effective temperature,
replicating the results shown by Mortier et al. (2014). Given this
correlation,andthelargescatterweseeinspectroscopiclog𝑔values
throughout Section 5.3, we conclude that the combined isochrone
log𝑔values provide the most self-consistent surface gravities from
this sample. It is important, however, to remain aware thatlog𝑔
values derived from isochrones are model dependent, and retain the
influence of other stellar parameters (Bonaca et al. 2012; Boyajian
et al. 2015).
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

gr8stars II : judgement day13
Figure 9.Box-and-whisker plot of thelog𝑔values determined by each
code for the sample of 30 discrepantlog𝑔targets, in addition to thelog𝑔
for these produced by only the equivalent widths section ofPA WS. Open
circles representlog𝑔values that extend beyond the minimum or maximum
extremes of the data.
5.4 Microturbulent Velocity𝑣mic
Animportantconsiderationinouranalysisistheinfluenceofspectro-
scopicallydetermined𝑣 miconotherderivedatmosphericparameters.
Forthisinvestigation,comparisonislimitedtothecodesthatprovide
𝑣 mic, beingARES+MOOG,FASMA, andPA WS.
Figure13displaysthehistogramsoftheresulting𝑣 mic determined
byeachrespectivecode,inadditiontothemedianandstandarddevi-
ation of each sample. From this, we see all three methods clustering
inaregionof𝑣 mic ∼1.0-1.2kms −1.Thisisconsistentwithexpecta-
tions for a sample of FGK dwarfs (e.g. Tsantaki et al. 2013; Mortier
etal.2014;Magrinietal.2022),indicatingageneralphysicalagree-
ment between the methods.
There are, however, evident systematic differences between the
methods.Themedian𝑣 mic valuesacrossthiscommonstellarsample
vary by up to∼0.17 km s−1, withFASMAproducing the highest
median𝑣 micof1.23kms −1 andARES+MOOGproducingthelowest
of1.06kms −1.Theseoffsetsareonacomparablescaletotheinternal
scatter in the individual methods, highlighting that𝑣mic is indeed
sensitive to the choice of methods and models.
Adifferenceinthedispersionsoftheresulting𝑣 mic distributionsis
also apparent, withPA WSshowing the lowest standard deviation (𝜎
= 0.20 km s−1), andARES+MOOGshowing the largest (𝜎= 0.31
km s−1). These differences in how tightly𝑣mic is constrained could
be attributed to a variety of reasons, potentially reflecting choices in
line lists, models, methodology, or parameter degeneracies.
Overall, the differences in𝑣mic distributions from each method
reflect method-dependent systematics of∼0.1 - 0.3 km s −1, ex-
ceeding the median uncertainties of 0.06 km s−1, 0.03 km s−1, and
0.06 km s−1 forPA WS,FASMA, andARES+MOOGrespectively.
This is further evidenced by the median RMSD in𝑣mic across the
three methods being 0.10 km s−1. Given the degeneracies between
𝑣 mic andotherspectroscopicparameters,thesesystematicsmaycon-
tribute to the differences observed between𝑇eff,log𝑔, and[Fe/H]
in the methods, however are unlikely to be the sole cause.
Inadditiontotheoverall𝑣 mic distributions,wealsoobserveaclear
positive trend between𝑣mic and𝑇 eff across all three methods, shown
in Figure 14. This is consistent with expectations for FGK dwarfs,
for which higher𝑇eff is associated with higher velocity convective
motions.
Althoughthispositivetrendisbroadlyfollowedforallthreemeth-
ods,Figure14showsthattheexactrelationshipdiffers.Thisindicates
thatwhiletheunderstoodphysicalrelationshipbetween𝑣 mic and𝑇 eff
is concretely recovered, its absolute calibration remains sensitive to
the choice of method.
5.5 Stellar Radius
As previously described, we obtained stellar radii from SED fitting
as part of GR8-1. In Figure 15, we show the difference between
the radii from using each spectroscopic method plusisochrones,
as described in Section 4.2, and the radii from SED fitting, plotted
against the SED fitting radii. In all subplots, we see a slight upwards
trend, with the difference between spectroscopic+isochronesand
SED radii increasing with the SED radius.
An excellent agreement between the values is seen, with the
RMSD between spectroscopy+isochronesand SED fitting being
under 0.10 R⊙ for all sets of results. Figure 15 also shows the re-
sults from the combined posterior, shown as the ‘Isochronal’ re-
sults in the bottom right hand panel. From combining all spectro-
scopic+isochronesresults, we observe an RMSD of 0.08 R⊙ from
the SED radii.
6 IMPACT ON EXOPLANETARY PARAMETERS
In the context of exoplanet characterisation or demographic studies,
it is important to understand the effect that the scatter in stellar
parameters has on exoplanetary parameters. Here, we consider the
planetary radius, mass, and equilibrium temperature.
In terms of the effect on exoplanetary radii, R𝑝, we can use the
transit depth
Depth=
 𝑅 𝑝
𝑅★
2
(1)
to investigate the effect of scatter in stellar radius. Considering only
the uncertainty induced by the scatter in stellar radius, we see an
uncertainty in planetary radius of
𝜎𝑅 𝑝 =𝜎 𝑅★
√
𝐷(2)
where𝜎 𝑅★ is uncertainty in stellar radius, and𝜎𝑅 𝑝 is the resultant
uncertainty in planetary radius. We calculate the scatter in radius as
the RMSD of the individual results from the median value. Across
all targets, the median scatter in radius is 0.02 R⊙. Investigating the
Earth-Sun system, we see an uncertainty in planetary radius of 0.02
R⊕ (2.00 %) induced purely by the median scatter in stellar radius.
AsweextendtothecoolerregimeofKdwarfs,weusethecasestudy
of HD219134 (Motalebi et al. 2015) – a K dwarf with 4 orbiting
planets. Looking at HD219134 b, we see an induced uncertainty in
planetaryradiusofR ⊕ (2.57%).WeadditionallytestonCoRoT-11b
(Gandolfi et al. 2010), a planet orbiting at 0.0436 AU around an F
dwarf with𝑅= 1.37𝑅 ⊙ and𝑇 eff = 6440 K. In this system, we see an
uncertainty in planetary radius purely from scatter in stellar radius
of 0.23 R⊕ (1.46 %). For HD219134 b and CoRoT-11 b, the quoted
uncertaintiesinplanetaryradiiare0.09R ⊕ and0.34R ⊕,respectively.
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

14Freckelton et al.
Figure10.Reducedchisquaredofeachforward-modelledspectrumwhencomparedtotheobservedone,usingtheresultsfromeachmethod.Thiscoversall30
discrepantlog𝑔targets.
From the NASA Exoplanet Archive (Christiansen et al. 2025), the
medianfractionaluncertaintyonexoplanetaryradiusintheliterature
is 7.36%, higher than uncertainty predicted to arise from scatter
in stellar radius alone. It is important to note, however, that this
prediction comes from scatter due to differing spectroscopic models
only – the effects of varying evolutionary models usingisochrones
is not explored here.
To determine the significance of the effect of stellar mass scatter
on the exoplanetary mass, we use the equation
𝑀𝑝 sin𝑖≈𝐾
 𝑃
2𝜋𝐺
 1
3
𝑀
2
3
★ (3)
where M𝑝 is planetary mass, P is planetary orbital period, G is the
gravitational constant, and M★ is the stellar mass. We assumed a
circular orbit and a planetary mass that is negligible compared to
the stellar mass. Isolating the contribution to uncertainty of scat-
ter in stellar mass, we obtain the following equation to determine
uncertainty in planetary mass
𝜎𝑀 𝑝 ≈ 2
3
𝜎𝑀★
𝑀★
𝑀𝑝 (4)
where𝜎 𝑀 𝑝 and𝜎 𝑀★ are the uncertainties in planetary and stellar
mass, respectively. Again taking the median scatter as RMSD from
the median of the combined isochronal posteriors, we find this to
be 0.05 M⊙ in stellar mass. For the Earth-Sun system, this scatter
induces an uncertainty of 0.03 M⊕ (3.00 %) in planetary mass. For
HD219134 b, with a mass of 4.36±0.44 M⊕, a scatter of 0.05 M⊙
would contribute an uncertainty of 0.19 M⊕ (4.36 %). CoRoT-11
b, with a mass of 740.47±108.05 M⊕, would have an uncertainty
contributed from stellar mass scatter of 18.01 M⊕ (2.43 %). Typical
uncertaintiesinplanetarymassappeartobesignificantlyhigherthan
thesefractionaluncertaintiesduetostellarmassscatter–seeMortier
etal.(2018)(20.95%),Hoyeretal.(2021)(7.25%),Mantovanetal.
(2024) (9.71 % & 40.68 %), Schmerling et al. (2025) (8.79 %).
Taking all results from this work for the targets analysed, we cal-
culatethescatteroneachtargetastheRMSDfromthemedianvalue.
In𝑇 eff, the median scatter across all targets is 76 K. Taking the situ-
ation of an Earth-Sun twin, with all orbital and physical parameters
equaltothatoftheEarthandSun,weusedthefollowingequationto
calculate planetary equilibrium temperature
𝑇eq =𝑇 eff
√︂
𝑅
2𝑎 (1−𝐴 𝐵)
1
4 (5)
where𝑅is stellar radius,𝑎is orbital semi-major axis, and𝐴𝐵 is the
Bond albedo of the planet. When propagating the uncertainty due
to scatter in stellar𝑇eff from using different methods, we consider
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

gr8stars II : judgement day15
Figure 11.Histograms of the differences between the isochronallog𝑔for each method and the PASTELlog𝑔, with standard deviation (STD) and median
shown for each distribution.
Figure 12.Left panel : Difference between thelog𝑔from the fullPA WS
pipeline and from the combined isochronal posteriors, plotted againstPA WS
𝑇eff. Right panel : Difference between thelog𝑔from the EW section of
PA WSandthecombinedisochronalposteriors,plottedagainstthePA WS𝑇 eff.
Both panels additionally show the Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) of
the data, in addition to the fitted linear regression lines.
thatstellarradiusisoftennotdirectlyinputtedintoequation5,rather
𝑅★
𝑎 is generally found from transit information, and assume this to
be the case for this purpose. Using the NASA Exoplanet Archive
(Christiansenetal.2025),wefindthemedianfractionuncertaintyin
𝑅★
𝑎 from transit measurements to be 0.16. We can use the following
equationtotranslatethescatterinstellar𝑇 efffromtheuseofdifferent
methods to a fractional uncertainty in the planetary𝑇eq;
𝜎𝑇eq
𝑇eq
=
√︂
( 𝜎𝑇eff
𝑇eff
) + 1
4 𝑅2
frac (6)
where𝑅 frac is the fractional uncertainty in𝑅★
𝑎 , which we set to 0.16
as per the median value in the literature. From equation 6, all three
casestudiesaspreviouslyinvestigatedreturnafractionaluncertainty
of 0.04 in the planetary equilibrium temperature. This suggests a
noise floor of at least 4% fractional uncertainty should be present
in all Teq measurements. In recent literature, planetary equilibrium
temperatures appear to often have uncertainties in the range 2.0%
- 3.5% (e.g. Mortier et al. (2018) – 2.13%, Hoyer et al. (2021) –
3.10%,Mantovanetal.(2024)–2.96%&2.98%,Scottetal.(2025)
– 2.40%, Schmerling et al. (2025) – 3.27%), suggesting that the
noisefloorintroducedbyscatterin𝑇 eff isnotfullyrepresentedinthe
current state of the field.
Fromtheseinvestigations,itisstronglysuggestedthatthescatterin
spectroscopic stellar parameters from differing model choices is not
a dominating factor in exoplanetary mass and radius uncertainties.
However, as previously stated, this comparison does not reflect the
scatter that can also be introduced by the use of differing evolution-
ary models in the determination of mass and radius. For planetary
equilibrium temperature, the noise floor from the combination of
scatter in𝑇 eff and median uncertainty in 𝑅★
𝑎 is higher than typi-
cal uncertainties in the literature, suggesting uncertainties in Teq are
generallyunderestimated.Additionally,astheprecisionandaccuracy
of exoplanet instrumentation and methodology increases, the noise
floors investigated in this work will become increasingly prevalent
and require careful attention.
7 CONCLUSIONS
By providing uniformly formatted, high resolution, high SNR spec-
tra, thegr8starscatalogue forms a uniquely useful aid in studying
the systematic effects of different spectroscopic methods. This work
showstheresultsofapplyingfivespectroscopicmethods,differingin
methodology,models,andassumptions,tothesamedataforasubset
of 585gr8starstargets.
Forthestellareffectivetemperature,surfacegravity,andmetallic-
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

16Freckelton et al.
Figure 13.Histograms of the determined microturblent velocity (𝑣mic) fromPA WS,FASMA, andARES+MOOG. Each histogram also notes the standard
deviation (STD) and median (Med.) values from each code.
Figure 14.The relationship between𝑣mic and𝑇 eff forARES+MOOG(left),PA WS(centre), andFASMA(right). The slope (m) and intercept (c) of the fitted
linear regression lines are shown in the legend of each subplot.
ity, we show that the precision errors often quoted for spectroscopic
parametersarefaroutweighedbythescatterthatcomesfromtheuse
of different methods. Given that we consistently see disagreements
between results at a significance larger than the precision uncertain-
ties, we can see that spectroscopic atmospheric parameters are still
influenced heavily by the disagreement between methodologies and
models, thus require uncertainties reflective of this. From this work,
suitable uncertainties for spectroscopically derived𝑇eff,log𝑔, and
[Fe/H]require inflations of at least 76 K, 0.14 dex, and 0.07 dex
respectively.
As part of this work, we also study the spectroscopiclog𝑔using
webSMEfor a direct comparison of 30 stars. As expected, we see
large scatter in the spectroscopiclog𝑔returned from each method.
We demonstrate that the isochronallog𝑔, which incorporates in-
formation from photometry and parallax, has improved agreement
with literature values from the PASTEL catalogue. Due to this, we
concludethattheisochronallog𝑔shouldbereliedupon,ratherthan
the spectroscopic one.
We also investigate the masses, radii, and ages of the stars, using
isochronal fitting with the spectroscopic effective temperature and
metallicity as part of the input. We propagate the scatter induced in
these parameters from using𝑇eff and[Fe/H]from different spectro-
scopicmethodstoexoplanetaryequilibriumtemperature,radius,and
mass. We find that the induced scatter does not outweigh the typi-
cal fractional uncertainties on exoplanetary mass and radius in the
literature, whereas fractional uncertainties in planetary equilibrium
temperature present a noise floor above those typically found in the
literature.
While we found that the scatter in planetary radii and masses
induced by different spectroscopic inputs is typically lower than un-
certainties reported in the literature, it is important to recognise that
thisrepresentsonlypartofthetotaluncertaintysources.Inthiswork,
stellar mass, radius, and age were determined using a single set of
stellarevolutionmodels.Asaresult,thenoisefloorsthatweestimate
due to scatter do not account for systematic uncertainties resulting
from model choice.
In addition, the demands of next-generation exoplanet surveys
and studies require increasingly precise stellar properties. When we
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

gr8stars II : judgement day17
Figure 15.Differences in radii from each spectroscopic method +isochrones, and the radii from SED fitting, plotted against SED radius for each method. The
lower right hand panel shows the results from combining allisochronesresults. Four SED outliers have been removed from all of these plots. The Pearson
Correlation Coefficient (PCC) and linear regression lines fitted to the data are shown in each panel.
look particularly at the detection and characterisation of Earth-sized
planets, stellar properties require uncertainties at a level for which
the scatter explored in this work becomes significant.
WhilewefocusonFGKdwarfswithinthiswork,theexpansionof
this to cooler dwarfs would be particularly valuable. Spectroscopic
modellingbecomesincreasinglydifficultforstarswithlowereffective
temperatures,andtheseareimportanttargetsforupcomingexoplanet
surveys, includingPLATO.
Future work should aim to extend this analysis with the incorpo-
rationofmultiplestellarevolutionmodelsandgrids.Thiswillallow
the full quantification of systematic uncertainties in derived stellar
andplanetaryproperties.Asobservationalprecisioncontinuestoim-
prove,athoroughunderstandingofthesesystematicswillbeessential
in reaching the full potential of next-generation exoplanet science.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Wearegratefultotheanonymousrefereefortheirconstructivefeed-
back that improved the quality of this work.
AVFacknowledgesthesupportoftheIOPthroughtheBellBurnell
Graduate Scholarship Fund.
A.M. acknowledges funding from a UKRI Future Leader Fellow-
ship, grant number MR/X033244/1 and a UK Science and Technol-
ogy Facilities Council (STFC) small grant ST/Y002334/1.
The Flatiron Institute is a division of the Simons Foundation.
This work benefited from support from the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Frame-
work Programme (grant agreement no. 865624).
ThisprojecthasreceivedfundingfromtheEuropeanUnion’sHori-
zon2020researchandinnovationprogrammeundergrantagreement
No 101008324 (ChETEC-INFRA).
This project has received funding from the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (CartographY GA. 804752)
JIGH and ASM acknowledge financial support from the Spanish
Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities (MICIU) project
PID2023-149982NB-I00.
S.G.S. acknowledge support from FCT through FCT contract nr.
CEECIND/00826/2018 and POPH/FSE (EC)
NCS is co-funded by the European Union (ERC, FIERCE,
101052347). Views and opinions expressed are however those
of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of
the European Union or the European Research Council. Neither
the European Union nor the granting authority can be held re-
sponsible for them. This work was supported by FCT - Fun-
dação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia through national funds by
these grants: UIDB/04434/2020 DOI: 10.54499/UIDB/04434/2020,
UIDP/04434/2020 DOI: 10.54499/UIDP/04434/2020.
ThisresearchhasmadeuseoftheNASAExoplanetArchive,which
is operated by the California Institute of Technology, under contract
with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under the
Exoplanet Exploration Program.
C.A.W. would like to acknowledge support from the UK Sci-
ence and Technology Facilities Council (STFC, grant number
ST/X00094X/1)
DATA AVAILABILITY
All stellar parameters derived through this work will be available
through Vizier CDS. Spectra are available upon request to the au-
thors.
REFERENCES
Al Moulla K., Dumusque X., Figueira P., Lo Curto G., Santos N. C., Wildi
F., 2023, A&A, 669, A39
Asplund M., Grevesse N., Sauval A. J., Scott P., 2009, ARA&A, 47, 481
Asplund M., Amarsi A. M., Grevesse N., 2021, A&A, 653, A141
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

18Freckelton et al.
Baines E. K., Armstrong J. T., Schmitt H. R., Zavala R. T., Benson J. A.,
Hutter D. J., Tycner C., van Belle G. T., 2018, AJ, 155, 30
Barklem P. S., Piskunov N., O’Mara B. J., 2000, A&AS, 142, 467
Blanco-Cuaresma S., 2019, MNRAS, 486, 2075
Blanco-CuaresmaS.,SoubiranC.,HeiterU.,JofréP.,2014,A&A,569,A111
Bonaca A., et al., 2012, ApJ, 755, L12
Bouchy F., et al., 2009, A&A, 505, 853
Boyajian T. S., et al., 2012, ApJ, 746, 101
Boyajian T., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 846
Brewer J. M., Fischer D. A., Basu S., Valenti J. A., Piskunov N., 2015, ApJ,
805, 126
Brewer J. M., et al., 2020, AJ, 160, 67
Casagrande L., Schönrich R., Asplund M., Cassisi S., Ramírez I., Meléndez
J., Bensby T., Feltzing S., 2011, A&A, 530, A138
Casamiquela L., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 470, 4363
Casamiquela L., et al., 2026, A&A, 705, A167
Christiansen J. L., et al., 2025, psj, 6, 186
Cretignier M., Francfort J., Dumusque X., Allart R., Pepe F., 2020, A&A,
640, A42
Cretignier M., Dumusque X., Hara N. C., Pepe F., 2021, A&A, 653, A43
Cretignier M., Dumusque X., Aigrain S., Pepe F., 2023, A&A, 678, A2
Cretignier M., et al., 2024, MNRAS, 535, 2562
Cutri R. M., et al., 2013, Explanatory Supplement to the AllWISE Data
Release Products
DeGroff W. T., et al., 2014, in Stepp L. M., Gilmozzi R., Hall H. J., eds,
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series Vol. 9145, Ground-based and Airborne Telescopes V. p. 91452C,
doi:10.1117/12.2057015
Dotter A., 2016, ApJS, 222, 8
DotterA.,ChaboyerB.,JevremovićD.,KostovV.,BaronE.,FergusonJ.W.,
2008, ApJS, 178, 89
Doyle A. P., Davies G. R., Smalley B., Chaplin W. J., Elsworth Y., 2014,
MNRAS, 444, 3592
Faria J. P., et al., 2020, A&A, 635, A13
Fischer D. A., et al., 2016, PASP, 128, 066001
Freckelton A. V., et al., 2024, MNRAS, 531, 4085
Freckelton A. V., et al., 2025, MNRAS, 540, 1786
Fuhrmann K., 2004, Astronomische Nachrichten, 325, 3
Gandolfi D., et al., 2010, A&A, 524, A55
Gonzalez G., Carlson M. K., Tobin R. W., 2010, VizieR Online Data Cat-
alog: Li abundances & vsini for star-planet systems (Gonzalez+, 2010),
VizieROn-lineDataCatalog:J/MNRAS/403/1368.Originallypublished
in: 2010MNRAS.403.1368G
Gray D. F., 2005, The Observation and Analysis of Stellar Photospheres
Gray R. O., Corbally C. J., 1994, AJ, 107, 742
Grevesse N., Asplund M., Sauval A. J., 2007, Space Sci. Rev., 130, 105
Gupta A. F., et al., 2021, AJ, 161, 130
Gupta A. F., et al., 2025, AJ, 169, 1
Gustafsson B., Edvardsson B., Eriksson K., Jørgensen U. G., Nordlund Å.,
Plez B., 2008, A&A, 486, 951
Hall R. D., Thompson S. J., Handley W., Queloz D., 2018, MNRAS, 479,
2968
Hegedűs V., Mészáros S., Jofré P., Stringfellow G. S., Feuillet D., García-
Hernández D. A., Nitschelm C., Zamora O., 2023, A&A, 670, A107
HeiterU.,JofréP.,GustafssonB.,KornA.J.,SoubiranC.,ThéveninF.,2015,
A&A, 582, A49
Heiter U., et al., 2021, A&A, 645, A106
Hinkel N. R., Timmes F. X., Young P. A., Pagano M. D., Turnbull M. C.,
2014, AJ, 148, 54
Hinkel N. R., et al., 2016, ApJS, 226, 4
Hoyer S., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 505, 3361
Husser T. O., Wende-von Berg S., Dreizler S., Homeier D., Reiners A.,
Barman T., Hauschildt P. H., 2013, A&A, 553, A6
Jofré P., et al., 2014, A&A, 564, A133
Jofré P., Heiter U., Soubiran C., 2019, ARA&A, 57, 571
Kolecki J. R., Weiss L. M., 2026, ApJ, 998, 342
Kurucz R. L., 1993, SYNTHE spectrum synthesis programs and line data.
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
Kurucz R. L., 2005, Memorie della Societa Astronomica Italiana Supple-
menti, 8, 14
Levine S. E., et al., 2012, in Stepp L. M., Gilmozzi R., Hall H. J., eds,
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series Vol. 8444, Ground-based and Airborne Telescopes IV. p. 844419,
doi:10.1117/12.926415
Luck R. E., 2017, AJ, 153, 21
Magrini L., et al., 2022, A&A, 663, A161
Mantovan G., et al., 2024, A&A, 682, A129
Meunier N., Lagrange A. M., Borgniet S., Rieutord M., 2015, A&A, 583,
A118
Mishenina T., Gorbaneva T., Pignatari M., Thielemann F. K., Korotin S. A.,
2015, MNRAS, 454, 1585
Morrell S., Naylor T., 2019, MNRAS, 489, 2615
Morrell S., Naylor T., 2020, MNRAS, 498, 5048
Morrell S., Naylor T., Southworth J., Sing D. K., 2025, MNRAS,
MortierA.,SousaS.G.,AdibekyanV.Z.,BrandãoI.M.,SantosN.C.,2014,
A&A, 572, A95
Mortier A., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 481, 1839
Mortier A., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 499, 5004
Morton T. D., 2015, isochrones: Stellar model grid package, Astrophysics
Source Code Library, record ascl:1503.010
Motalebi F., et al., 2015, A&A, 584, A72
Perruchot S., et al., 2008, in McLean I. S., Casali M. M., eds, Society of
Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series Vol.
7014, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy II. p.
70140J, doi:10.1117/12.787379
PiskunovN.E.,1992,inGlagolevskijY.V.,RomanyukI.I.,eds,Physicsand
Evolution of Stars: Stellar Magnetism. p. 92
Piskunov N., Valenti J. A., 2017, A&A, 597, A16
Placco V. M., Sneden C., Roederer I. U., Lawler J. E., Den Hartog E. A.,
Hejazi N., Maas Z., Bernath P., 2021, Research Notes of the American
Astronomical Society, 5, 92
Ralchenko Y., 2005, Memorie della Societa Astronomica Italiana Supple-
menti, 8, 96
Ramírez I., Allende Prieto C., Lambert D. L., 2007, A&A, 465, 271
Rauer H., et al., 2014, Experimental Astronomy, 38, 249
Rauer H., et al., 2025, Experimental Astronomy, 59, 26
Robertson P., Mahadevan S., Endl M., Roy A., 2014, Science, 345, 440
RyabchikovaT.,PiskunovN.,KuruczR.L.,StempelsH.C.,HeiterU.,Pakho-
mov Y., Barklem P. S., 2015, Phys. Scr., 90, 054005
Santos N. C., et al., 2013, A&A, 556, A150
Santos N. C., et al., 2025, The Messenger, 194, 21
Sbordone L., Bonifacio P., Castelli F., Kurucz R. L., 2004, Memorie della
Societa Astronomica Italiana Supplementi, 5, 93
Schmerling H., et al., 2025, A&A, 699, A185
Scott M. G., et al., 2025, MNRAS, 540, 1909
Skrutskie M. F., et al., 2006, AJ, 131, 1163
Smiljanic R., et al., 2014, A&A, 570, A122
Sneden C. A., 1973, PhD thesis, University of Texas, Austin
Soubiran C., Le Campion J.-F., Brouillet N., Chemin L., 2016, A&A, 591,
A118
Soubiran C., et al., 2024, A&A, 682, A145
Sousa S. G., 2014, in , Determination of Atmospheric Parameters. Springer,
pp 297–310, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-06956-2_26
Sousa S. G., Santos N. C., Israelian G., Mayor M., Monteiro M. J. P. F. G.,
2007, A&A, 469, 783
Sousa S. G., et al., 2008, A&A, 487, 373
Sousa S. G., Santos N. C., Adibekyan V., Delgado-Mena E., Israelian G.,
2015, A&A, 577, A67
Sousa S. G., et al., 2021, A&A, 656, A53
Sozzetti A., Torres G., Charbonneau D., Latham D. W., Holman M. J., Winn
J. N., Laird J. B., O’Donovan F. T., 2007, ApJ, 664, 1190
Stürmer J., et al., 2024, in Bryant J. J., Motohara K., Vernet J. R. D., eds,
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series Vol. 13096, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for As-
tronomy X. p. 130968E, doi:10.1117/12.3019107
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

gr8stars II : judgement day19
Suárez Mascareño A., Rebolo R., González Hernández J. I., Esposito M.,
2017, MNRAS, 468, 4772
Tayar J., Claytor Z. R., Huber D., van Saders J., 2022, ApJ, 927, 31
ThompsonS.J.,etal.,2016,inEvansC.J.,SimardL.,TakamiH.,eds,Society
of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series
Vol. 9908, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy
VI. p. 99086F (arXiv:1608.04611), doi:10.1117/12.2232111
Torres G., Fischer D. A., Sozzetti A., Buchhave L. A., Winn J. N., Holman
M. J., Carter J. A., 2012, ApJ, 757, 161
TsantakiM.,SousaS.G.,AdibekyanV.Z.,SantosN.C.,MortierA.,Israelian
G., 2013, A&A, 555, A150
Tsantaki M., Andreasen D. T., Teixeira G. D. C., Sousa S. G., Santos N. C.,
Delgado-Mena E., Bruzual G., 2018, MNRAS, 473, 5066
Tsantaki M., Andreasen D., Teixeira G., 2020, The Journal of Open Source
Software, 5, 2048
Unsöld A., 1955, Physik der Sternatmosphären, mit besonderer Berücksich-
tigung der Sonne. Berlin, Springer, 1955. 2. Aufl.
Valenti J. A., Fischer D. A., 2005, ApJS, 159, 141
Valenti J. A., Piskunov N., 1996, A&AS, 118, 595
Wehrhahn A., Piskunov N., Ryabchikova T., 2023, A&A, 671, A171
Worley C. C., et al., 2020, A&A, 643, A83
Worley C. C., et al., 2024, A&A, 684, A148
Xiang M., et al., 2017, ApJS, 232, 2
Zicher N., et al., 2022, MNRAS, 512, 3060
da Silva R., Milone A. d. C., Rocha-Pinto H. J., 2015, A&A, 580, A24
APPENDIX A: PASTEL𝑇eff,[Fe/H], ANDlog𝑔TRENDS
Figures A1 and A2 display the differences between values deter-
mined spectroscopically in this work, and those from the PASTEL
catalogue. Figure A1 compareslog𝑔from this work to PASTEL,
coloured by the[Fe/H], whereas Figure A2 compares[Fe/H]to
PASTEL, coloured by𝑇eff.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)

20Freckelton et al.
Figure A1.Difference betweenlog𝑔from this work and PASTEL, coloured by the[Fe/H]from each method on the top row, and the PASTEL[Fe/H]on the
second row. The top row shows the Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) and linear regression lines fitted to the data.
Figure A2.Difference between[Fe/H]from this work and from PASTEL, coloured by the𝑇eff from each method on the first row, and the PASTEL𝑇eff on the
second row. The first row shows the Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) and linear regression lines fitted to the data.
MNRAS000, 1–19 (2025)