Title: Simulating realistic radio morphologies of Fanaroff-Riley I jets in a self-regulating cool-core cluster
Authors: Léna Jlassi, Rainer Weinberger, Christoph Pfrommer, Maria Werhahn, Joseph Whittingham, Philipp Girichidis
Published: 2026-06-02
Categories: astro-ph.GA, astro-ph.HE

Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. paper2©ESO 2026
June 4, 2026
Simulating realistic radio morphologies of Fanaroff-Riley I jets in a
self-regulating cool-core cluster
Léna Jlassi1,2 , Rainer Weinberger1, Christoph Pfrommer1, Maria Werhahn3, Joseph Whittingham1, and Philipp
Girichidis4
1 Leibniz-Institut für Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), An der Sternwarte 16, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany
e-mail:ljlassi@aip.de
2 Institut für Physik und Astronomie, Universität Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24/25, 14476 Potsdam, Germany
3 Max-Planck-Institut für Astrophysik, Karl-Schwarzschild-Str. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany
4 Universität Heidelberg, Zentrum für Astronomie, Institut für Theoretische Astrophysik, Albert-Ueberle-Str. 2, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany
June 4, 2026
ABSTRACT
Active galactic nucleus (AGN) jets radiate radio synchrotron emission displaying a wide range of morphologies. At the same time,
they provide heat to prevent cooling flows in cool-core galaxy clusters. We produce mock radio observations of AGN jets in a self-
regulating cool-core galaxy cluster. To this end, we employ magneto-hydrodynamical simulations of an idealised Perseus-like galaxy
cluster, in which accretion-powered low-density jets accelerate cosmic ray protons and electrons by means of a sub-grid model.
Cosmic ray electron spectra are spatially and temporally evolved along Lagrangian tracer trajectories using the Fokker-Planck solver
Crestto produce radio synchrotron emission. Self-regulated AGN jets stabilize the cool-core cluster against cooling flows and produce
realistic Fanaroff-Riley I (FRI) and disturbed lobe morphologies, in contrast to symmetrical lobe structures obtained with a single jet
outburst of fixed power. Our mock radio observations are viewed in a blazar configuration – along the jet axis – and exhibit complex
radio-emitting lobe structures despite this. This highlights the strong deflection of light jets by cold gas structures and suggests that
small-scale black hole and jet properties cannot be inferred from kpc-scale FRI radio lobe morphologies. Combining self-consistently
evolved magnetic fields and electron spectra enables us to explain a known observational phenomenon, whereby radio observations
of AGN lobes on galaxy cluster scales occasionally display similar spatial extents at different frequencies: in 1–50µG magnetic
fields obtained in our cool-core environment, both freshly accelerated and hundreds-of-Myr-old electrons are able to contribute to
the 150 MHz–1.4 GHz frequency range. In addition to providing a window into AGN jet feedback through radio diagnostics, these
simulations employing a time-varying jet luminosity yield radio phenomena typical of episodic AGN activity, such as restarted and
remnant radio galaxies.
Key words.galaxies: jets – galaxies: clusters: intracluster medium – radiation mechanisms: non-thermal – magnetohydrodynamics
(MHD) – Methods: numerical
1. Introduction
The cooling time of the X-ray emitting gas in a large number of
galaxy clusters is less than the Hubble time (Peterson & Fabian
2006). In these so-called ‘cool-core’ galaxy clusters, the ex-
pected cooling flows are not observed and instead, the to-
tal star formation rates are one to two orders of magni-
tude below the predicted mass deposition rates (Crawford et al.
1999). Jets launched in the central active galactic nucleus
(AGN) system constitute a mechanism to heat the intra-
cluster medium (ICM; Fabian 2012; McNamara & Nulsen 2012;
Hlavacek-Larrondo et al. 2022). The jets’ mechanical luminosi-
ties estimated using X-ray cavity powers appears well corre-
lated with the X-ray cooling luminosity (Birzan et al. 2004;
Rafferty et al. 2006; Kokotanekov et al. 2017), emphasizing the
self-regulating nature of these systems.
Radio lobes inflated by the jets are often observed at the loca-
tion of these X-ray cavities (McNamara et al. 2000; Birzan et al.
2004; Bîrzan et al. 2008) and are hence complementary tracers
of the energy released by the central supermassive black hole
(SMBH). This radio synchrotron emitting plasma indicates the
presence of relativistic particles, so-called cosmic rays (CRs),
and magnetic fields. These CRs are likely accelerated through
diffusive shock acceleration (Axford et al. 1977; Bell 1978b,a)
and Fermi second order processes (Fermi 1949), although accel-
eration processes specific to jet dynamics are diverse (see e.g.
Matthews et al. 2020, for a review).
The total pressure measured in AGN jet lobes points to the
presence of a non-radiating component, likely in the form of CR
protons (Dunn & Fabian 2004; Bîrzan et al. 2008; Croston et al.
2008, 2018). This hadronic component can also provide heating
to the ICM by excitation of Alfvén waves through plasma in-
stabilities and collisionless damping of these waves (Guo & Oh
2008; Pfrommer 2013; Jacob & Pfrommer 2017a,b). For this
reason CR protons have been included in numerous studies sim-
ulating AGN feedback in cool-core clusters (Sijacki et al. 2008;
Guo & Mathews 2011; Ruszkowski et al. 2017; Ehlert et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2020; Su et al. 2021; Beckmann et al. 2022).
Through synchrotron radiation, CR electrons provide a direct
observational window into the dynamics of AGN jets in such
environments. The Fanaroff-Riley (FR) morphological classifi-
cation (Fanaroff& Riley 1974) has been used to identify core-
brightened radio-emitting jets – referred to as radio galaxies –
Article number, page 1
arXiv:2606.04084v1  [astro-ph.GA]  2 Jun 2026

A&A proofs:manuscript no. paper2
as Fanaroff-Riley Type I (FRI) and edge-brightened radio galax-
ies as Fanaroff-Riley Type II (FRII) (see Hardcastle & Croston
2020, for a review). This classification is also linked with the
source’s radio luminosity, with FRI radio galaxies having lower
luminosities on average in comparison to FRIIs (An & Baan
2012; Mingo et al. 2019). The phenomenology underlying this
morphological divide is generally described as FRIIs remain-
ing relativistic and collimated on large scales, often terminat-
ing in hotspots, while FRIs, although initially relativistic, de-
celerate on kiloparsec scales upon interacting with the environ-
ment and by entraining the surrounding plasma (Bicknell 1995;
Laing & Bridle 2002). The environment hosting these sources
has hence been inferred to explain the classification, with richer
and more massive environments such as those of galaxy clus-
ters where FRI radio galaxies are predominant (Wing & Blanton
2011; Mingo et al. 2019), providing an explanation for the halt-
ing of jets on small scales (Ledlow & Owen 1996). Nonethe-
less, host environment alone has proved insufficient to explain
the divide (Best et al. 2007; Capetti et al. 2017b; Mahatma et al.
2023). Instead, it is currently thought to be caused by the in-
terplay of intrinsic black hole and jet properties (Lin et al. 2010;
Best & Heckman 2012; Ineson et al. 2015; Tadhunter 2016) with
the host environmental density (Bicknell 1995; Kaiser & Best
2007; Croston et al. 2008).
Furthermore, there exists a variety of extended sources with
characteristics deviating from the twin-lobed jets included in
the bimodal FR classification. Classifications associated with
the episodic nature of AGNs include remnant radio galaxies
which describe fading AGN accelerated plasma not directly
associated with active jets (Murgia et al. 2011; Brienza et al.
2017; Mahatma et al. 2018), and restarted radio galaxies
in which older remnant lobes are observed simultaneously
with freshly-inflated radio lobes (Schoenmakers et al. 2000;
Jamrozy et al. 2007; Jetha et al. 2008; Mahatma et al. 2019).
The morphological diversity of radio galaxies also encompasses
hybrid morphology radio sources (Gopal-Krishna & Wiita
2000; Kapi ´nska et al. 2017; Mingo et al. 2019), X-shaped ra-
dio galaxies (Leahy & Parma 1992; Yang et al. 2019), and
more broadly, unclassified sources with unusual morphologies
(Gopal-Krishna et al. 2024). Amongst these unusual morpholo-
gies, radio galaxies can present plumed lobe characteristics, ‘dis-
turbed’ lobes (in contrast to ‘polar’ lobes, which are in directly
opposite directions), but also radio galaxies that do not exhibit
clear jet-inflated lobes.
There are many numerical studies (see Bourne & Yang
2023, for a review) investigating how AGN jets produce
some of these morphologies (e.g., Saxton et al. 2010;
Krause et al. 2012; Tchekhovskoy & Bromberg 2016;
Massaglia et al. 2016; Nolting et al. 2019; O’Neill et al. 2019;
Mukherjee et al. 2020; Horton et al. 2020; Yates-Jones et al.
2023; Chen et al. 2023; Bhattacharjee et al. 2024; Elley et al.
2026; Domínguez-Fernández et al. 2024). In this study, we aim
to combine three elements to simulate the morphology of radio
galaxies in galaxy cluster environments. We describe them in
the following:
1. Self-regulation: in cool-core cluster environments, cen-
tral radio galaxies provide a heating component es-
sential to regulate cooling flows. Simulating AGN jets
that are able to self-regulate, that is where accretion
onto the central SMBH directly powers the jets while
maintaining the cluster in a cool-core state (see e.g.
Dubois et al. 2010; Li & Bryan 2014; Prasad et al. 2015;
Yang & Reynolds 2016; Beckmann et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2020; Bourne & Sijacki 2021; Weinberger & Pfrommer
2026), is an important component to reproduce realistic en-
vironments hosting central radio galaxies. Moreover, the po-
tential for CR protons to heat the ICM makes them a com-
pelling component to include in such simulations.
2. Varying jet luminosity: in contrast to single jet events of-
ten used in numerical works investigating AGN jet morphol-
ogy, a self-regulating jet model naturally leads to an evolv-
ing jet luminosity, sometimes with interruptions in jet ac-
tivity. Indeed, a varying jet power can have drastic effects
on morphology (Saxton et al. 2010; Whitehead & Matthews
2023; Elley et al. 2026). Most importantly, observations
of remnant and restarted radio galaxies necessarily im-
ply physical systems in which the AGN jets are not al-
ways active. Radio observations of filaments linked to
radio galaxies (Rudnick et al. 2022; Rubeis et al. 2025;
Brienza et al. 2025) also point to complex interactions be-
tween jets and cluster environment (Dubois et al. 2009;
ZuHone et al. 2021; Bourne & Sijacki 2017; Bellomi et al.
2024; Domínguez-Fernández et al. 2024).
3. Spectral modelling of CR electrons: any attempt to pro-
duce realistic radio galaxy morphology from numerical sim-
ulations should involve modelling the non-thermal elec-
trons responsible for the emitted synchrotron radiation, and
self-consistently evolved magnetic fields. The short cool-
ing timescales of CR electrons (Ensslin et al. 2011) necessi-
tate the inclusion of spatially and temporally evolving radia-
tive losses. Moreover, evolving resolved CR electron spectra
rather than individual Lorentz factors entails the inclusion
of processes such as Coulomb and bremsstrahlung losses,
which can have an impact on the shape of obtained ra-
dio spectra (Werhahn et al. 2026a), and which are impor-
tant to study fossil electron populations in galaxy clusters
(Pinzke et al. 2013; van Weeren et al. 2019).
In this work, we present simulations combining these three
elements: 1) jets providing a heating source with the inclusion
of a CR proton component, stabilizing the cool-core cluster, 2)
a time-varying jet luminosity determined by accretion onto the
central SMBH, and 3) the spectral evolution of CR electrons re-
sponsible for the observed radio emission.
Ehlert et al. (2023) – hereafter E23 – presented three-
dimensional magneto-hydrodynamical (MHD) simulations of
an idealised Perseus-like cool-core cluster in combination with
the AGN jet model from Weinberger et al. (2023). Their sim-
ulated cluster self-regulates and exhibits central entropies and
cooling times on par with observations of cool-core clus-
ters. Here, we make use of their cold accretion model, which
mimics cold gas raining onto the central supermassive black
hole (Pizzolato & Soker 2005; Sharma et al. 2012; Gaspari et al.
2017; Tremblay et al. 2018; Olivares et al. 2019). We extend
their setup by implementing CR proton and electron popula-
tions, first presented in a simpler, single jet event in Jlassi et al.
(2026) – hereafter, J26. In this study, we focus our analysis on
the spectral evolution of CR electrons and the resulting synthetic
radio observations. The impact of CR protons on the thermody-
namic state of the cluster will be tackled in future studies, for
which heating estimators can be used (e.g. Martizzi et al. 2019;
Meenakshi et al. 2026).
We organise the paper as follows: in Sect. 2, we describe the
simulation setup and the employed CR models. In Sect. 3, we
present the mock radio observations of the self-regulating cool-
core cluster. In Sect. 4, we present the global CR electron and
radio spectra throughout the simulation. Finally, in Sect. 5, we
Article number, page 2

Léna Jlassi et al.: Simulating FRI jets in a self-regulating cool-core cluster
examine the local spectra of various electron populations and
how they contribute to global spectra.
2. Methods
In this work, we use identical initial conditions, accretion and jet
modelling to those of theFiducialmodel described in E23. We
summarise all essential aspects here but refer the reader to their
work for a more detailed description. The novel aspect of our
simulations lies in the implementation of CR proton and electron
populations and is described in Sects. 2.4 and 2.5.
Our three-dimensional MHD simulations employ the Arepo
code (Springel 2010; Pakmor et al. 2016; Weinberger et al.
2020). It uses an unstructured, moving V oronoi mesh on which
the equations of ideal MHD are discretised and solved using
the second-order finite-volume Godunov scheme (Pakmor et al.
2011; Pakmor & Springel 2013) and an HLLD Riemann solver
(Miyoshi et al. 2010).
2.1. Initial conditions: a Perseus like cool-core cluster
The simulated galaxy cluster is initialised in a cubic domain of
side length 6 Mpc. The electron density follows the radial pro-
file of Churazov et al. (2003), rescaled to a cosmology with a
dimensionless Hubble parameter ofh=0.67:
ne =46×10 −3
1+
 r
60 kpc
!2
−1.8
cm−3
+4.7×10 −3
1+
 r
210 kpc
!2
−0.87
cm−3,(1)
and the gas is placed in hydrostatic equilibrium within a
composite gravitational potential. The potential consists of an
NFW cluster halo with virial massM 200,NFW =8×10 14 M⊙,
radiusR 200,NFW =2 Mpc and concentration parameter 5
(Reiprich & Böhringer 2002), along with a central galaxy rep-
resented by an isothermal sphere with massM 200,ISO =2.4×
1011 M⊙ and radiusR 200,ISO =15 kpc (Mathews et al. 2006).
The initial conditions include turbulent magnetic fields us-
ing the procedure from Ruszkowski et al. (2007) and Ehlert et al.
(2018) to yield an average magnetic-to-thermal pressure ratio
ofX B,ICM =P B/Pth =0.0125, whereP B andP th are the mag-
netic and thermal pressures, respectively. Perturbations are also
added to the hydrostatic temperatures. In this way, both mag-
netic and temperature fluctuations follow a Kolmogorov power
spectrum on scales smaller thank inj =(37.5 kpc) −1, and white
noise on larger scales. In addition, velocity fluctuations with a
dispersion ofσ=70 km s −1 are imposed within the central 800
kpc. Although this is lower than measured velocity dispersions
(Hitomi Collaboration et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2025), these ini-
tial fluctuations are erased by subsequent jet activity. The fluc-
tuations in the initial conditions render this cool-core cluster en-
vironment more realistic by adding asymmetry mainly through
orbiting substructures and local sites where thermal instabilities
can grow at different stages.
2.2. Cooling and star formation
We model cooling and star formation consistent with the Il-
lustrisTNG model (Pillepich et al. 2018), which built upon the
model previously described in V ogelsberger et al. (2013). Ra-
diative cooling including primordial and metal-line cooling with
constant metallicityZ=0.3 Z ⊙ (Werner et al. 2013) is modelled
above temperatures of 10 4 K. Gas denser thann H =0.13 cm −3
either exists on an effective equation of state as star-forming gas,
or as hotter, non star-forming gas. Star formation is modelled as
a stochastic process calibrated to the Kennicutt-Schmidt relation
according to the interstellar medium (ISM) model described in
Springel & Hernquist (2003). In contrast to IllustrisTNG, we do
not use wind particles for stellar feedback in our simulations.
2.3. Accretion and AGN feedback
In contrast to the fixed jet power used in our previous work (J26),
we use the self-regulated AGN jet feedback presented in E23,
where the jet power is determined by accretion onto the SMBH
throughout the simulation duration of 2 Gyr.
In the centre of the cool-core cluster, we place a black hole of
massM BH =4.5×10 9 M⊙ based on black hole – host galaxy scal-
ing relations (Kormendy & Ho 2013). Around this black hole,
an inner sphere with radiusr=0.65 kpc is used to initialise
the jet, while an outer spherical shell 0.65<r<2 kpc is used
to determine the accretion properties onto the black hole (see
Weinberger et al. 2023, for details on the numerical implemen-
tation of the jet algorithm).
In the outer spherical shell (0.65<r<2 kpc), we make
use of the cold accretion model implemented in E23, where the
black hole accretion rate is defined as
˙Mcold =ϵ Mcold
tff
,(2)
whereM cold includes gas with a temperature below 2×10 4 K
and star forming gas,t ff =
p
2r/gis the free-fall time with
g=dΦ/drbeing the local acceleration due to the composite
gravitational potential described in Sect. 2.1. The parameterϵ
includes effects unresolved in our simulations that can affect the
accretion of cold gas, namely angular momentum delaying ac-
cretion of the gas onto the SMBH and unresolved small-scale
feedback heating some of the cold gas before it is accreted.
The jet power is determined by the accretion rate according
to
Ljet =η ˙Mcoldc2 =ηϵ Mcold
tff
c2,(3)
wherecis the speed of light andηis an efficiency parameter.
Following theFiducialsimulation of E23, we use efficiencies
ϵ=0.1 andη=0.01. More details on the influence of accretion
model (Bondi vs. cold accretion) on the self-regulated nature of
the cool-core cluster can be found in E23.
We initialise the jets within the central spherical regionr<
0.65 kpc with a fiducial jet density ofρ jet =10 −28 g cm −3
corresponding to an ICM-to-jet density contrast ofρ ICM/ρjet ∼
3×10 3 −10 4. The jets are launched from this region in strictly
bipolar directions with zero opening angle. Additionally, toroidal
magnetic fields are injected by setting the magnetic-to-thermal
pressure ratioX B,jet =0.1. Jet material is traced using a passive
scalar initialised toX jet =1 in cells located in the jet region, and
subsequently advected with the flow.
The cell mass resolution is determined using the distance
from the centre followingm target =m target,0 exp
 r
100 kpc

, where
mtarget,0 =1.5×10 6 M⊙. At the cluster outskirts, the cell volume
is limited toV 1/3
cell ≈370 kpc for numerical reasons. Jet cells with
Xjet >10 −3 are refined to a target volume (Vjet,target /Xjet)1/3 with
Vjet,target =0.65 kpc, but at most a volume where a cell does not
Article number, page 3

A&A proofs:manuscript no. paper2
exceed the target massm target. This ensures that the jet propaga-
tion is well-resolved, while smoothly derefining cells with aged
jet material to the target mass criterion of the ICM. Cells are re-
fined (derefined) if the target mass or volume exceeds (is below)
a factor of 2 of the target volume. On top of these criteria, we
refine cells to ensure that adjacent cells have volumes differing
at most by a factor of four.
2.4. Cosmic ray protons
In jets, CR acceleration can occur through shocks at re-
collimation and termination sites (Nishikawa et al. 2020;
Cerutti & Giacinti 2023), backflows (Matthews et al. 2019) or
shearing flows where reconnection can occur (Wang et al. 2021;
Sironi et al. 2021). Our AGN feedback model is aimed at study-
ing the long-term impact of AGN jets on cool-core galaxy clus-
ters (>Gyr). Consequently, due to resolution limitations, the
sites of acceleration are unresolved in our simulations. We there-
fore employ a sub-grid prescription for acceleration of CRs,
which we describe in detail in J26. We summarise the main as-
pects here.
CR protons are evolved as a relativistic fluid with adiabatic
indexγ=4/3 and dynamically coupled to the total pressure in
the MHD equations following Pfrommer et al. (2017). The en-
ergy converted into CR protons is determined based on the jet
energy according to
Ecrp =ξ crpEjet,(4)
whereE crp andE jet are the CR proton and jet energies, and
ξcrp =0.1 is the efficiency of jet-to-CR proton energy conversion.
Converting thermal energy into CR protons during jet launch
would alter jet dynamics. To avoid this, thermal energy is in-
stead gradually converted into CR proton energy inside the jet,
after the jet’s kinetic energy has thermalised (this occurs faster
than the dynamics of the system). We keep track of the energy
budget to be converted progressively into CR protons using a
passive quantityE crp, advected in Arepo. The evolution of this
energy budget is dictated by an exponential decay
dEcrp
dt =− Ecrp
τinj
(5)
over a characteristic injection timescaleτ inj =10 Myr, chosen to
be comparable to the duration the relativistic material remains in
the jet spine. In our simulations where the jet power is dictated
by accretion (and therefore stochastic, see Sect. 2.3), usingE crp
to track the energy budget to be converted into CRs allows us
convert the correct fraction of jet energy into CR protons. Along
a Lagrangian element of the jet, our algorithm leads to an ac-
celerated CR energy that exponentially decreases with time, as
described in detail in J26. This injected energy also serves as the
source function for CR electron acceleration.
In addition to advection with the background plasma,
CRs are transported through diffusion and streaming. When
CRs propagate faster than the Alfvén velocity, they ex-
cite Alfvén waves: this process is the streaming instability
(Kulsrud & Pearce 1969; Shalaby et al. 2023; Lemmerz et al.
2025). As CRs scatter on their self-generated Alfvén waves,
they start to isotropize in the wave frame. Damping processes
dissipate wave energy and hence, effectively transfer energy
from CRs to the background thermal plasma following a rate
|3A · ∇P crp|(Wiener et al. 2013) where3 A =B/
p
4πρis the
Alfvén velocity,ρis the mass density and∇P crp is the CR pres-
sure gradient.
We model anisotropic diffusion along the local magnetic
field with a constant anisotropic diffusion coefficient along the
magnetic field ofκ diff =10 29 cm2 s−1. To order of magnitude,
this corresponds to an Alfvén speed of 100 km s−1 and a CR gra-
dient length of 3 kpc. The combination of this anisotropic diffu-
sion with Alfvén losses emulates the effect of streaming. Alfvén
wave losses are only active in cells withX jet ≤10 −3 to prevent
artificially large numerical cooling rates at steep gradients in in-
terfaces between lobes and the surrounding ICM (we point the
reader to Ehlert et al. 2018, for further details). Furthermore, we
include Coulomb and hadronic losses (Pfrommer et al. 2017) of
CR protons, which are subdominant in comparison to Alfvénic
losses in galaxy clusters (Guo & Oh 2008; Ruszkowski et al.
2017).
Appendix A.3 shows the radial evolution of the CR proton to
thermal pressure ratioX crpXcrp, and also confirms that our cool-
core cluster self-regulates and exhibits a stable thermodynamic
state across 2 Gyr with the addition of this CR proton population,
in agreement with E23. In a future study, we will investigate the
impact of CR protons on a self-regulated cool-core such as the
one presented here, in comparison to one without CRs (E23) us-
ing a heating estimator (e.g. Meenakshi et al. 2026). This will be
crucial to quantify the contribution from different heating com-
ponents (e.g. CRs, shocks, turbulent dissipation and mixing, adi-
abatic compression).
2.5. Cosmic ray electrons
The modelling of CR electron spectra is performed in the La-
grangian frame using tracer particles, which track fluid proper-
ties on the MHD timestep (these are the velocity fluid tracers
described in Genel et al. 2013). Along these Lagrangian trajecto-
ries, the post-processing code Crest(Winner et al. 2019) solves
the Fokker-Planck equation to evolve the one-dimensional CR
electron distribution functionf(p)=4πp 2 f 3D(p), wheref 3D(p)
is the three-dimensional distribution function, andp=|p|=
|P|/(mec) is the normalised momentum, wherem e is the elec-
tron mass. Details of the numerical methods and physics imple-
mented in this code are described in Winner et al. (2019).
We evolve the distribution functionf(p) accounting for sub-
grid acceleration in AGN jets (J26), Coulomb collisions, syn-
chrotron, inverse Compton, and bremsstrahlung losses, and adi-
abatic changes. We developed a specific procedure to treat mix-
ing effects for low-density AGN jets in dense cool-core galaxy
cluster environments (J26), which we summarise in Sect. 2.5.2.
Crestis additionally equipped to perform sub-grid acceleration
at supernovae (Werhahn et al. 2026b), resolved Fermi-I accelera-
tion (Whittingham et al. 2026; Whittingham et al. 2026) and re-
acceleration, and Fermi-II momentum diffusion, which are not
modelled in this work.
For each tracer particle, which represents a population of CR
electrons, we obtain a temporally and spatially evolving electron
spectrum. The CR electron spectrum can be integrated to yield
the CR electron energy densityε cre =
R ∞
0 Te(p)f(p)dpwhere
Te(p)=(
p
1+p 2 −1)m ec2 is the CR electron kinetic energy.
Cresttherefore samples the underlying CR electron density
field. A V oronoi mesh is constructed in post-processing based
on the location of the tracer particles (i.e. a different tessellation
from the one constructed in Arepo), allowing each tracer to be
associated with a volumeV cell,tr, and hence an energy according
toE cre =ε creVcell,tr (see Fig. A.1).
We integratef(p) in the range from 10 −2 <p<10 8 with 20
logarithmically-spaced bins per decade. We consider the ICM
Article number, page 4

Léna Jlassi et al.: Simulating FRI jets in a self-regulating cool-core cluster
to be a fully ionised primordial gas containing primarily hydro-
gen with a mass fraction ofX H =0.76, and helium. This leads
to a mean molecular weight ofµ=0.588 and an electron-to-
hydrogen abundance ofx e =1.157. We use a redshift ofz=0,
corresponding to a cosmic microwave background (CMB) pho-
ton energy density ofε cmb ≈4.172×10 −13 erg cm−3, or equiv-
alently, a magnetic field strengthB cmb =3.2µG. Although we
use initial conditions based on the Perseus galaxy cluster (see
Sect. 2.1), this work does not aim to make specific predictions for
this particular object. Rather, this object serves as an archetype
cool-core galaxy cluster in which AGN feedback is at play. Us-
ing a redshift ofz=0.0183 would lead to a marginal increase
in CMB equivalent magnetic field strength at this redshift to
Bcmb =3.2 (1+z) 2 µG≈3.3µG. We therefore only use this red-
shift to convert observational beam sizes to physical distances in
Fig. 2.
Tracer particles are spawned on-the-fly in the jet injection
region. Rather than creating a tracer particle in each cell in the
jet region, which could lead to an unpredictably large num-
ber of tracer particles due to the stochasticity of jet activity in
our simulations, we create tracer particle at a given frequency
1/Ttracer creation, whereT tracer creation is the time period between
tracer creation events. We choose the latter according to the final
number of tracers we aim to spawn during the simulation. Addi-
tionally, we add a background distribution of tracer particles1 in
the initial conditions filling a cubic box of side 340 kpc. In the
simulations presented here, we obtain a total of 6×10 5 tracers at
the end of the simulation. This corresponds to one tracer particle
for every two cells withX jet >10 −6.
2.5.1. Acceleration of CR electrons
Following the procedure initially described in J26, we convert
a fraction of the energy density accelerated into CR protons
(Sect. 2.4) into CR electrons according to
εcre =ξ creεcrp,(6)
whereξ cre =0.01 is the energy conversion efficiency from CR
protons to electrons. Combining proton (see Sect. 2.4) and elec-
tron acceleration efficiencies results in 0.1 % of the jet energy
being converted into CR electrons. We only accelerate CR elec-
trons when they are inside the jets or lobes, defined here as
Xjet >10 −3 and when the gas speed exceeds3 min =3000 km s −1.
We model the accelerated CR electron population as a power-law
in momentum with a source function following
Qinj(p)=r jet
C
∆t p−αinjΘ(p−p min),(7)
whereα inj =2.2 is the electron injection spectral index. Given
a synchrotron flux densityS∝ν −αν whereνis the frequency,
this electron injection index corresponds to a radio spectral in-
dex ofα ν =(α inj −1)/2=0.6, as observed in radio lobes
(e.g. Murgia et al. 2011; Kolokythas et al. 2015; Shulevski et al.
2017; Mahatma et al. 2023). The variabler jet is required to
account for mixing effects (see Sect. 2.5.2),∆tis the MHD
timestep, andΘ(x) is the Heaviside step function. The normal-
isation of the spectrumCand the minimum injection momen-
tump min are determined based on the accelerated CR electron
energy density and enforcing continuity between the thermal
1 These background tracers do not contribute to the total spectrum, as
they only get accelerated if they are entrained in the jet. They serve to
compute the V oronoi mesh in post-processing by filling regions devoid
of tracers.
Maxwellian and the non-thermal CR electron spectrum. We limit
3p th ≤p min ≤10 (J26), wherep th is the momentum at which
the thermal Maxwellian peaks.
2.5.2. Adiabatic effects and mixing
Low-density, high-temperature jet plasma injected into the
dense, cold central parts of cool-core clusters leads to a con-
vectively unstable configuration. As a consequence, jet-inflated
bubbles rise buoyantly in the cluster atmosphere, thereby ex-
panding and hence adiabatically cooling. Along Lagrangian tra-
jectories of tracer particles created in low-density jets, mixing of
low-density jet material with the dense ICM causes the densityρ
recorded by tracers to increase in time. This increase in density
also causes adiabatic compression of CR electrons. Simultane-
ously, however, as jet material mixes with the ICM, CR electrons
initially injected in jet plasma adiabatically expand into a larger
volume devoid of electrons.
We treat adiabatic compression and expansion of the spec-
trum using the background densityρrecorded by tracer particles.
In addition, we account for the second effect, namely advection
and mixing of low-density jet material (filled with CR electrons)
with high-density ICM material (devoid of CR electrons), by us-
ing the jet tracerX jet =m jet/(mICM +m jet), wherem ICM andm jet
are the masses of ICM and jet materials, respectively. We make
use ofX jet, which is evolved using the continuity equation and
therefore captures mass flow across cell interfaces accurately,
to quantify how much CR electrons have mixed with the ICM.
Specifically, we use this quantity to track changes in the number
density of electrons. Indeed, CR electrons initially accelerated in
the jet whereX jet =1 experience dilution as jet material mixes
with the ICM, causingX jet to decrease. In practice, this is taken
into account in the CR electron spectrum by rescaling the num-
ber density defined asn cre =
R ∞
0 f(p)dp, according to
ncre,f =r jetncre,i,wherer jet =X jet,f/Xjet,i,(8)
where the subscripts i and f refer to a change from an initial state
to a final state. This is simply a change in the normalisation of the
spectrum,f f =r jet fi, following the definition of the CR electron
number density. In J26, we investigated adiabatic and mixing ef-
fects in great detail. Overall, we found that CRs accelerated by
low-density jets in cool-core environments experience both adia-
batic compression and dilution, leaving the overall normalisation
unchanged but shifting spectral distributions to higher momenta.
2.6. Synchrotron emission
To obtain synthetic synchrotron data, we employ the Crayon+
code (Werhahn et al. 2021), which post-processes individual
tracer particles from Crestto calculate the instantaneous non-
thermal emission. We point the reader to Appendix A.1 in
Werhahn et al. 2021 for more details. In the following, we as-
sume that the synchrotron emission is optically thin to self-
absorption in the ICM. We calculate the synchrotron emissivity
for each tracer particle as (in units of erg s−1 Hz−1 cm−3)
jν =E dNγ
dνdVdt =
√
3e3B⊥
mec2
Z ∞
0
f(p)F(ν/ν c) dp,(9)
whereEis the energy ofN γ photons,νis the frequency,Vis the
unit volume,tis the unit time,eis the elementary charge, and
B⊥ is the magnetic field perpendicular to the line of sight. The
Article number, page 5

A&A proofs:manuscript no. paper2
dimensionless synchrotron kernelF(x) in the integral is defined
as
F(x)=x
Z ∞
0
K5/3(ξ)dξ,(10)
wherex=ν/ν c andK 5/3 is the modified Bessel function of order
5/3. An analytical approximation from Aharonian et al. (2010)
is used to calculateF(x) more efficiently .
Integratingj ν along the line of sightLallows us
to obtain the radio synchrotron intensityI ν (in units of
erg s−1 Hz−1 cm−2 sterad−1)
Iν = 1
4π
Z ∞
0
jν dL,(11)
where we useL=340 kpc for radio intensity maps throughout
this work, unless otherwise specified. The synchrotron spectral
index is then calculated according to
αν2
ν1 =− log10(Iν2 /Iν1)
log10(ν2/ν1) ,(12)
whereν 1 < ν2 such thatα ν2
ν1 >0. The critical frequencyν c is
νc = 3eB⊥γ2
4πmec ,(13)
whereγ=
p
1+p 2 is the electron Lorentz factor, andγ≈pfor
p≫1. Given the typical synchrotron emission frequencyν sync ≈
2νc (Pfrommer et al. 2022), we can therefore define the typical
electron momentum emitting synchrotron radiation at 150 MHz
as
p|150 MHz ≃1.3×10 3 ×
 B⊥
10µG
!−1/2
,(14)
which is essential to understand how CR electron spectra con-
tribute to the observed radio emission, as we investigate in
Sect. 5.
3. Mock radio observations of self-regulated AGN
jets in a cool-core cluster
3.1. Jet deflection
Figure 1 shows projections of our simulations during a jet-active
phase, att=1.44 Gyr. All projections have a depth≈120 kpc,
with the exception of the radio intensity map (bottom right panel)
which is obtained by projecting along a line of sight of 340 kpc
centred on the SMBH. The projection direction for all the panels
is parallel to the jet launching direction.
Despite the jets being injected in a purely bi-directional man-
ner with no opening angle and no jet precession, the diversity
of lobe orientations echoes the strong jet deflection occurring
on small scales, and is reflected in theX jet map on scales of
20 kpc close to the SMBH. The reason for this lack of colli-
mation on large scales is due to a combination of two factors:
one being intrinsic to the jet, and the other caused by the ambi-
ent medium. First, we simulate light jets with a density contrast
of∼3×10 3 −10 4 with the external medium, which have in-
sufficient momentum flux to push through the external medium.
Second, we set up a turbulent ambient medium (see Sect. 2.1)
where radiative cooling of the thermal gas leads to cold gas
structures, which deflect the jet on kpc-scales. Indeed, light jets
contribute to isotropic spreading of turbulence in comparison to
denser jets (E23, Meenakshi et al. 2026). This turbulence is im-
printed in the magnetic field strength map. Further away from
the central AGN, the turbulent initial conditions are visible as lo-
cal variations in the magnetic field strength. On the other hand,
in the central parts, specifically in the jet and lobe regions, the
magnetic field strength ranges from a fewµG to 60µG, and ex-
hibits filamentary structures along the jets but also in the wake
of older, buoyantly rising lobes. These structures are also clear
in the magnetic-to-thermal pressure ratioX B map, and appear
more highly magnetised than the background gas 2. This mag-
netic pressure support, reaching close to 50% of the thermal
pressure in the bubble wakes, provides an explanation for the
filamentary morphology visible on larger scales. In Sect. 5, we
will discuss the specific impact of magnetic field strength on the
resulting radio emission.
A variety of lobes from different jet outbursts can be seen in
the jet tracerX jet projection. This passive quantity is initialised as
Xjet =1 in the jet region, and decreases due to advection and tur-
bulent mixing with ambient ICM gas, while adiabatic processes
leave this quantity invariant. Because of this, smaller values of
the jet tracerX jet (pink colours) indicate younger, more recently
injected jet material 3. Our self-regulated AGN jets produce di-
verse bubble shapes and sizes, located at different radii in almost
all directions around the SMBH. In the mass density projection,
these lobes are observable as under-dense regions, due to the
low-density jets which inflate them. While the most recently in-
flated bubbles are clearly visible in the central 100 kpc, most
of the older lobes at larger radii are less noticeable in the den-
sity projection. This is due to the large depth of projection used,
but also due to the drop in ICM density towards larger radii,
against which under-dense bubbles are less discernible. This di-
verse population of jet-inflated lobes lead to cavities in maps of
synthetic X-ray emission, and will be examined in conjunction
with our synthetic radio maps in future work.
3.2. Self-regulation with CR protons and electrons
This current work focuses on the new CR proton and electron
populations implemented in this self-regulated cool-core envi-
ronment, which are presented in the respective energy density
maps in Fig. 1. Both CR protons and electrons are accelerated
in the jet and hence reflect the distribution of jet material. How-
ever, while the jet material is simply advected, CR protons addi-
tionally experience diffusion, leading to smoother edges around
the lobes. Turning our attention to the CR electron spatial dis-
tribution confirms that we obtain electron energy densities at the
correct proportion to protons (i.e. smaller by a factor 100), al-
though there are evident differences between the two: electrons
retain slightly higher energy densities in the jet and lobes, and
have more defined lobe edges as well as patchier distributions
in the lobes. This reflects a difference in the modelled transport
processes for both populations, as well as differing numerical
implementations. Protons are evolved as a relativistic fluid in the
finite-volume solver with advection, anisotropic diffusion in a
turbulent magnetic field and dynamical pressure coupling, while
2 The influence of magnetic fields on cold gas was examined in de-
tail in E23, who found that light jets lead to filamentary structures
which are observable through Hαin central dominant (cD) galaxies
(e.g. Gendron-Marsolais et al. 2018), as opposed to dense jets which
form disk-like structures.
3 It is worth noting that the large projection depth needed to highlight
the different lobes inflated in many directions, also lowers this volume-
weighted quantity.
Article number, page 6

Léna Jlassi et al.: Simulating FRI jets in a self-regulating cool-core cluster
Fig. 1.Projections of self-regulated AGN jets in a Perseus-like galaxy cluster att=1.44 Gyr.Top:From left to right, volume-weighted gas mass
density, magnetic field strength, CR proton energy density, and the CR electron energy density multiplied by 1/ξcre =100, whereξ cre is our chosen
efficiency of CR proton to CR electron energy conversion (Sect. 2.5.1).Bottom:From left to right, we show the volume-weighted jet tracerX jet,
the magnetic-to-thermal pressure ratioX B, and the CR proton to thermal pressure ratioX crp, all calculated using volume-weighted pressures. The
last panel shows the radio intensity at 150 MHz obtained from CR electron spectra calculated with the Fokker-Planck solver Crest, smoothed with
a 2D Gaussian beam with full-width at half-maximum FWHM=4 kpc. The low-density jet-inflated lobes of different shapes and sizes are filled
with CRs. The radio intensity at 150 MHz primarily highlights the ongoing jet outburst, but previous outbursts are visible in the CR distributions.
electrons are evolved in post-processing along Lagrangian tra-
jectories without accounting for diffusive transport.
Moreover, protons and electrons experience different phys-
ical loss processes: their energies are therefore not expected to
evolve in exactly the same manner, as shown by the total energy
diagnostics presented in Appendix A. Yet the close spatial corre-
spondence between the CR proton and electron distributions and
that of the jet material indicates that diffusion of protons down
the CR pressure gradient that is projected on the magnetic field
lines is not the dominant transport mechanism. Instead, turbu-
lent diffusion plays a large role in redistributing material in the
cluster core, with a turbulent diffusion coefficient that can be ap-
proximated asκ turb ≈σ losLturb/3≈10 30 cm2 s−1, whereσ los ≈
180 km s−1 is the estimated line of sight velocity dispersion (see
Fig. 14 of E23) and the coherence scale is on the order of the
diameter of jet-inflated bubbles,L turb ≈60 kpc (Bellomi et al.
2025). This effective turbulent diffusion coefficient is thus larger
than the intrinsic CR diffusion coefficient in three-dimensional
(nearly isotropic) turbulence ofκ diff/3≈3×10 28 cm2 s−1 (see
Sect. 2.4).
The isotropic bubble distribution due to jet deflection leads to
CRs filling the central 100 kpc of the cool-core cluster. The CR
proton-to-thermal pressure map mirrors this, and additionally il-
lustrates the effect of our CR proton algorithm in converting jet
energy into CR protons with a varying jet power. We reach val-
ues ofX crp ≤0.05 in the central 10 kpc and obtain lower values
in the central∼100 kpc after 1.5 Gyr (see Fig. A.3), which is
in line with upper limits onX crp derived from the non-detection
of gamma-rays (Jacob & Pfrommer 2017a,b). We defer further
analysis on this topic to a future study.
Finally, the radio intensity map at 150 MHz highlights
the central lobes resulting from the ongoing jet outburst, in
which the jets appear bent on scales of 20 kpc, reminiscent
of FRI jets which do not remain collimated on large scales
(De Gasperin et al. 2012; We˙ zgowiec et al. 2024; Cotton et al.
2025). Beyond the central pair of lobes reaching∼70 kpc from
the central SMBH, other lobes recognizable in the CR distribu-
tions have radio intensities lower by two orders of magnitude
or more. However, the magnetic field strengths and CR electron
energy densities in these lobes at larger radii have not decreased
significantly. This suggests that older electrons are filling these
lobes, which have cooled by the time they reach those radii. We
discuss this in detail in Sect. 5.2. To understand how these ra-
dio intensities fit within current observations of radio galaxies,
we now present mock radio observations of our simulations at
multiple epochs.
3.3. Radio mocks: a diversity of radio morphologies and
phenomena
In Fig. 2, we show radio intensity maps at 150 MHz at differ-
ent epochs chosen to demonstrate the variety of obtained mor-
Article number, page 7

A&A proofs:manuscript no. paper2
Fig. 2.Synchrotron intensity maps at 150 MHz of self-regulated AGN jets at different epochs, in comparison with the single jet outburst in the
bottom right corner presented in J26. We smooth the image using a symmetric 2D beam with FWHM=7 ′′ ≈2.7 kpc (depicted in panel A at the
bottom right) to mock observationally motivated angular resolutions, and use the conversion 1 Jy beam−1 =0.018 Jy arcsec −2. We draw contours at
σLoTSS ×[3,100,800], whereσ LoTSS =100µJy/beam is the sensitivity achieved in LoTSS. These contour levels are also marked in the colour bar
as vertical lines. We obtain mock radio maps of FRI-like jets, and lobes with complex, asymmetrical structures. This in contrast to the simulation
of a single jet outburst, which solely produces symmetrical, polar lobes.
phologies. For comparison, we display the radio emission for
the single-jet outburst presented in J26 in the bottom right. The
latter emerges from a jet event with powerLjet =3×10 45 erg s−1
active for 50 Myr, shown here at 55 Myr. We note that the ra-
dio images obtained for the self-regulated simulation are all pro-
jected along the axis parallel to the jet launching axis whereas
that of the single outburst is projected perpendicular to the jet
launching axis, for the purpose of comparing morphologies. We
make use of the sensitivity reached in the LOFAR Two-metre
Sky Survey (LoTSS) ofσLoTSS =100µJy/beam (Shimwell et al.
2017) to plot contours atσ LoTSS ×[3,100,800]. We place our
simulated object at the redshift of Perseus,z=0.0183, which
Article number, page 8

Léna Jlassi et al.: Simulating FRI jets in a self-regulating cool-core cluster
Fig. 3.Synchrotron intensity maps projected along three different axes
at 150 MHz of a single snapshot att=1.46 Gyr (see movie), and
smoothed with a 2D Gaussian beam FWHM=4 kpc. The cartoon in the
upper right illustrates the jet launching direction. The bottom left image
in the cube is obtained by projecting along the jet launching axis, as is
the case for the mock images shown in Fig. 2. This viewing direction
corresponds to a blazar-like configuration, despite which we observe
clear jet-inflated lobes. This demonstrates the deflection experienced by
the jets on kpc-scales, caused by cold gas structures forming in the clus-
ter centre and accreted onto the SMBH.
corresponds to an angular scale of 0.38 kpc arcsec −1. We adopt
a beam size with full-width at half-maximum (FWHM)=7 ′′4
applied as a symmetric 2D Gaussian kernel to smooth our radio
intensity maps.
The peak intensity at 150 MHz reaches levels of
≈0.23 Jy arcsec−2, corresponding to≈13 Jy beam −1 for our
smoothing beam of 7′′ ×7 ′′. This is on par with observations of
radio galaxies with clear AGN lobes in galaxy clusters such as
M87 in the Virgo cluster (De Gasperin et al. 2012) or Hydra A in
Abell 1958 (Wise et al. 2007), with levels of 10–100 Jy beam −1
obtained with larger beams. On the other hand, observations of
radio lobes in the Perseus cluster display lower surface bright-
ness (Gendron-Marsolais et al. 2020) in comparison with our
peak value. However, the lobes observed in Perseus do not ex-
hibit clear jet structures and likely correspond to a weaker or
older jet outburst. Generally, without fine-tuning parameters or
rescaling our electron spectra, we successfully reproduce ob-
served levels of radio surface brightness. This is also demon-
strated by the global radio luminosities obtained throughout our
simulation, which we discuss in Sect. 4.
Furthermore, the first contour shown in Fig. 2 corresponding
to 3σ LoTSS reveals that aged lobes from previous outbursts, at
distances reaching≈200 kpc, would in principle be observable
by such a survey. However, real radio observations, in compari-
son to our synthetic ones, still face numerous challenges such as
4 This is comparable to the angular resolution in LoTSS as well as the
highest resolution observations of the Perseus cluster (Groeneveld et al.
2026) at this frequency.
incompleteu–vplane coverage, calibration uncertainties, high
dynamic range observations and the challenge of completely re-
moving central or background radio sources which may give rise
to side lobes, etc.
Throughout 2 Gyr of evolution, jet radio plasma reaches
extents up to 400 kpc with diverse morphologies, with some
clearly indicating the presence of jets, and others showing rem-
nant plasma with complex morphologies. Images C, D, E, F re-
semble FRI radio galaxies, with plume-like, disturbed and bent
jet lobes. In fact, applying the traditional definition used in clas-
sifying FRI and FRII sources (Fanaroff& Riley 1974) results
in 97% of our snapshots being identified as FRI sources in the
AGN’s maintenance phase (see Sect. 4). However, this classi-
fication has limitations when applied to unusual and complex
morphologies departing from ideal, polar lobes. We describe our
procedure and display such edge cases in Appendix B. Amongst
these morphologies, we find a radio image with a single lobe in
panel A, restarted radio galaxies in panels C, D, E and F, i.e.
evidence of episodic activity where an older pair of radio lobes
from previous jet activity is observed simultaneously with a pair
of inner lobes from ongoing activity (e.g. Schoenmakers et al.
2000; Jamrozy et al. 2007). The single outburst presented in J26
and shown in panel I at 5 Myr post jet activity displays the
typical, two-sided polar lobes observed in both FRI and FRIIs
(Capetti et al. 2017a,b). In contrast to this, images A, B and H
exhibit radio plasma that is difficult to directly identify as typi-
cal pairs of jet lobes. Looking at the corresponding spectral index
maps for these images (see Appendix C) reveals that the emis-
sion in B and G display low spectral indices ofα 1.4 GHz
150 MHz ≈0.6
close to the SMBH, indicative of freshly accelerated plasma.
Panel H, on the other hand, exhibits spectral indices larger than
unity, and corresponds to radio plasma in a remnant phase, when
the bright radio core and jets disappear but lobes continue to ra-
diate.
As previously mentioned, the mock radio maps from our
self-regulated AGN jets shown in Fig. 2 were obtained by pro-
jecting the radio emission from CR electrons along the jet
launching direction. To understand the implications of this, we
select one epoch,t=1.46 Gyr, and present its three-dimensional
radio morphology. The corresponding radio intensity maps are
presented in Fig. 3, where each face of the cube corresponds to
a different projection direction.
These three projections confirm the strong deflection expe-
rienced by the jets, causing the radio emitting plasma to spread
into nearly all directions around the SMBH. Moreover, project-
ing along the jet launching direction corresponds to a blazar-like
configuration where we are observing the jet ‘down the barrel’.
All radio images shown in Fig. 2, as well as the left panel of
Fig. 3 are hence blazar configurations, despite the complex lobe
morphologies observed. In fact, while the radio image obtained
in the blazar configuration clearly resembles a radio galaxy, pro-
jecting along a different direction yields a radio galaxy with what
appears to be three lobes (rightmost side of the cube). Project-
ing along the final direction (upper side of the cube) helps dis-
entangle this three-lobe configuration into a radio galaxy with
strongly deviated jets, following an almost helical structure (we
emphasize that we neither adopted a jet opening angle nor any
precession).
As discussed in Sect. 3.1 these complex and disturbed mor-
phologies are due to light jets interacting with cold gas struc-
tures in the background gas, which additionally feed the SMBH
through cold accretion (see Sect. 2.3). Indeed, both the self-
regulated AGN jet simulation presented in this work and the sin-
gle jet outburst presented in J26 employ identical initial con-
Article number, page 9

A&A proofs:manuscript no. paper2
Fig. 4.Bottom:Time evolution of the jet luminosity (black line) and 1.4 GHz radio luminosity (coloured line). The black and red dashed lines
indicate the mean jet and radio luminosities, respectively. The jets are initially in an ‘intermittent’ phase with short, weak outbursts (≤0.9 Gyr)
and transition into a ‘maintenance’-phase where the outbursts are powerful and almost continuous (>0.9 Gyr).Top left:Time evolution of the
volume-weighted non-thermal electron spectra. In the first Gyr, the sparse jet outbursts lead to a strongly-cooled CR electron spectrum as a result
of Coulomb and radiative losses. Once the AGN jets enter a maintenance phase with almost continuous outbursts, the high momentum part of the
spectrum exhibits a steady-state slope as new electrons are accelerated.Top right:Time evolution of the total radio luminosity between 10 MHz
and 100 GHz computed from the electron spectra. The vertical dashed line indicates theν=150 MHz frequency, and the horizontal dashed line
the FRI-FRII radio power divide observed at this frequency (Mingo et al. 2019). The spectral evolution over time is analogous to that of the CR
electron spectrum.
ditions and jet density. The interplay between the radiatively
cooling background gas and accretion driven jet activity is there-
fore responsible for the morphological differences observed be-
tween these two setups, which emphasises the need to model
self-regulated jets in order to produce realistic radio galaxies in
simulations.
4. How AGN jet activity influences global electron
and radio spectra
4.1. Two evolutionary phases of jet activity
Having explored the morphological characteristics of our AGN
jets, we now present global CR electron and radio spectra re-
sponsible for this emission. Figure 4 shows the time evolution of
the jet and radio powers, the corresponding global CR electron
spectrum (left) and the resulting radio spectrum (right) through-
out 2 Gyr of evolution. Electron spectra are volume-weighted
while radio spectra are obtained by integrating over the intensity
of all tracer particles within a box of side 340 kpc centred on the
SMBH.
Focusing first on the bottom panel, the temporal evolution of
the jet luminosity clearly exhibits two phases. The first Gyr is an
‘intermittent’ phase, where the jet outbursts are short and weak
(<1044 erg s−1). After nearly 1 Gyr, the AGN begins a more ac-
tive phase owing to the cold gas mass accreted onto the SMBH
and feeding the jet (see Fig. A.2 for the temporal evolution of
accretion and SMBH-related quantities). In this second period,
which we call the ‘maintenance’ phase, the AGN is active with
longer outbursts of higher average jet power (>10 44 erg s−1). In
this maintenance phase, there are nonetheless periods where the
jets nearly switch off, e.g.t≈1.6 Gyr due to a decrease in the
accreted cold gas mass. Observationally, this epoch would cor-
respond to a case of a restarted radio galaxy, where the decrease
Article number, page 10

Léna Jlassi et al.: Simulating FRI jets in a self-regulating cool-core cluster
in jet luminosity would be observed as jets switching off, as is
the case in our simulated radio maps (see movie).
We show the average jet and radio luminosities as dashed
black and red lines, respectively. Our simulations yield an av-
erage jet power of 5.7×10 44 erg s−1 and an average specific
1.4 GHz radio luminosity of 1.2×10 40 erg s−1. The radio power,
smaller by roughly four orders of magnitude, traces the jet lu-
minosity but remains on a floor value throughout the mainte-
nance phase even when the instantaneous jet luminosity drops
abruptly, as is the case around 1.6 Gyr. This can be explained
by the variability timescale of jet activity being shorter than the
cooling time scale of CR electrons which are progressively ac-
celerated (rather than injected at a unique event in a jet outburst).
Electrons hence still emit radio emission despite the decrease in
instantaneous jet power. In future work, we will investigate the
link between jet and radio luminosities.
Overall, our simulations yield radio luminosities below
1026 W Hz−1 at 150 MHz, in agreement with observed luminosi-
ties of FRI sources (Fanaroff& Riley 1974; Ledlow & Owen
1996; Mingo et al. 2019), which have lower luminosities in com-
parison to FRII sources5. This result is consistent with the radio
intensity levels obtained in our maps (Fig. 2), both of which are
in line with observations.
4.2. Intermittent phase
We now focus on the top panels of Fig. 4. In the initial, inter-
mittent phase (shown in purple to magenta-coloured lines), the
electron spectrum exhibits properties of a typical freely-cooling
spectrum: a convex spectrum shaped by Coulomb losses at low
momenta, and synchrotron and inverse-Compton losses at high
momenta. The spectrum reduces in normalization and narrows
with time as electrons are progressively cooled after the ini-
tial outbursts. Comparing this spectral evolution to that with-
out adiabatic changes and mixing effects included (described
in Sect. 2.5.2 and in extensive detail in J26) confirms that CR
electrons experience dilution, which explains this decrease in the
normalisation. The overall freely-cooling behaviour of the spec-
trum is particularly noticeable in this intermittent phase where
jet outbursts are weak and short-lived because they form sig-
nificantly smaller lobes than in the maintenance phase. These
lobes do not propagate further than 50 kpc and are easily dis-
rupted through mixing with the ICM. The temporal evolution of
the radio spectrum mirrors this freely-cooling behaviour, with
synchrotron losses being faster at higher frequencies. As a con-
sequence, the radio luminosity at 150 MHz (cf. vertical dashed
line) decreases by nearly five orders of magnitude in about
0.5 Gyr, and is two orders of magnitude lower than the luminos-
ity in the maintenance phase (shown in red to yellow-coloured
lines). For these reasons, we choose to show radio morphologies
from the maintenance phase in Fig. 2. The morphology observed
in the initial intermittent phase are instead compact and of very
low luminosity, and could be likened to unresolved, compact ra-
dio galaxies, also referred to as FR0 sources (Sadler et al. 2014;
Baldi et al. 2015, 2019; Vardoulaki et al. 2021).
5 This break, however, is only an indicator of where FRI and FRII
sources are expected to lie on average; there is a large overlap in
the luminosity associated with objects of these two morphologies
(Mingo et al. 2019).
4.3. Maintenance phase
In the second Gyr of evolution where the AGN is in a main-
tenance mode, the global CR electron spectral shape resembles
a freely-cooling spectrum at low and mid-momenta (p<10 4),
while high-momenta display a steady-state slope ofαinj+1=3.2
almost throughout. This steady-state slope indicates that ongo-
ing acceleration is competing with radiative losses at these mo-
menta. Despite this, the spectral normalisation at high momenta
varies by a factor of 100. As described in Sect. 2.5.1, 0.1% of the
jet energy is injected into electrons. Assuming all radio emitting
plasma experiences similar levels of dilution (in turn decreasing
the spectral normalisation by the same amount), the change in
normalisation at mid-momenta is therefore a consequence of the
varying jet luminosity. The radio spectrum mirrors the electron
spectrum and generally exhibits a power-law behaviour. A short
interruption in AGN activity and hence a lack of newly-injected
CR electrons e.g. at around 1.6 Gyr, is reflected in the CR elec-
tron spectrum, which again displays a freely-cooling shape due
to dominating radiative losses. This is also visible in the radio
spectrum, which deviates from a power-law behaviour at this
time. This indicates that the high-momentum spectrum (p>10 6)
retains almost no memory of recent injection events due to fast
cooling losses. To understand this, we analyse how populations
of different ages contribute to the global spectrum at a single
epoch in the following section.
5. Disentangling the impact of electrons of different
ages on the resulting emission
We distinguish between populations of CR electrons accelerated
at different stages in Fig. 5 and focus on a single snapshot at
t=1.5 Gyr, during which the jet is active. Specifically, we
distinguish between electron populations accelerated in the last
4 Myr in the first column, and electrons accelerated between 4
and 400 Myr in the second column, and show their physical lo-
cation in the third column. We make use of the quantityt since inj,
defined as the time elapsed since the last CR electron accelera-
tion event6 for an individual tracer particle (we describe the cri-
teria for acceleration in Sect. 2.5). Because the time since the last
injectiont since inj can be defined as the electron age, we use this
terminology in the following description 7, and where unspeci-
fied, we generally refer to young and old electrons as electrons
with ages≤4 Myr (first column) and 4 Myr<t since inj ≤400 Myr
(second column), respectively.
5.1. CR electron age distributions: electron spectra
Focusing first on CR electron spectra, electrons still undergo-
ing acceleration (purple line,t since inj =now) contribute most
strongly to the high momentum spectrum fromp>2×10 5,
and trace the ongoing jet outburst in the map. The cumulative
spectrum for all electrons younger than 4 Myr (black dashed
line) also reveals that these electrons undergoing acceleration
are solely responsible for the steady-state slope observed at high
momenta in the global electron spectrum (black dotted line).
6 More specifically, this corresponds to the last integration timestep in
Crestwhere CR electron energy was injected
7 In J26, two age definitions were adopted depending on the electron
spectral range of interest. For the purpose of this analysis, which con-
cerns Gyr timescales, the 10 Myr progressive injection timescale in-
troduces a negligible distinction between the two definitions, and we
therefore do not differentiate between them here for simplicity.
Article number, page 11

A&A proofs:manuscript no. paper2
Fig. 5.Spatial and spectral distributions of different electron ages, defined as the time since last injectiont since inj, att=1.5 Gyr. We differentiate
between young (age≤4 Myr) and old (4<age≤400 Myr) CR electrons on the left and right, respectively. Electrons undergoing acceleration
at the current time correspond tot since inj =now.Right:Spatial distributions of CR electron tracer particles, colour-coded by their age, i.e. their
corresponding time since injection.Left, top row:CR electron spectra colour-coded by the time since injection. Using the 10-90th percentiles of
the magnetic field strength distribution, we plot the electron momentum contributing to the 150 MHz and 1.4 GHz emissions in light and dark
grey, respectively. We show the global spectrum at the snapshot time as a dotted black line, and the cumulative spectra composed of the electron
populations showed in each panel using a dashed black line.Left, bottom row:Corresponding synchrotron radio spectra. High momenta (p>10 5)
are dominated by electrons undergoing acceleration. Low and mid-momenta (p<10 4) are dominated by old electrons. Both young and old CR
electrons contribute to the intermediate momentum range 10 3 <p<10 4, which is precisely the range which contributes to emission in the
150 MHz – 1.4 GHz band.
Electrons no longer experiencing acceleration, but younger than
1 Myr have already cooled away atp>10 7 (magenta line), and
are tracing a lobe at (z,y)≈(−60,−40) kpc. This trend continues
for other young electrons, e.g. with ages between 1 and 4 Myr, as
strong radiative losses carry on cooling these populations at high
momenta. The spectral normalisation at 10 1 <p<10 4 varies
across these populations. This decrease in normalization could
be due to dilution and compression occurring simultaneously,
shifting the spectrum right and downwards. It could also orig-
inate from the progressive and exponentially decreasing source
function accelerating CRs in our simulations, according to which
the spectral normalisation is determined by the maximum energy
density injected into electrons. Therefore, as the jet power deter-
mines the energy accelerated into CRs, variations in the spectral
normalisation of different electron populations are expected due
to the fluctuating jet power. For a more detailed description of
how our acceleration algorithms affect CR electrons spectra in a
single-jet outburst, we refer the reader to J26.
Shifting our attention to older electrons (middle column), the
low- and mid-momentum electron spectral range (p<10 5) in
the global spectrum is dominated by contributions from elec-
trons aged between 4 and 400 Myr. These display a typical
freely-cooling behaviour of progressively losing energy through
Coulomb losses and radiative losses, which narrows their spec-
tral distribution. The CR electron spectral range 3×10 4 <p<
105 stems mostly from electrons with ages ranging from 4 to
100 Myr (as evidenced by the cumulative spectrum for old elec-
trons), which trace the lobes of a previous jet outburst, reaching
a horizontal extent of∼200 kpc (−100 kpc<z<100 kpc) and
vertical extent of∼150 kpc (−75 kpc<y<75 kpc). Electrons
older than 100 Myr still contribute strongly to the global spec-
trum due to the longer cooling times of electrons atp<3×10 4,
and correspond to older jet outbursts. These old electrons have a
heterogeneous distribution, reaching lateral extents greater than
250 kpc and are located in almost all directions, emphasising
the complex interaction between low-density jets and a turbulent
environment forming cold gas structures (see Sect. 3).
In conclusion, while old electrons determine the normalisa-
tion of the global electron spectrum atp<10 4, only electrons
undergoing acceleration are responsible for the high momentum,
steady-state spectral shape. In the following, we examine the in-
termediate spectral range at momenta 103 <p<10 4, which cor-
respond to the electron momenta that typically emit radio syn-
chrotron emission in the range from 150 MHz to 1.4 GHz.
5.2. CR electron age distributions: radio synchrotron spectra
In the resulting synchrotron emission spectra (lower panels in
Fig. 5), electrons younger than 4 Myr old dominate the global
radio spectrum from≈5 GHz and at higher frequencies, as indi-
cated by their cumulative spectrum (black dashed line). On the
other hand, up to≈200 MHz, it is electrons aged between 4 and
Article number, page 12

Léna Jlassi et al.: Simulating FRI jets in a self-regulating cool-core cluster
Fig. 6.Multi-panel view of the AGN jet outburst att=1.5 Gyr (same time as Fig. 5).Central column:From top to bottom, we show the 150 MHz
radio intensity, the spectral index map at 150 MHz – 1.4 GHz, and the 1.4 GHz intensity. The radio mocks are smoothed with a Gaussian beam
with FHWM=4 kpc, from which the spectral index map is computed. The multi-epoch radio intensity at these two frequencies is shown in a
movie.Left and right columns:CR electron spectra and corresponding radio synchrotron spectra in four different regions of interest. Each box
has dimensions 30×30 kpc 2, and the same depth as the radio images. The 10–90th percentile magnetic field strengths within these boxes is used
to show the momenta contributing to the 150 MHz and 1.4 GHz emission frequencies in light and dark gray, respectively. The similar features
observed in the jet lobes at low and high frequencies are explained by the contributing momenta highlighting both old and young electrons (see
Fig. 5). Regions a) and b) are composed of old electron populations whose cut-offmomentump≈10 4 is in the band of contributing momenta,
which is why these electrons are visible at 150 MHz, but not at 1.4 GHz. Regions c) and d) include younger electrons in comparison to regions a)
and b), indicated by the power-law shape in region c) and d).
100 Myr (light green line) which dominate the cumulative spec-
trum, with electrons older than 100 Myr not contributing at all.
The cumulative spectra of young and old electrons strongly over-
lap in the intermediate spectral range 200 MHz< ν <5 GHz.
To understand this, we connect electron and synchrotron spectra
using Eq. (14), which allows us to determine which momentum
pcontributes to the emission at a given frequencyν sync given
the magnetic field strength encountered by CR electrons. His-
tograms of the magnetic field strengths experienced by these CR
electron populations are shown in Appendix D and range from
Article number, page 13

A&A proofs:manuscript no. paper2
0.2 to 100µG with most tracers located in fields of 2−40µG
(10th to 90th percentiles). These magnetic field strengths are
in accordance with estimates obtained from observations (see
Carilli & Taylor 2002, for a review) using equipartition argu-
ments (e.g. Bîrzan et al. 2008; De Gasperin et al. 2012) in AGN
lobes and Faraday rotation measures (e.g. V ogt & Enßlin 2005;
Kuchar & Enßlin 2011; Osinga et al. 2025) in the ICM.
We show the momenta contributing to the 150 MHz and
1.4 GHz emission in light and dark grey, respectively, in the
top panels of Fig. 5, and indicate these frequencies in the syn-
chrotron spectra using vertical lines of the same colours 8. This
allows us to directly map electron spectral range to synchrotron
frequency. Due to the comparable magnetic field strengths en-
countered by both young and old electrons (see Appendix D),
momenta contributing to the emission at 150 MHz< ν <
1.4 GHz generally fall in the range 5×10 2 <p<10 4 for
both young and old populations. This range is precisely where
the global spectrum transitions between its freely-cooling, con-
vex shape to its power-law behaviour, as previously mentioned.
Indeed, due to cooling times longer than∼200 Myr at these
momenta, electrons less than 100 Myr old are able to con-
tribute to the synchrotron emission in the 200 MHz< ν <
5 GHz range. Nonetheless, in the band of momenta responsi-
ble for the 150 MHz emission, the spectrum corresponding to
4 Myr<age≤100 Myr has a higher normalisationp 2⟨f(p)⟩ V ≈
2×10 −10 cm−3 in comparison to young electrons, and there-
fore dominate the emission spectrum at this frequency. The pic-
ture becomes more complex at 1.4 GHz, as both young and old
electrons have equivalent spectral normalisationsp 2⟨f(p)⟩ V ≈
3×10 −11 cm−3, albeit with different spectral slopes. Young elec-
trons have flatter spectra, which explains their larger contribution
to the global radio spectrum at 1.4 GHz.
This effect – whereby electrons of different ages contribute
to the 150 MHz< ν <1.4 GHz emission range – explains
why emission maps at similar spatial resolutions but differ-
ent frequencies can look remarkably similar, as is the case for
M87, the central galaxy in the Virgo cluster (De Gasperin et al.
2012, 2025), which displays comparable features at 54, 144 and
1284 MHz (see also Lane et al. 2004, where the FRI source, Hy-
dra A, appears similar at 74 and 330 MHz). To further illustrate
this effect, we present 150 MHz and 1.4 GHz radio intensity
maps in Fig. 6 at the same epoch. Although we obtain generally
similar maps at these two frequencies, the lower frequency map
(middle column, top panel) reveals older radio emitting plasma
in the form of lobes. The regions of high resemblance between
the two maps correspond to electrons younger than 100 Myr old
in Fig. 5, all of which have non-negligible CR electron spectra
in the range of momenta contributing to the 1.4 GHz emission,
as explained above.
Moreover, connecting electron and radio spectra using the
encountered magnetic field strengths explains why extending ob-
servations to frequencies lower than 150 MHz does not always
uncover significantly larger extents in emission. For example, the
respective electron spectra in Fig. 5 (left, top row) for popula-
tions with ages between 100-200 (teal colour) and 200-300 Myr
(blue colour) look remarkably similar atp≈10 3, which con-
tributes to the 150 MHz emission. As a consequence of their
equivalent electron spectra, their radio spectral shape (left, bot-
tom row) below 150 MHz is almost identical despite their dif-
ferent ages. While the luminosity observed at a frequency of
8 The range of momenta shown corresponds to the minimum 10th per-
centile and maximum 90th percentile magnetic field strengths of the
electron populations shown in each panel.
50 MHz would be greater than at 150 MHz, electrons with ages
100 Myr<t since inj ≤200 Myr would not appear brighter than
electrons with ages 200 Myr<t since inj ≤300 Myr. Nonethe-
less, the general argument according to which lower frequen-
cies probe older electrons still stands in terms of relative lu-
minosities. That is to say, for the oldest electrons with ages
300 Myr<t since inj ≤400 Myr and assuming equal observational
sensitivities at 50 MHz and 150 MHz, observations at lower fre-
quencies increases their likelihood of detection, simply due to
their greater luminosity at lower frequencies.
5.3. Connecting age distributions to local spectra
Figure 6 highlights the localised spectral information encoded in
our simulations. Four different regions are shown, each with its
corresponding local CR electron and radio spectrum. The range
of momenta contributing to the 150 MHz–1.4 GHz emission lies
around 103 <p<10 4 and is uniform across all regions.
Region d) is centred on the jet, and is almost identical to the
cumulative spectrum for electrons witht since inj ≤4 Myr (upper
left panel of Fig. 5), which indicates that the youngest electrons
– those still undergoing acceleration – are contributing in this
region. The spectral index map reflects this with a smooth dis-
tribution ofα ν =0.6 along the jet barrel. Region c) highlights a
recently inflated jet lobe with a spectrum exhibiting a power-law
behaviour at high momenta, indicative of ongoing acceleration.
However, the CR electron spectrum in this region has similar
features to the global spectrum (black dotted line in Fig. 5), no-
tably the freely-cooling shape at 10−1 <p<10 3. Indeed, despite
the ongoing acceleration of CR electrons, the spectral index dis-
tribution in this region includes values higher thanα ν ≈0.6.
This region appears to contain the entire range of CR electron
populations accelerated at different jet outbursts, which explains
why the spectrum in this region has similar features to the global
spectrum.
Regions a) and b) emphasise old lobes, i.e. remnant plasma
with age ranges of 100–200 Myr and 300–400 Myr, respec-
tively. Despite having different ages, their spectra have similar,
freely-cooling shapes. The larger age of electrons in region b)
(cf. Fig. 5) explains the spectral cut-offat a lower momentum
in comparison to that in region a), due to CR electrons having
cooled for a longer duration. Specifically, this cut-offis at the
edge of the band of momenta contributing to the 1.4 GHz, which
explains the lack of visible emission in the 1.4 GHz image in this
region. On the other hand, in region a), electrons in the 1.4 GHz
momentum range have not cooled completely, which explains
why they are slightly visible in the 1.4 GHz image.
6. Conclusions
In this study, we extend the self-regulated Perseus-like cool-core
cluster presented in E23 by accelerating and evolving CR pro-
ton and electron populations in the AGN jets. The CR protons
are modelled as a relativistic fluid in MHD, while CR elec-
trons are evolved in post-processing along Lagrangian tracer
particles using Crest(Winner et al. 2019) to evolve CR elec-
tron spectra. We use Crayon+to calculate the radio synchrotron
emission (Werhahn et al. 2021). The AGN jet luminosity is
self-consistently determined by cold accretion onto the central
SMBH and hence fluctuates throughout the simulation duration
of 2 Gyr. In this work, we present spatially and temporally evolv-
ing CR electron spectra and the resulting mock radio continuum
observations. We summarize our findings as follows:
Article number, page 14

Léna Jlassi et al.: Simulating FRI jets in a self-regulating cool-core cluster
–Self-regulated AGN jets produce complex and ‘disturbed’
FRI morphologies (Figs. 2 and 3) which depart from typ-
ical polar lobe structures prevalent in numerical studies of
AGN jets. Indeed, comparing these complex morphologies to
the polar lobe structures obtained in our previous work (J26)
which uses identical initial conditions and algorithms but
crucially, a single jet outburst of fixed power, demonstrates
that accretion-modulated AGN jet power (Fig. 4) plays a ma-
jor role in producing realistic morphologies (Fig. 2). More-
over, the variability in jet power produces multiple genera-
tions of lobes, as well as morphologies that match restarted
and remnant radio galaxies.
–All mock radio observations presented are viewed in a
blazar-configuration – with the line of sight parallel to the jet
launch direction – and yield intricate lobe and plume features
despite this, emphasizing the strong deflection of the jets on
kpc scales (Figs. 2 and 3). This deflection is due to our sim-
ulated light jets (ρ ICM/ρjet ∼3×10 3 −10 4), which carry a
low momentum density and are hence easily re-oriented by
thermally unstable cold and dense gas structures, the latter
which also feed the central SMBH through cold accretion
and power the jet (E23). Thus, our simulations suggest that
inferring the black hole spin and small-scale jet orientation
from (FRI) radio lobe morphologies on kpc scales and above
is, fundamentally, not possible.
–Our self-consistently evolved CR electron spectra allow us
to account for a well-known observational phenomenon: ra-
dio observations of AGN jet lobes in cluster environments
occasionally display similar spatial extents and morphologi-
cal features across different frequencies (Fig. 6). This is ex-
plained by the range of electron momenta 10 3 <p<10 4
contributing to the 150 MHz–1.4 GHz frequency range in
magnetic fields of 1–50µG obtained in our cool-core envi-
ronment. In this range of momenta, both young (a few Myr
old) and old (hundreds of Myr old) electrons are able to
contribute to the radio emission observed in the 150 MHz–
1.4 GHz range (Fig. 5).
The modelling of temporally and spatially evolving CR elec-
tron spectra allows us to examine the link between CR electrons
shaped by the plasma they are embedded in, and the resulting
observed radio emission. Our simulation setup is ideally suited
to study various radio phenomena relating to AGN jets in galaxy
clusters. Moreover, on top of the radio diagnostics they provide,
our AGN jets’ ability to prevent cooling flows allows us to study
the connection between jet power and observed radio emission,
to gain insight into AGN feedback from the radio window. We
will explore these topics in future work.
Acknowledgements.The analysis of the simulations presented in this work were
performed using the Python package Paicos(Berlok et al. 2024). LJ and CP ac-
knowledge support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German
Research Foundation) as part of the DFG Research Unit FOR5195 – project
number 443220636. CP and JW acknowledge support by the European Research
Council under ERC-AdG grant PICOGAL-101019746. RW acknowledges fund-
ing of a Leibniz Junior Research Group (project number J131/2022). PG grate-
fully acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council via
the ERC Synergy Grant "ECOGAL" (project ID 855130).
Data Availability
The data underlying this article will be shared on reasonable re-
quest to the corresponding author.
References
Aharonian, F. A., Kelner, S. R., & Prosekin, A. Y . 2010, Physical Review D, 82,
043002
An, T. & Baan, W. A. 2012, ApJ, 760, 77
Axford, W. I., Leer, E., & Skadron, G. 1977, in International Cosmic Ray Con-
ference, V ol. 11, 132
Baldi, R. D., Capetti, A., & Giovannini, G. 2015, A&A, 576, A38
Baldi, R. D., Capetti, A., & Giovannini, G. 2019, MNRAS, 482, 2294
Beckmann, R. S., Dubois, Y ., Guillard, P., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A60
Beckmann, R. S., Dubois, Y ., Pellissier, A., et al. 2022, A&A, 665, A129
Bell, A. R. 1978a, MNRAS, 182, 443
Bell, A. R. 1978b, MNRAS, 182, 147
Bellomi, E., ZuHone, J. A., Truong, N., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2512.12754
Bellomi, E., ZuHone, J. A., Weinberger, R., et al. 2024, ApJ, 974, 234
Berlok, T., Jlassi, L., Puchwein, E., & Haugbølle, T. 2024, Journal of Open
Source Software, 9, 6296
Best, P. N. & Heckman, T. M. 2012, MNRAS, 421, 1569
Best, P. N., V on Der Linden, A., Kauffmann, G., Heckman, T. M., & Kaiser, C. R.
2007, MNRAS, 379, 894
Bhattacharjee, A., Seo, J., Ryu, D., & Kang, H. 2024, ApJ, 976, 91
Bicknell, G. V . 1995, A&AS, 101, 29
Bîrzan, L., McNamara, B. R., Nulsen, P. E. J., Carilli, C. L., & Wise, M. W. 2008,
ApJ, 686, 859
Birzan, L., Rafferty, D. A., McNamara, B. R., Wise, M. W., & Nulsen, P. E. J.
2004, ApJ, 607, 800
Bourne, M. A. & Sijacki, D. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 4707
Bourne, M. A. & Sijacki, D. 2021, MNRAS, 506, 488
Bourne, M. A. & Yang, H.-Y . K. 2023, Galaxies, 11, 73
Brienza, M., Godfrey, L., Morganti, R., et al. 2017, A&A, 606, A98
Brienza, M., Rajpurohit, K., Churazov, E., et al. 2025, A&A, 696, A239
Capetti, A., Massaro, F., & Baldi, R. D. 2017a, A&A, 598, A49
Capetti, A., Massaro, F., & Baldi, R. D. 2017b, A&A, 601, A81
Carilli, C. L. & Taylor, G. B. 2002, Annual Review of A&A, 40, 319
Cavagnolo, K. W., Donahue, M., V oit, G. M., & Sun, M. 2008, ApJ, 683, L107
Cerutti, B. & Giacinti, G. 2023, A&A, 676, A23
Chen, Y .-H., Heinz, S., & Hooper, E. 2023, MNRAS, 522, 2850
Churazov, E., Forman, W., Jones, C., & Böhringer, H. 2003, ApJ, 590, 225
Cotton, W., Giri, G., Agnihotri, P. J., et al. 2025, MeerKAT 1.3 GHz Observations
of the Wide Angle Tail Radio Galaxy J1712$-$2435
Crawford, C. S., Allen, S. W., Ebeling, H., Edge, A. C., & Fabian, A. C. 1999,
MNRAS, 306, 857
Croston, J. H., Hardcastle, M. J., Birkinshaw, M., Worrall, D. M., & Laing, R. A.
2008, MNRAS, 386, 1709
Croston, J. H., Ineson, J., & Hardcastle, M. J. 2018, MNRAS, 476, 1614
De Gasperin, F., Edler, H. W., Boselli, A., et al. 2025, A&A, 693, A189
De Gasperin, F., Orrú, E., Murgia, M., et al. 2012, A&A, 547, A56
Domínguez-Fernández, P., ZuHone, J., Weinberger, R., et al. 2024, Jet Interac-
tion with Galaxy Cluster Mergers
Dubois, Y ., Devriendt, J., Slyz, A., & Silk, J. 2009, MNRAS, 399, L49
Dubois, Y ., Devriendt, J., Slyz, A., & Teyssier, R. 2010, MNRAS, 409, 985
Dunn, R. J. H. & Fabian, A. C. 2004, MNRAS, 355, 862
Ehlert, K., Weinberger, R., Pfrommer, C., Pakmor, R., & Springel, V . 2018, MN-
RAS, 481, 2878
Ehlert, K., Weinberger, R., Pfrommer, C., Pakmor, R., & Springel, V . 2023, MN-
RAS, 518, 4622
Elley, E. L., Matthews, J. H., Mukherjee, D., & Vaidya, B. 2026, Simulating
Radio Emission from Flickering AGN Jets: Travelling Shocks and Hotspot
Brightening
Ensslin, T. A., Pfrommer, C., Miniati, F., & Subramanian, K. 2011, A&A, 527,
A99
Fabian, A. C. 2012, Annual Review of A&A, 50, 455
Fanaroff, B. L. & Riley, J. M. 1974, MNRAS, 167, 31P
Fermi, ENRICO. 1949, Physical Review, 75, 1169
Gaspari, M., Temi, P., & Brighenti, F. 2017, MNRAS, 466, 677
Gendron-Marsolais, M., Hlavacek-Larrondo, J., Martin, T. B., et al. 2018, MN-
RAS, 479, L28
Gendron-Marsolais, M.-L., Hlavacek-Larrondo, J., van Weeren, R. J., et al. 2020,
MNRAS, 499, 5791
Genel, S., V ogelsberger, M., Nelson, D., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 1426
Gopal-Krishna, Patra, D., & Joshi, R. 2024, A Sample of 25 Radio Galaxies with
Highly Unusual Radio Morphologies, Selected from the LoTSS-DR2 Survey
at 144 Mhz
Gopal-Krishna & Wiita, P. J. 2000, Extragalactic Radio Sources with Hybrid
Morphology: Implications for the Fanaroff-Riley Dichotomy
Groeneveld, C., van Weeren, R. J., Gendron-Marsolais, M.-L., et al. 2026, Inves-
tigating the Radio Emission in the Perseus Cluster with LOFAR Sub-80 MHz
LBA
Guo, F. & Mathews, W. G. 2011, ApJ, 728, 121
Article number, page 15

A&A proofs:manuscript no. paper2
Guo, F. & Oh, S. P. 2008, MNRAS, 384, 251
Hardcastle, M. J. & Croston, J. H. 2020, New Astronomy Reviews, 88, 101539
Hitomi Collaboration, Aharonian, F., Akamatsu, H., et al. 2018, Publications of
the Astronomical Society of Japan, 70, 9
Hlavacek-Larrondo, J., Li, Y ., & Churazov, E. 2022, in Handbook of X-ray and
Gamma-ray Astrophysics (Springer, Singapore), 1–66
Horton, M. A., Krause, M. G. H., & Hardcastle, M. J. 2020, MNRAS, 499, 5765
Hudson, D. S., Mittal, R., Reiprich, T. H., et al. 2010, A&A, 513, A37
Ineson, J., Croston, J. H., Hardcastle, M. J., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 453, 2682
Jacob, S. & Pfrommer, C. 2017a, MNRAS, stx131
Jacob, S. & Pfrommer, C. 2017b, MNRAS, stx132
Jamrozy, M., Konar, C., Saikia, D. J., et al. 2007, MNRAS, 378, 581
Jetha, N. N., Hardcastle, M. J., Ponman, T. J., & Sakelliou, I. 2008, MNRAS,
391, 1052
Jlassi, L., Weinberger, R., Pfrommer, C., et al. 2026, Simulating Cosmic Ray
Electron Spectra and Radio Emission from an AGN Jet Outburst in a Cool-
Core Cluster
Kaiser, C. R. & Best, P. N. 2007, MNRAS, 381, 1548
Kapi´nska, A. D., Terentev, I., Wong, O. I., et al. 2017, The Astronomical Journal,
154, 253
Kokotanekov, G., Wise, M., Heald, G. H., et al. 2017, A&A, 605, A48
Kolokythas, K., O’Sullivan, E., Giacintucci, S., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 450, 1732
Kormendy, J. & Ho, L. C. 2013, Annual Review of A&A, 51, 511
Krause, M., Alexander, P., Riley, J., & Hopton, D. 2012, MNRAS, 427, 3196
Kuchar, P. & Enßlin, T. A. 2011, A&A, 529, A13
Kulsrud, R. & Pearce, W. P. 1969, ApJ, 156, 445
Laing, R. A. & Bridle, A. H. 2002, MNRAS, 336, 1161
Lane, W. M., Clarke, T. E., Taylor, G. B., Perley, R. A., & Kassim, N. E. 2004,
The Astronomical Journal, 127, 48
Leahy, J. P. & Parma, P. 1992, in Extragalactic Radio Sources. From Beams to
Jets, 307–308
Ledlow, M. J. & Owen, F. N. 1996, The Astronomical Journal, 112, 9
Lemmerz, R., Shalaby, M., Pfrommer, C., & Thomas, T. 2025, ApJ, 979, 34
Li, Y . & Bryan, G. L. 2014, ApJ, 789, 54
Lin, Y .-T., Shen, Y ., Strauss, M. A., Richards, G. T., & Lunnan, R. 2010, ApJ,
723, 1119
Mahatma, V . H., Basu, A., Hardcastle, M. J., Morabito, L. K., & van Weeren,
R. J. 2023, MNRAS, 520, 4427
Mahatma, V . H., Hardcastle, M. J., Williams, W. L., et al. 2019, A&A, 622, A13
Mahatma, V . H., Hardcastle, M. J., Williams, W. L., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 475,
4557
Martizzi, D., Quataert, E., Faucher-Giguere, C.-A., & Fielding, D. 2019, MN-
RAS, 483, 2465
Massaglia, S., Bodo, G., Rossi, P., Capetti, S., & Mignone, A. 2016, A&A, 596,
A12
Mathews, W. G., Faltenbacher, A., & Brighenti, F. 2006, ApJ, 638, 659
Matthews, J. H., Bell, A. R., & Blundell, K. M. 2020, New Astronomy Reviews,
89, 101543
Matthews, J. H., Bell, A. R., Blundell, K. M., & Araudo, A. T. 2019, MNRAS,
482, 4303
McNamara, B. R. & Nulsen, P. E. J. 2012, New Journal of Physics, 14, 055023
McNamara, B. R., Wise, M., Nulsen, P. E. J., et al. 2000, ApJ, 534, L135
Meenakshi, M., Weinberger, R., Pfrommer, C., & Berlok, T. 2026, Identifying
Heating Processes in Simulations with an Entropy-Based Scheme: A Single
Jet Episode in a Galaxy Cluster
Mingo, B., Croston, J. H., Hardcastle, M. J., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 488, 2701
Miyoshi, T., Terada, N., Matsumoto, Y ., et al. 2010, IEEE Transactions on
Plasma Science, 38, 2236
Mukherjee, D., Bodo, G., Mignone, A., Rossi, P., & Vaidya, B. 2020, MNRAS,
499, 681
Murgia, M., Parma, P., Mack, K.-H., et al. 2011, A&A, 526, A148
Nishikawa, K., Mizuno, Y ., Gómez, J. L., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 493, 2652
Nolting, C., Jones, T. W., O’Neill, B. J., & Mendygral, P. J. 2019, ApJ, 876, 154
Olivares, V ., Salome, P., Combes, F., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A22
O’Neill, B. J., Jones, T. W., Nolting, C., & Mendygral, P. J. 2019, ApJ, 884, 12
Osinga, E., van Weeren, R. J., Rudnick, L., et al. 2025, A&A, 694, A44
Pakmor, R., Bauer, A., & Springel, V . 2011, MNRAS, 418, 1392
Pakmor, R. & Springel, V . 2013, MNRAS, 432, 176
Pakmor, R., Springel, V ., Bauer, A., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 455, 1134
Peterson, J. R. & Fabian, A. C. 2006, Physics Reports, 427, 1
Pfrommer, C. 2013, ApJ, 779, 10
Pfrommer, C., Pakmor, R., Schaal, K., Simpson, C. M., & Springel, V . 2017,
MNRAS, 465, 4500
Pfrommer, C., Werhahn, M., Pakmor, R., Girichidis, P., & Simpson, C. M. 2022,
MNRAS, 515, 4229
Pillepich, A., Springel, V ., Nelson, D., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 473, 4077
Pinzke, A., Oh, S. P., & Pfrommer, C. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 1061
Pizzolato, F. & Soker, N. 2005, ApJ, 632, 821
Prasad, D., Sharma, P., & Babul, A. 2015, ApJ, 811, 108
Rafferty, D. A., McNamara, B. R., Nulsen, P. E. J., & Wise, M. W. 2006, ApJ,
652, 216
Reiprich, T. H. & Böhringer, H. 2002, ApJ, 567, 716
Rubeis, E. D., Bondi, M., Botteon, A., et al. 2025, Revealing the Intricacies of
Radio Galaxies and Filaments in the Merging Galaxy Cluster Abell 2255. II.
Properties of Filaments Using Multi-Frequency Radio Data
Rudnick, L., Bruggen, M., Brunetti, G., et al. 2022, ApJ, 935, 168
Ruszkowski, M., Ensslin, T. A., Bruggen, M., Heinz, S., & Pfrommer, C. 2007,
MNRAS, 378, 662
Ruszkowski, M., Yang, H.-Y . K., & Reynolds, C. S. 2017, ApJ, 844, 13
Sadler, E. M., Ekers, R. D., Mahony, E. K., Mauch, T., & Murphy, T. 2014,
MNRAS, 438, 796
Saxton, C. J., Wu, K., Korunoska, S., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 405, 1816
Schoenmakers, A. P., De Bruyn, A. G., Rottgering, H. J. A., Van Der Laan, H.,
& Kaiser, C. R. 2000, MNRAS, 315, 371
Shalaby, M., Thomas, T., Pfrommer, C., Lemmerz, R., & Bresci, V . 2023, Journal
of Plasma Physics, 89, 175890603
Sharma, P., McCourt, M., Quataert, E., & Parrish, I. J. 2012, MNRAS, 420, 3174
Shimwell, T. W., Röttgering, H. J. A., Best, P. N., et al. 2017, A&A, 598, A104
Shulevski, A., Morganti, R., Harwood, J. J., et al. 2017, A&A, 600, A65
Sijacki, D., Pfrommer, C., Springel, V ., & Enlin, T. A. 2008, MNRAS, 387, 1403
Sironi, L., Rowan, M. E., & Narayan, R. 2021, ApJLetters, 907, L44
Springel, V . 2010, MNRAS, 401, 791
Springel, V . & Hernquist, L. 2003, MNRAS, 339, 289
Su, K.-Y ., Hopkins, P. F., Bryan, G. L., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 507, 175
Tadhunter, C. 2016, A&A Rev., 24, 10
Tchekhovskoy, A. & Bromberg, O. 2016, MNRAS: Letters, 461, L46
Tremblay, G. R., Combes, F., Oonk, J. B. R., et al. 2018, ApJ, 865, 13
van Weeren, R. J., de Gasperin, F., Akamatsu, H., et al. 2019, Space Sci. Rev.,
215, 16
Vardoulaki, E., Jiménez Andrade, E. F., Delvecchio, I., et al. 2021, A&A, 648,
A102
V ogelsberger, M., Genel, S., Sijacki, D., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 3031
V ogt, C. & Enßlin, T. A. 2005, A&A, 434, 67
Wang, C., Ruszkowski, M., & Yang, H.-Y . K. 2020, MNRAS, 493, 4065
Wang, J.-S., Reville, B., Liu, R.-Y ., Rieger, F. M., & Aharonian, F. A. 2021,
MNRAS, 505, 1334
Weinberger, R. & Pfrommer, C. 2026, A&A, 706, L13
Weinberger, R., Springel, V ., & Pakmor, R. 2020, A&AS, 248, 32
Weinberger, R., Su, K.-Y ., Ehlert, K., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 523, 1104
Werhahn, M., Pfrommer, C., & Girichidis, P. 2021, MNRAS, 508, 4072
Werhahn, M., Pfrommer, C., Girichidis, P., et al. 2026a, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2604.20950
Werhahn, M., Pfrommer, C., Whittingham, J., et al. 2026b, MNRAS, 548,
stag682
Werner, N., Urban, O., Simionescu, A., & Allen, S. W. 2013, Nature, 502, 656
We˙ zgowiec, M., Jamrozy, M., Chy˙ zy, K. T., et al. 2024, A&A, 691, A193
Whitehead, H. W. & Matthews, J. H. 2023, MNRAS, 523, 2478
Whittingham, J., Pfrommer, C., Werhahn, M., Jlassi, L., & Girichidis, P. 2026,
A&A, 706, A39
Whittingham, J., Pfrommer, C., Werhahn, M., Jlassi, L., & Girichidis, P. 2026,
Zooming in on Radio Relics – II. How Relic Morphology Probes Density
Fluctuations at the Edge of Galaxy Clusters
Wiener, J., Zweibel, E. G., & Oh, S. P. 2013, ApJ, 767, 87
Wing, J. D. & Blanton, E. L. 2011, The Astronomical Journal, 141, 88
Winner, G., Pfrommer, C., Girichidis, P., & Pakmor, R. 2019, MNRAS, 488,
2235
Wise, M. W., McNamara, B. R., Nulsen, P. E. J., Houck, J. C., & David, L. P.
2007, ApJ, 659, 1153
Yang, H.-Y . K. & Reynolds, C. S. 2016, ApJ, 818, 181
Yang, X., Joshi, R., Gopal-Krishna, et al. 2019, A&AS, 245, 17
Yates-Jones, P. M., Shabala, S. S., Power, C., et al. 2023, Publications of the
Astronomical Society of Australia, 40, e014
Zhang, C., Zhuravleva, I., Heinrich, A., et al. 2025, Mapping the Perseus Galaxy
Cluster with XRISM: Gas Kinematic Features and Their Implications for Tur-
bulence
ZuHone, J., Ehlert, K., Weinberger, R., & Pfrommer, C. 2021, Galaxies, 9, 91
Article number, page 16

Léna Jlassi et al.: Simulating FRI jets in a self-regulating cool-core cluster
Fig. A.1.Time evolution of the cumulative jet, CR proton, and CR
electron energies. Protons are transported through advection and diffu-
sion, and cooled through Coulomb, hadronic, and Alfvén losses. The
electrons are transported strictly through advection, and cooled through
Coulomb and radiative (bremsstrahlung, synchrotron and IC) losses.
The different loss processes experienced by CR protons and electrons
explain the differently decreasing CR proton and electron energies over
time.
Appendix A: Energetics and self-regulation of AGN
jet feedback over 2 Gyr
Fig. A.2.Time evolution of cold gas massM cold (T<10 6K), star for-
mation rate ˙M⋆, jet powerL jet and black hole massM BH. The AGN jet
model establishes self-regulation, most clear att>0.9 Gyr, in the main-
tenance phase where the jet is continuously on.
In the top panel of Fig. A.1, we show the evolution of the
cumulative injected jet energy, and CR proton and electron en-
Fig. A.3.Radial profiles of the X-ray weighted electron number den-
sityn e,X, temperatureT X, entropyK e,X, thermal pressureP th,X. The final
panel shows the new addition of CR protons to the E23 setup through
the CRp-to-thermal pressure ratioX crp, which uses volume-weighted
pressures. Dashed grey lines indicate number density (10 −2 cm−3) and
entropy (30 keV cm2) criteria used to separate strong cool-core clus-
ters from moderate to non cool-core clusters (Cavagnolo et al. 2008;
Hudson et al. 2010). The thermodynamic profiles are consistent with
observations and stable after 0.5 Gyr, highlighting the self-regulation
achieved in the cool-core cluster.
ergies. The initial short jet outbursts occurring around 0.25 Gyr
(see Fig. A.2), are visible as an increase in energy for all compo-
nents. These outbursts are followed by a quiescent period during
which the CR proton and electron energies decrease, albeit the
latter more drastically. This decrease is due to CR protons ex-
periencing Coulomb, hadronic and Alfvénic losses, while elec-
trons experience Coulomb and radiative losses as well as adia-
batic and mixing losses. Although the overall CR electron energy
decreases between 0.3 and 0.9 Gyr, peaks are observed, likely
corresponding to discrete accretion events. In the second Gyr,
where the AGN is in a maintenance phase (see Fig. A.2), the
cumulative jet energy increases, allowing the total CR proton
and electron energies to somewhat stabilise despite their strong
losses. From 1.6 Gyr onwards, the average jet power decreases,
leading the total CR electron energy to decrease overall. This
Article number, page 17

A&A proofs:manuscript no. paper2
can be explained by newly injected CR electrons carrying less
energy than previous jet events, which are therefore not able to
replenish the electron energy fast enough to counteract Coulomb
and radiative losses. For a more detailed discussion on the accel-
eration algorithms and the recovered energy fractions, we point
the reader to J26, where we show the evolution of jet, CR pro-
ton and electron energies in a simpler setup where we simulate a
single jet outburst.
We now present the self-regulating nature of our AGN jet
feedback model. To do this, we present similar diagnostics as
those presented in E23. In Fig. A.2, we show the evolution of
properties related to the cooling processes, star formation and the
accreting SMBH, namely the cold gas massM cold (T<10 6 K),
the star formation rate ˙M⋆, the jet powerL jet, and the black hole
massM BH. The initial intermittent phase of AGN activity is due
to cold accretion which fuels the AGN jets. The range of values
recovered in our simulation align with those obtained in Fig. 6 of
E23, albeit with slightly higher cold gas mass and hence higher
star formation rates (<200 M ⊙ yr−1). The addition of CR pro-
tons in comparison to their work likely has an impact on the
evolution of these quantities, which will be explored in future
work. This novel CR proton component is presented in Fig. A.3
in conjunction with radial profiles of X-ray weighted thermo-
dynamic quantities characterizing cool-core clusters. The X-ray
weighting uses the thermal bremsstrahlung cooling luminosity
˙εth ∝n eni
√
Tfor cells with 0.2 keV<k BT<10 keV, where
ne andn i are the number densities of electrons and ions, respec-
tively. After 1 Gyr, CR protons stabilise at approximately a few
percent of the thermal pressure in the central 50 kpc, due to con-
tinuous jet activity in this maintenance-phase. Furthermore, in
alignment with the results of E23 and as shown by the radial pro-
files, our AGN jet feedback establishes a cycle of self-regulation
after∼0.5 Gyr.
Appendix B: FR classification
The traditional FR classification (Fanaroff& Riley 1974) con-
sists of determining whether the source’s brightest region is
closer to the core (i.e. the host) or to the edge of the source,
in comparison the mid-point of the source on a given side. In the
former, the source is identified as an FRI source, while it is clas-
sified as an FRII in the latter. First, we only choose images from
our simulations when the jet is active. We use radio intensity
maps at 150 MHz to find the mid-point of the source (defined
as the pixel corresponding to half of the extent of the source).
To find the extent of the source, we use radio intensity maps at
150 MHz, identify all pixels with at least 5% of the maximum
intensity, and choose the one with the largest radial position. We
then find the mid-point of the source, defined as the pixel cor-
responding to half of the extent of the source. Finally, we find
the brightest pixel of the source. We then classify our images as
FRI or FRII depending on the location of this brightest pixel rel-
ative to the mid-point. This procedure is illustrated in Fig. B.1,
where we show the locations of the host in green (in our case,
the SMBH), the furthest pixel within 5% of the maximum radio
intensity in white, and the brightest pixel in yellow.
This yields an FRI identification rate of≈97%, as shown in
Fig. B.1. However, upon closer inspection, we found that images
classifying FRII radio galaxies did not resemble the traditional
morphology expected for such objects. Rather, it reflects the lim-
its of such a classification procedure when dealing with complex
morphologies where no clear opposing polar lobes are visible,
as shown in Fig. 2. This is also why FR classification procedures
usually involve manual verification even when using automated
algorithms.
Fig. B.1.Time evolution of FR classification indices obtained following
the original criteria defined in Fanaroff& Riley (1974), calculated for
all times where the jet is active in the maintenance phase (t>0.9 Gyr).
We obtain FRI indices for almost all times, except at those times where
the morphology cannot be described as twin lobes, at which point the
FRI-FRII classification should no longer be applied.
Appendix C: Spectral index maps
In Fig. B.2, we show spectral index maps corresponding to the
radio images at 150 MHz presented in Fig. 2. Whereas some of
the complex morphologies observed in our radio maps make in-
terpretations on the state of the plasma difficult, these spectral in-
dex maps indicate where more recently accelerated plasma lies.
Appendix D: Magnetic field strengths
In Fig. C.1, we show magnetic field strength histograms, where
each line corresponds to a specific electron age distribution
(same as shown in Fig. 5). The magnetic field strengths broadly
range from around 0.2 to 100µG with the 10th to 90th per-
centile values ranging from around 2 to 40µG. The magnetic
field strength distribution extends to somewhat lower values in
the case of older CR electron populations, reaching strengths of
0.1µG, although the 10th to 90th percentile range does not de-
crease significantly.
Article number, page 18

Léna Jlassi et al.: Simulating FRI jets in a self-regulating cool-core cluster
Fig. B.2.Spectral index maps calculated between 150 MHz and 1.4 GHz, obtained using radio intensity maps smoothed with a 2D Gaussian beam
FWHM=2 kpc, smaller than beam sizes used throughout the paper in order to highlight small-scale spectral index variations.
Article number, page 19

A&A proofs:manuscript no. paper2
Fig. C.1.Magnetic field strength histograms for the electron age dis-
tributions shown in Fig. 5. We display the 10th and 90th percentiles
of each distribution with gray bands, each delimited by coloured lines
matching the corresponding distribution.
Article number, page 20