Title: The Radio-IR Correlation in the Context of Deep Radio Source Counts
Authors: Tirth D. Surti, Vikram Ravi, Allison Matthews, Viviana A. Rosero
Published: 2026-06-01
Categories: astro-ph.GA

Draft version June 3, 2026
Typeset using LATEXtwocolumnstyle in AASTeX7.0.2
The Radio–IR Correlation in the Context of Deep Radio Source Counts
Tirth D. Surti
 ,1 Vikram Ravi
 ,1 Allison Matthews
 ,2 and Viviana A. Rosero
 1
1Cahill Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics, California Institute of Technology, 1216 E California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
2Carnegie Observatories, 813 Santa Barbara Street, Pasadena, CA 91101, USA
ABSTRACT
Increasingly deep, confusion-limited radio surveys have pushed direct radio source-count measure-
ments down to tens ofµJy at 1.4 GHz. Confusion-noiseP(D) analyses extend the statistical counts
down below 1µJy. Radio source counts have allowed for constraints on the radio–derived star formation
rate density (SFRD) history through models of the backwards evolution of the local radio luminosity
function, using the radio–FIR correlation,q∝log(L FIR/L1.4), to convert radio luminosities to FIR
luminosities and hence star-formation rates. Recent deep radio source counts fromMeerKATsuggest
a potential tension in the SFRD history between radio and UV/FIR measurements at 1≲z≲2. This
corresponds to a>3σdiscrepancy between the predicted and measured source counts near 10µJy. We
introduce a purely radio-luminosity based parameterization of the redshift evolution of the radio–FIR
correlation based on changing cosmic ray losses. We find evidence (≳2σ) that an evolution in the
radio–FIR correlation consistent with a mild decrease inqout toz∼2 arising from strengthening mag-
netic fields can mitigate the source count tension. We additionally show that intrinsic scatter in the
radio–FIR correlation is likely boundedσ q ≲0.3 dex at these redshifts ifqdecreases. Although we find
no evidence that current radio source counts imply a breakdown in the radio–FIR correlation, future
deep radio surveys from the Deep Synoptic Array (DSA) will be able to push radio source counts down
to several nJy, providing stronger constraints on the allowed evolution.
Keywords:Radio continuum emission (1340) — Star formation (1569) — Cosmic rays (329) — Cos-
mology (343)
1.INTRODUCTION
Differential radio source counts down to micro-Jansky
fluxes provide a fundamental constraint on the evolu-
tion of star formation rate density (SFRD), because
they indicate the integrated sum of the flux density
contributions from SFGs across all redshifts. Deep ra-
dio surveys (J. J. Condon et al. 2012; T. Vernstrom
et al. 2014; V. Smolˇ ci´ c et al. 2017; Mandal, S. et al.
2021; A. M. Matthews et al. 2021a), further aided by
a P(D) analysis of confusion-limited data, have mea-
sured differential source count contributionsn(S) over
flux densities dominated by both active galactic nuclei
(AGN) and star-forming galaxies (SFG) at∼100 mJy
and∼30µJy at 1.4 GHz, respectively. SFRD mea-
surements constrained by multiple UV and far–infrared
(FIR) surveys corrected for dust extinction indicate an
SFRD that rose sharply and peaked nearz∼2 before
decaying withe-folding timescaleτ∼4 Gyr to to a lo-
Email: tsurti@caltech.edu
cal SFRDψ 0∼0.015 M⊙ yr−1 Mpc−3 (P. Madau & M.
Dickinson 2014) (MD hereafter) under a fixed Salpeter
initial mass function (IMF, E. E. Salpeter 1955). This
compilation has become the standard for comparison for
radio–derived cosmic SFRDs that have become possible
with deeper and nearly photometrically complete radio
surveys out to higher redshifts (e.g., Novak, M. et al.
2017; R. K. Cochrane et al. 2023).
Given the immunity of radio emission to dust extinc-
tion, and the likely origin of radio emission from HII
regions (thermal free–free) and accelerated cosmic rays
from supernovae (non-thermal synchrotron, M. Harwit
& F. Pacini 1975), radio emission can also trace star
formation. This is most conveniently parameterized in
terms of the observed tight radio–FIR correlation de-
fined by the parameterq∝log(L FIR)−log(L 1.4 GHz),
which is used to first convert to an equivalent FIR lumi-
nosity and then a star formation rate. This correlation
was originally observed using local star forming galaxies
(P. C. van der Kruit 1973; L. J. Rickard & P. M. Harvey
1984), showing a remarkably small dispersion of∼7%
arXiv:2606.02717v1  [astro-ph.GA]  1 Jun 2026

2
(G. Helou et al. 1985). Under the assumption of a fixed
1.4 GHz spectral index,qis observed to exhibit a mild
redshift evolution, decreasing with redshift out toz∼3
and potentially beyond (I. Delvecchio et al. 2021; J. Del-
haize et al. 2017). More fundamental is likely its relation
to SFG mass (luminosity), withqobserved to rise with
smaller masses (luminosities) (I. Delvecchio et al. 2021)
and potentially flatten above log(L 1.4)≥22.5 (A. M.
Matthews et al. 2021b).
The radio–FIR correlation can be inferred from the re-
lationship between the ionizing photon rate from young
stars in HII regions to that of thermal radio emission and
separately between ionizing photon rate to star forma-
tion rate on the≲100 Myr timescale that IR emission
traces star formation so thatL T
1.4 ∝L FIR (E. J. Murphy
2009; I. Yoon 2024). Consequently, theqparameter is
directly related to the fraction of the total 1.4 GHz radio
emission of a star forming galaxy that is thermal. Ob-
servations of local SFGs suggest that∼10% of the total
emission at 1.4 GHz is thermal (J. J. Condon & Q. F.
Yin 1990), which only increases at higher rest-frame fre-
quencies before cold dust emission begins to dominate
at∼100 GHz. Independent of the correlation with FIR
luminosities, spectral fitting of star formation rates has
also indicated correlations between radio emission and
star formation with scatter on the level of∼0.2–0.3 dex
(R. K. Cochrane et al. 2023), comparable to the ob-
served scatter on the radio–FIR correlation evaluated
out to higher redshifts (I. Delvecchio et al. 2021).
As previously done for infrared–based source counts
(C. P. Pearson 2001; B´ ethermin, M. et al. 2011), ra-
dio source counts can be modeled by evolving the local
1.4 GHz radio luminosity function (LF) backwards un-
der an assumed pure luminosity and density evolution
such that the radio LF at any redshiftzcan be ex-
pressed in terms of the local LF (Novak, M. et al. 2017;
A. M. Matthews et al. 2021b). In this paper, we build
on the work of A. M. Matthews et al. (2021b), hereafter
M21b, which finds a radio–derived SFR history that is
potentially in tension with UV/FIR measurements. In
Section 2, we briefly summarize the radio source count
model and in Section 3, we show the discrepancy be-
tween the observed UV/IR SFRD history and the radio
source counts under a non-evolving radio–FIR correla-
tion. In Section 4 we provide a semi–analytic model
ofq(z) evolution parameterized purely in terms of ra-
dio luminosity motivated redshift–dependent changes in
cosmic ray losses and the effect of intrinsic scatter in the
radio–FIR correlation. In Section 5, we discuss the effect
of scatter in the radio–FIR correlation on the derived
SFRDs, and in Section 6, we show the impact on the
various models ofq(z) evolution and intrinsic scatter on
the radio source counts. These sections demonstrate the
information that can be gleaned from deep radio source
counts when paired with other SFR tracers. In Section
7, we discuss the flux densities down to which surveys
with upcoming radio telescopes like the Deep Synoptic
Array (DSA; G. Hallinan et al. 2019) will be able to
constrain radio source counts, thus providing stronger
constraints on the radio LF evolution.
To remain consistent with M21b, we assume a flat
ΛCDM cosmology withH 0 = 70 and Ω m,0 = 0.3. We
take the spectral indexαto be such thatS ν∼ν α,so
α <0 for optically-thin thermal free-free and non-
thermal synchrotron emission in SFGs. We also assume
the Salpeter IMF in all SFRD calculations for consis-
tency with MD.
2.MODEL OVERVIEW
To model theS 2n(S) radio source counts derived from
the DEEP2 field, we adopt the procedure of M21b,
whereby the local radio LF for SFGs and AGN are both
evolved backwards in time under a luminosity and den-
sity evolution. This evolution is different for SFGs and
AGN. We refer the reader to M21b for the full descrip-
tion of the radio source count model, but we summarize
the relevant parts of the model briefly in this section and
modifications made to the original procedure.
Ifρ dex(Lν|z) is the radio LF at redshiftz, then the lu-
minosity density function isu dex(Lν|z) =L νρdex(Lν|z),
which has dimensions of spectral luminosity per volume
per dex of radio luminosity. Assuming a pure luminosity
evolutionf(z) and density evolutiong(z), the luminos-
ity density function at any redshift can be related to the
local luminosity density function:
udex(Lν|z) =f(z)g(z)u dex(Lν/f(z)|0).(1)
For the local AGN LF, we assume the parameters found
by M21b, originally taken from (J. J. Condon et al.
2019). For SFGs, to reduce the impact of cosmic vari-
ance we combine independent 1.4 GHz radio LFs derived
from J. J. Condon et al. (2019); T. Mauch & E. M. Sadler
(2007); P. N. Best et al. (2005); J. J. Condon et al. (2002)
following the approach of Novak, M. et al. (2017) and
fit the standard functional form
ρdex(Lν|0) =ρ ⋆
 Lν
L⋆
1−α
exp

− 1
2σ2 log2

1 + Lν
L⋆

(2)
originally from W. Saunders et al. (1990). Here,ρ ⋆ is the
density at the cut-off luminosityL ⋆,αcontrols the slope
belowL ⋆, andσcontrols the width or slope aboveL ⋆.
A Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) fit usingemcee
(D. Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013) with symmetrized er-
rors and a Gaussian log-likelihood gives logρ⋆ =−2.41±

3
19 20 21 22 23 24
log L  [W/Hz]
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
log dex [Mpc 3 dex 1]
Condon+02
Best+05
Mauch+07
Condon+19
Figure 1.Combined fit to the local SFG radio LF using
independent source counts provided by J. J. Condon et al.
(2002); P. N. Best et al. (2005); T. Mauch & E. M. Sadler
(2007); J. J. Condon et al. (2019), spanning nearly 5 dex
in radio luminosities. We have overlaid the 1, 2, and 3σ
contours in decreasing opacity.
0.03 (Mpc −3 dex−1), logL ⋆ = 21.16±0.06 (W Hz −1),
α= 1.22±0.03, andσ= 0.66±0.01. The high luminos-
ity slopeσis higher by∼0.1 compared with J. J. Condon
et al. (2019), resulting in a minimal∼0.07 dex change in
the local SFRD for a given IMF. Hereafter, we keep
these parameters fixed to reduce the parameter space
complexity when fitting for the luminosity and density
evolution. In Figure 1, we show the confidence inter-
vals of the posterior plotted over the combined dataset,
which spans∼5 decades in luminosity.
Under a spectral index distributionp(α|z) and a lu-
minosity density functionu dex(Lν|z) that evolves with
redshift, the source counts are given by
S2n(S) = c
4πln(10)
Z tL,max
0
Z ∞
−∞
[p(α|z)·
udex(Lν|z)(1 +z) α ]dαdtL,(3)
wheret L is the lookback time andt L,max ≈13.47 Gyr.
Both AGN and SFGs are assumed to have different spec-
tral index distributions. We keep the same AGN spec-
tral index distribution as M21b, which includes a dou-
ble Gaussian with a dominant steep spectrum and less
dominant flat spectrum source population components.
The SFG spectral index distribution is determined by
the empirical observations of J. J. Condon & Q. F. Yin
(1990) where the ratio of the non-thermal to thermal
flux density for the typical local star forming galaxy is
given by:
Sn
St
≈10
 ν
GHz
−0.7
.(4)
M21b model the spectral index distribution of SFGs
as a single Gaussian where the mean spectral index at
redshiftzis the flux-weighted average of the thermal
αt =−0.1 and non-thermalα n =−0.8 spectral indices
at the corresponding rest frame frequencies. However,
this tends to overestimate the flattening in the spectral
index between 1.4 GHz and 1.4(1+z) GHz at higher red-
shifts due to spectral curvature between the observed
and rest frame frequencies and the spectral index be-
ing flatter at 1.4(1 +z) GHz by nature of the average
radio SED of SFGs. We instead compute the effective
spectral index between the observed frequencyνand the
rest-frame frequencyν 0 =ν(1 +z) as
αeff = 1
log(1 +z) log
 ν−0.1 + 10ναn
ν−0.1
0 + 10ναn
0

.(5)
Assuming that⟨α n⟩=−0.8 withσ αn = 0.17 as done in
M21b, we approximate the spectral index distribution
as a Gaussian with meanα eff and standard deviation
σαeff =|∂α eff/∂αn|σ αn to first order.
The corresponding luminosity density functions deter-
mined by the luminosity and density evolutionsf(z) and
g(z), respectively, can be integrated at each redshift to
obtain an SFRD. This is done by using the parameter
qFIR defined by
qFIR = log
 LFIR/(3.75×10 12 Hz)
L1.4

(6)
to convert radio luminosity densities to FIR luminosities
and then a standard IMF (assumed here to be Salpeter)
to convert the FIR luminosities to star formation rates.
M21b find the local radio–FIR correlation to be lumi-
nosity dependent
qFIR =



2.69−0.147[log(L 1.4)−19.1] log(L 1.4)<22.5
2.19 log(L 1.4)≥22.5,
(7)
which is consistent with I. Delvecchio et al. (2021) who
find an increasingqwith smaller SFG stellar masses, the
origin of which is still not certain and subject to future
studies.
Since MD convert integrated total IR (TIR) luminosi-
ties from 8–1000µm to SFRs using a constant factor
κT IR = 4.5×10 −44 M⊙ yr−1 erg−1 s for a Salpeter IMF,
but we use an FIR luminosity–based conversion, we
adopt the empirical correction factor ofL TIR/LFIR ≈
1.91 toκ IR to convert FIR luminosities to SFRs for
consistency (E. F. Bell 2003). The SFRDψ(t) in
M⊙ Mpc−3 yr−1 is then given by:
ψ(t) = 8.6×10 −37 ·3.75×10 12·
Z ∞
−∞
udex(Lν|t)10qFIR(logL ν)dlogL ν,(8)

4
whereu dex(Lν|t) is in W Hz −1 Mpc−3 dex−1. This re-
sults in a reduction in the SFRDs by∼0.12 dex relative
to M21b.
3.CURRENT DISCREPANCY BETWEEN RADIO
COUNTS AND SFR HISTORY
M21b show that for redshifts 1≲z≲2, the radio
source counts imply a luminosity and density evolution
that is potentially discrepant with IR measurements of
the SFRD by a factor of a few. Furthermore, for red-
shifts above the turnover in the SFRDz≳2, the radio–
derived cosmic SFRD appears to underestimate the UV
measurements. To show this discrepancy, we consider
finding the luminosity and density evolution functions
that best match the observed cosmic SFRD based on IR
and extinction–corrected UV measurements and com-
pare the implied source counts from that evolution to
the observed radio source counts.
In addition to the IR and UV measurements collected
by MD, to concretize the expected behavior of the SFRD
at higher redshifts and thus better constrain the ini-
tial conditions off(z) andg(z), we consider adding
additional secure UV SFRD measurements over red-
shifts 4≲z≲8 from R. J. Bouwens et al. (2015).
The authors use a slightly different conversion factor
ofκ ′
UV = 1.25×10 −28 (cgs) to that of MD who use
κUV = 1.15×10 −28, which we correct the SFRD mea-
surements with, so that all UV measurements consis-
tently use the same conversion factor. The discovery of
UV–bright galaxies at high redshiftsz≥10 by JWST
have led to additional constraints on the SFRD his-
tory for redshifts out toz∼12. We incorporate addi-
tional measurements from C. T. Donnan et al. (2024);
L. Whitler et al. (2025) using the same conversionκ UV
to get SFRDs. Errors are symmetrized in log-space and
assumed to be Gaussian for efficient likelihood compu-
tation.
We assume a non–evolvingq FIR with redshift, but
maintain the luminosity-dependent parameterization as
shown in Equation 7. We use the parameterization of
f(t) andg(t) given by M21b,
f(t) = 0.5

erf
 t−t f
τf

+ 1

exp
 t0 −t
τ1

,(9)
resulting in a total of six parameters:t f,g represent-
ing the characteristic turn-on time,τ f,g representing the
timescale of the turn-on, andτ 1,2 representing the decay
timescale of the luminosityf(t) and densityg(t) evolu-
tions respectively. We similarly keep the late time den-
sity evolution constant, setting the exponential decay
timescale toτ 2 =−∞; when this parameter is free, we
find that the posteriors tend to converge to large neg-
ative decay timescalesτ 2 ≪ −10 Gyr, consistent with
0.1 1 10
z
0.01
0.1
1
10
f(z): arg maxz
f(z)<4
g(z): arg maxz
f(z)<4
f(z): arg maxz
f(z) 4
g(z): arg maxz
f(z) 4
Figure 2.Fits to the observed IR/UV SFRD curve results
in two allowed luminosity (solid) and density (dashed) evo-
lutions to the local radio LF, which we distinguish by the
redshift of the peak in the LF evolution. We have plotted
the median posterior evolution.
a non–evolving late time density evolution. We use
the MCMC packageemcee(D. Foreman-Mackey et al.
2013) to obtain uncertainties over the resulting radio
source counts from the evolutionary parameters that
best match the observed UV/IR–derived cosmic SFRD.
We use a Gaussian log-likelihood, with the approxima-
tion that the measurements are independent. Using a
prior consistent with M21b thatf(0)g(0)≪0.1 yields a
phase space of two solutions consistent with the UV/FIR
measurements:
•one wheref(z) peaks atz∼2–3 with a sharp den-
sity cutoff at late timesz≥7 (distinguished as
arg maxz f(z)<4), and
•another wheref(z) peaks atz∼4–5 with a grad-
ual density cutoff afterz∼1 (distinguished as
arg maxz f(z)≥4).
The resulting luminosity and density evolutions from
both priors are shown in Figure 2. Direct constructions
of radio LFs of SFGs by different surveys have not yet
achieved a consensus on the luminosity and density evo-
lution. For example, in the VLA-COSMOS field, Novak,
M. et al. (2017) show that a pure luminosity evolution
is sufficient to explain observed radio LFs out toz∼4,
with the luminosity evolution peaking atz∼3 at∼20×
higher thanz= 0; this is more consistent with the prior
having the lower redshiftf(z) peak. Alternatively, in
the LOFAR deep fields, R. K. Cochrane et al. (2023)
infer a luminosity evolution that may increase out to at
leastz≈4 at≳100×higher thanz= 0, while densities
start to decrease at aroundz∼1 (see Figure 7 in R. K.

5
Figure 3.Both priors consistent with the UV/FIR SFRD
history (bottom) result in source counts that are discrepant
at the>3σlevel in at least two flux density bins near the
SFG source count peak at∼30µJy (top). Priors are distin-
guished by the color, and shades of decreasing opacity show
the 1, 2, and 3σintervals to the fits to the source counts and
SFRD history.
Cochrane et al. 2023); this is more consistent with the
prior having the higher redshiftf(z) peak. BecauseL ⋆
galaxies are only observed in the radio out toz≲2, the
high redshift luminosity and density evolution from ob-
served LFs are likely degenerate. We therefore evaluate
the agreement with the radio source counts considering
both priors.
In Figure 3, we show the resulting fit to the radio
source counts and cosmic star formation rate history
under both priors. We observe that both models fail to
reproduce the observed counts nearS∼10µJy to at least
3σ, but enforcing the peak in the luminosity evolution to
be at lowerzresults in a much more significant discrep-
ancy. Using the median posterior sample, we find that
for log(S)<−5.5, the two priors produce marginally
differentn(S)∝S −γ slopes, withz <4 luminosity evo-
lution peak producing a slopeγ≈1.4 and thez≥4
luminosity evolution peak producing a slopeγ≈1.3.
For comparison, T. Mauch et al. (2020) estimate a slope
withγ≈1.5 for log(S)≤ −5.
The greatest contribution to the radio source counts
over this range of flux densities comes from radio LFs
atz≈1–2, whereL ⋆ ≈f(z= 1.5)L ⋆,0 ≈10 22 W/Hz,
which is the range of redshifts where M21b overestimate
the UV/FIR SFRDs. This suggests that the luminosity
and/or density evolution under a constantq(z) is too
weak to reproduce the SFG peak in the radio source
counts, implying that there must be a decreasingq(z)
over redshifts that yield the greatest contributions to the
10µJy source counts. This is motivated by empirical
observations of a decreasingq(z) out to these redshifts
(I. Delvecchio et al. 2021; J. Delhaize et al. 2017; G.
Calistro Rivera et al. 2017) and physically by strength-
ening magnetic field strengths in increasingly turbulent
and denser star forming environments that can initially
counteract increasing synchrotron losses, which would
otherwise causeq(z) to “break down” and rapidly in-
crease with redshift (e.g., E. J. Murphy 2009). A de-
creasingq(z) forcesf(z) org(z) to be larger at these in-
termediate redshifts to increase the contribution to the
radio source counts. In the following sections, we con-
sider whether an evolvingq(z) can help mitigate such a
discrepancy.
4.MODEL OF RADIO-FIR CORRELATION
EVOLUTION
There is some observational evidence thatq(z) de-
creases mildly out to intermediate redshifts. I. Delvec-
chio et al. (2021) show that previously derivedq(z) evo-
lutions out to intermediate redshifts (e.g., reliably out
toz∼3–4) are most likely due to selection effects, where
the most massive SFGs are preferentially selected out
to higher redshift, which are observed to have a smaller
qthan the lower mass counterparts. When accounting
for stellar mass, I. Delvecchio et al. (2021) show that
any redshift evolution is much weaker, with the most
massive SFGs exhibitingq(z)∼(1 +z) −0.055. When fit-
ted across all stellar mass bins, the evolution is even
weaker withq(z)∼(1 +z) −0.023.However, due to in-
creasing cosmic ray losses at higher redshifts, includ-
ing inverse Compton scattering from the CMB and ion-
ization/bremsstrahlung losses in higher density environ-
ments, the fraction of thermal emission is expected to
rise, particularly for lower mass and luminosity SFGs.
Given thatL T
ν ∝L FIR, by the definition of the radio-
FIR correlation,q∝q 0 + log(ft).Therefore, a rising
thermal radio fraction will result in a largerqand hence
more star formation rate per unit radio luminosity gen-
erated, thus resulting in the breakdown of the radio–FIR

6
correlation (E. J. Murphy 2009; D. R. G. Schleicher &
R. Beck 2013) at high redshifts. An initially decreasing
q(z), however, implies that this breakdown is halted by a
strengthening synchrotron component, initially reducing
the thermal fraction in SFGs relative toz= 0. Stack-
ing of deep MIGHTEE observations have suggested that
among the more massive SFGs,q TIR starts to increase
forz≳3 following an initial decrease, likely due to such
redshift-dependent cosmic ray losses beginning to take
over (I. H. Whittam et al. 2025).
Significant work has already been done to modelq(z)
evolution either for galaxies of a fixed magnetic field
strength (e.g., E. J. Murphy 2009) or fixed gas mass sur-
face density (e.g., I. Yoon 2024). However, these models
do not indicate how galaxies of the same radio lumi-
nosity, a directly observable parameter, at different red-
shifts are expected to evolve and are thus not compati-
ble with backwards evolutionary models to match radio
source counts. SinceL ⋆ galaxies at any redshift dom-
inate the radio luminosity density and hence SFRD, it
is important to constrain howqchanges for them. Fur-
thermore, galaxies of different stellar masses, gas surface
densities, and luminosities are expected to have different
magnetic field strengths owing to their different star for-
mation rates, thus necessitating a more complete model
of joint magnetic field strength andq(z) evolution.
We first define the synchrotron suppression factorfs =
fs(L1.4, z,∆q, ν), whereL 1.4 is the 1.4 GHz luminosity
at a given redshiftz, ∆q=q(L 1.4, z)−q(L 1.4, z= 0),the
change inqrelative to a galaxy of the same luminosity at
z= 0, andνis the frequency at which the suppression
factor is calculated. Assuming that the thermal and
non-thermal luminosities are directly correlated to the
same SFR quantity by some factorsaν andb ν before any
suppressionf s (see Equations 10–13 in E. J. Murphy
et al. 2011), we can define
Lν(z) =L T
ν (z) +L NT
ν (z) (10)
=a νSFR(z) +b νSFR(z)fs.(11)
The non-thermal component can be interpreted as that
from supernovae accelerating cosmic rays before encoun-
tering various loss mechanisms that would cause its re-
duction by the time the emission leaves the galaxy. Con-
sequently, the star formation rate must change to main-
tain the same radio luminosity. Then, the thermal frac-
tion of a galaxy with spectral luminosityL ν at redshift
zis given by:
ft = LT
ν (z)
LTν (z) +L NTν (z) = aν
aν +b νfs
.(12)
The conditions atz= 0 set the relationship betweena ν
andb ν, where there is no redshift-related synchrotron
suppression factorf s = 1. As similarly assumed by E. J.
Murphy (2009); I. Yoon (2024), we assume a∼10% ther-
mal fraction at 1.4 GHz requiring thatb ν = 10ν −0.7
GHz aν.
Therefore, from Equation 10, we obtain a thermal frac-
tion depending only on the non-thermal to thermal ratio
atz= 0 and the additional synchrotron suppression fac-
torf s:
ft = 1
1 + 10ν−0.7
GHz fs
.(13)
Becausef s changes for galaxies of the same luminosity,
the corresponding star formation rate must change as
well. SupposeL ν(z) =L ν(0).Then relating Equation 11
to that evaluated atz= 0,
SFR(z)
SFR0
= aν +b ν
aν +b νfs
= ft(z)
ft(0) ≡10 ∆q,(14)
so the increase (decrease) in SFR for a galaxy of the
same luminosity is consistent with an increase (decrease)
inqfrom the local value but driven by an increase (de-
crease) in the thermal radio fraction.
SinceL NT
ν ∝E 1−p(Psynch/Ploss) per unit star forma-
tion rate (E. J. Murphy 2009), wherep≈2.6 is the
assumed cosmic ray injection index producing a non-
thermal spectral indexα n =−0.8,P synch is the syn-
chrotron power, andP loss is the sum of the energy loss
rates of cosmic rays not contributing to the 1.4 GHz
emission, we take the synchrotron suppression factor to
be
fs = B(z)(p−1)/2Psynch(z)Ploss(0)
B(0)(p−1)/2Psynch(0)Ploss(z) ,(15)
where the extra factor of the magnetic field strength ra-
tio comes from 1.4 GHz emission sampling a different
part of the cosmic ray injection spectrum and thus a
different cosmic ray density contributing to the 1.4 GHz
emission.P loss is the sum of the various energy loss
rates of cosmic rays including synchrotron, ionization,
bremsstrahlung, inverse Compton off the CMB and in-
terstellar radiation fields, and escape (see E. J. Murphy
2009, for loss timescale equations). For the magnetic
field energy density, we assume that the magnetic fields
in galaxies are saturated throughout most of cosmic his-
tory; it is expected that magnetic field saturation via
seed turbulent dynamos can takeO(10 Myr) (J. Schober
et al. 2013). Under the assumption of turbulent kinetic
energy densities driven by supernovae being some frac-
tion of the magnetic field energy density, D. R. G. Schle-
icher & R. Beck (2013) show that
B∝Σ 1/3
SFR(1 +z) β/6,(16)
where the ISM average number densityn ISM ∝(1+z) β.
The exponent for the star formation rate surface den-
sity is in general agreement with observations, but this

7
could also hold for star formation rate alone (e.g., D.
Belfiori et al. 2025; F. Tabatabaei et al. 2025). The den-
sity evolution is uncertain, as while the average matter
density of the universe changes as∼(1 +z) 3, ionized re-
gion densities observed with JWST appear to grow as
(1 +z) 1−2 (Y. Isobe et al. 2023a). Furthermore, radio
continuum sizes are observed to decrease weakly with
redshift∼(1 +z) −0.26 (E. F. Jim´ enez-Andrade et al.
2021) or∼(1 +z) −0.18 (I. Delvecchio et al. 2021), which
if galaxies of a similar radio luminosity corresponded
to a similar stellar mass, would imply a density evo-
lutionn ISM∼(1 +z) 0.54−0.78. Alternatively, if the rele-
vantR e traces the optical–UV size, thenR e∼(1+z) −0.84
(T. Shibuya et al. 2015). Given that radio continuum
sizes are less sensitive to host-galaxy extinction, we con-
sider a size evolutionR e∼(1+z) −0.26 that is luminosity–
independent and a density evolution that tracks with the
evolution in the galaxy volumen ISM∼(1 +z) 0.78,which
is closer to lower bound on the ISM density evolution
implied by (Y. Isobe et al. 2023a). This choice also
qualitatively reproduces the weak initialq(z) decrease
observed by I. Delvecchio et al. (2021).
We take ΣSFR ∝SFR/R 2
e ∝10 ∆q(L1.4/R2
e) and nor-
malize the magnetic field strength to Milky Way val-
ues ofB= 10µG forL 1.4 = 2×10 21 W/Hz. For
galaxies of the same mass/luminosity, it is not ex-
pected that the radio continuum size changes signifi-
cantly at a given redshift (E. F. Jim´ enez-Andrade et al.
2021), so only a redshift dependence onR e is incorpo-
rated. We normalize the ISM density ton ISM ≈1 cm −3
for the Milky Way and scale it to the magnetic field
asn ISM ∝B 2 at a fixed redshift; this dependence
sets the ionization and bremsstrahlung cosmic ray loss
timescales. We note, however, that this relationship may
be steeper given that observations interpreted using the
Davis–Chandrasekhar–Fermi method (DCF) indicate a
power as steep asn ISM∼B1/0.26 in the diffuse ISM (D. J.
Whitworth et al. 2025). We find that this does not
significantly impact the resultingq(z) evolution forL ⋆
galaxies.
We assumeU B ≈U ⋆ for the energy density of the in-
terstellar radiation field, consistent with observations of
local SFGs (T. M. Yoast-Hull et al. 2016), which con-
tribute to the inverse Compton loss timescale in addition
to the CMB. We assume an initial cosmic ray escape
scale height ofh∼1.5 kpc consistent with observed L–
band scale heights of local edge-on galaxies (M. Krause
et al. 2018) that changes with the effective size evolution
Re(z), thus setting the escape loss timescale.
Becausef s explicitly depends on ∆qthrough the mag-
netic field strength, ∆qcan only be solved numerically
Figure 4.Top: A fiducial cosmic ray loss model incorpo-
rating evolving ISM magnetic field strengths, densities, in-
terstellar radiation and CMB energy densities, and galaxy
sizes reproduces the observed decrease inq(z)∼(1 +z) −0.023
from I. Delvecchio et al. (2021) at low redshifts but even-
tually result in ∆q=q(z)−q 0 (solid) rising as non-syn-
chrotron losses take over, resulting in an increase in the
thermal fraction (dotted). Bottom: Growth in the aver-
age ISM density (solid) is driven by the radio continuum
size evolutionn ISM∼R−1/3
e ∼(1 +z) 0.78 with magnetic fields
B∼n1/2
ISM (dotted). We show the equipartition magnetic field
strength evolution derived by F. Tabatabaei et al. (2025) on
SFGs with luminosities 23.5≲log(L 1.4)≲24.5 for redshifts
1.5≤z≤3.5, noting that this steeper evolution is likely
driven by luminosity selection effects.
as a fixed–point problem:
ft(z, L1.4,∆q, ν)
ft(0, L1.4,0, ν) = 10∆q.(17)
We usescipy’sbrentqroutine to numerically compute
∆qover a grid of spectral luminosities and redshifts,
bracketing ∆q∈[−2,1], at two (one) orders of magni-
tude below (above) a thermal fraction of 10% atz= 0.
Over this range, we confirm that there is a unique ∆q
solution.
In Figure 4, we show howf t(z),q(z),n ISM(z), and
B(z) evolve for different luminosities under our chosen
size and density evolution. It is unlikely that SFGs
spanning five decades in radio luminosity are expected

8
to have similar thermal fractions atz= 0, and no
study has been done to verify whether there is a ra-
dio luminosity-dependent thermal fraction in the lo-
cal universe given the difficulty of obtaining high fre-
quency observations to constrain the thermal compo-
nent of the radio spectrum. However, we find that our
model provides comparable change toqout toz∼2–3 as
the mass-independentq(z) evolution from (I. Delvecchio
et al. 2021) going as∼(1 +z) −0.023, particularly among
the higher mass/luminosity SFGs. As lower luminosity
SFGs have weaker magnetic field strengths, they experi-
ence an earlier breakdown in theq(z) evolution relative
to the higher luminosity SFGs.
The model magnetic field strength evolution is weaker
than the equipartition magnetic field strength evolution
observed by F. Tabatabaei et al. (2025) over the redshift
range 1.5< z <3.5 for SFGs in the luminosity range
23.5≤log(L 1.4)≤24.5, which exhibit a distribution
100≲(B eq/µG)≤200. However, we note that this
sample includes starbursts with higher magnetic field
strengths and there is a strong redshift dependence on
the observed radio luminosity, thus leading to a stronger
inferred magnetic field evolution.
Becausef s is frequency dependent, the average spec-
trum in Equation 4 will be modified as a function of
redshift and radio luminosity, resulting in the mean
spectral index needed for 1.4 GHz spectral luminosity
k-corrections being modified. The mean spectral index
is taken to be the same as Equation 5, but with the
additional suppression factorf s:
αeff = 1
log(1 +z) log
 ν−0.1 + 10fsν−0.8
ν−0.1
0 + 10fsν−0.8
0

.(18)
In Figure 5, we plot the redshift evolution in the spec-
tral index distribution for SFGs of different luminosities
assumed fork-correction under the assumption that all
SFGs start with the similar average spectra defined in
Equation 4. We observe that for the more luminous
SFGs, the spectral index betweenν= 1.4 GHz and
ν0 = 1.4(1 +z) GHz tends to remain consistent across
redshift because of the minimal change in the thermal
fraction. The lower luminosity SFGs show an initial
steepening of the spectral index due to these SFGs be-
ing dominated initially by synchrotron losses, but even-
tually flatten at high redshifts as the thermal com-
ponent takes over and synchrotron emission gets sup-
pressed by inverse Compton from the CMB, ionization,
and bremsstrahlung losses.
5.EFFECT OF INTRINSIC SCATTER
In our models that derive the cosmic SFRD from radio
source counts, we require a conversion from radio LFs to
0 2 4 6 8 10
z
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
eff
log(L1.4) = 20
log(L1.4) = 22
log(L1.4) = 24
Figure 5.Due to frequency and luminosity-dependent cos-
mic ray loss effects, higher luminosity SFGs exhibit a mild
flattening in the spectral index while lower luminosity SFGs
first exhibit a steepening before flattening at high redshifts
once the thermal contribution starts to take over and 1.4 GHz
observed emission corresponds to higher frequency emission
where the radio spectrum is intrinsically flatter before any
synchrotron suppression. The shaded regions represent the
1σinterval on the spectral index.
FIR LFs, which will be affected by the intrinsic scatter
inq(z). If the star formation rate ultimately determines
the radio luminosity, then the resulting radio luminosity
will be broadened at the high luminosity end leading to
a shallower exponential cutoff compared to the intrinsic
SFR function (resulting from Eddington Bias, A. S. Ed-
dington 1913). This has been considered previously by
(R. K. Cochrane et al. 2023) when converting LOFAR
deep field 150 MHz LFs directly to SFR functions. Fur-
thermore, differences in ISM environments across galax-
ies of the same radio luminosity will lead to scatter in
the fraction of non-thermal radio emission to account
for the total radio luminosity. Scatter is typically not
accounted for when integrating IR and UV LFs to ob-
tain SFRDs (e.g., as in MD), so we only account for it
going from radio LFs to FIR LFs based on the scatter
inq(z).
Empirical comparisons between radio and FIR LFs
suggest that the FIR LFs are indeed steeper at the high
luminosity end. In particular, C. Gruppioni et al. (2013)
fit the same parameteric form (Equation 2) to total IR
LFs fromz= 0 toz= 4.2 finding aσ= 0.5 for spi-
ral galaxies and an even steeperσ= 0.35 for starburst
galaxies, compared to the derived radioσ≈0.66. How-
ever, we note that this may be subject to cosmic variance
effects; the highest luminosity SFGs have smaller counts
and therefore poorer statistics in the LFs, which deter-
mine the high luminosity slope. Definingx= log(L 1.4)

9
andy= log(SFR), the SFR function is such that
ρdex(x) =
Z
ρdex(y)P(x|y)dy,(19)
whereρ dex(y) is the SFR function andP(x|y) is a Gaus-
sian evaluated at the mean of the transformation be-
tween the variablesxandy
y=x+ log(8.6×10 −37 ×3.75×10 12) +q FIR(x) (20)
with standard deviation given by the intrinsic scatter
σq transforming between radio and FIR luminosities.
The level of scatter is inferred to beσ q ≈0.2 based
on direct observations (I. Delvecchio et al. 2021), but
this assumes no intrinsic variation in the spectral in-
dex fork-corrections. Galaxies of similar luminosities
are observed to show significant variation in the low–
frequency (non-thermal) spectral index (F. Tabatabaei
et al. 2025) which could lead to larger scatter inσ q,
arising from variations in ISM magnetic field strengths,
densities, and even potentially cosmic ray injection en-
ergy distributions.
We approximate the intrinsic FIR LF (and conse-
quently SFR function) to have the same functional form
as the radio LF. Because the convolution cannot be in-
verted analytically, we use an MCMC to sample the
parameters of the intrinsic SFR function and perform
the Gaussian convolution to match the observed radio
LF. We utilize a Gaussian likelihood between the model-
convolved radio LF and the observed radio LF combined
from multiple surveys, as described in Section 2.
In Figure 6, we show the level of correction to the
SFRD for thez= 0 radio LF for different choices of
scatter 0.1≤σ q ≤0.5 and the corresponding high lu-
minosity slopeσ. We find that a scatterσ q ≈0.3 is
consistent with producing an FIR high-luminosity slope
ofσ≈0.5. However, the level of correction imparted on
the SFRD is only∼0.08 dex which, although larger than
the corrections derived by R. K. Cochrane et al. (2023),
provides a statistically significant∼20-30% change to
theS 2n(S) counts, as further discussed in Section 6.
Because our modelq(z) is luminosity dependent, the
transformation defined in Equation 19 will change with
redshift, resulting in a redshift–dependent SFRD correc-
tion and high SFR slope.
6.RESULTS & DISCUSSION
To determine whether an evolvingq(z) or corrections
to the SFRD arising from intrinsic scatter can reduce
the radio source count discrepancy, we perform the same
procedure as Section 3, finding the evolutionary param-
eters that best match the observed UV/IR SFRD his-
tory and then comparing to the source counts. We do
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Intrinsic Scatter q [dex]
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
SFRD Correction [dex] 0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
LF High Luminosity Slope 
Figure 6.A larger intrinsic scatterσ q produces a steeper in-
trinsic SFR function slope (orange) and consequently a larger
correction to the SFRD (blue).
so because UV/FIR measurements probe the SFRD out
to high redshiftsz∼12, while the available radio source
counts are only sensitive toz∼3–4, when incorporating
theP(D) extrapolation. Therefore, the observed SFRD
provides tighter constraints on the radio LF evolution,
as seen in the bottom panel of Figure 3. We test five
models using both sets of priors on the pure luminos-
ity evolution to test the impact of an evolvingq(z) that
either continues to decrease with redshift or eventually
breaks down at high redshift and intrinsic scatter in the
radio–FIR correlation.
1. Motivated byσ q = 0.3 dex reproducing the high
luminosity slope of thez= 0 IR LF and being an
upper bound to the observed scatter inq, we adopt
a correction factor of∼0.08 dex without anyq(z)
evolution to test whether intrinsic scatter alone is
sufficient to reduce the source count discrepancy.
2. We modify Equation 7 and incorporate a redshift
evolutionq FIR∼(1 +z) −0.023 at fixed radio lumi-
nosity consistent with (I. Delvecchio et al. 2021)
to independently test whether a monotonically de-
creasingq(z) can explain the radio source counts.
3. Same as 2, but we incorporate the additional cor-
rection factor that is constant with redshift given
by∼0.08 dex to test the combination of both ef-
fects.
4. We apply our fiducial model ofq(z) evolution in-
corporating the redshift evolution of cosmic ray
losses described in Section 4 and shown in Fig-
ure 4. This is to test whether there is any evidence
within the source counts to distinguish between a
purely decreasingq(z) or one that breaks down at

10
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
z
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
SFRD Correction [dex] arg maxz
f(z)<4
arg maxz
f(z) 4
Figure 7.Despite the assumption of a constant scatter
σq = 0.3 dex, the luminosity dependence onq(z) produces
an SFRD correction dependent on redshift, which is interpo-
lated over using a smoothing spline.
high redshifts. We add the ∆q(z, L 1.4) in Equa-
tion 7.
5. Same as 4, but we incorporate a redshift-
dependent scatter correction, approximated by us-
ing the median evolutionary parameters derived
from 4 and using the method described in Sec-
tion 5 to evaluate the correction over a grid of
redshift points. This is a reasonable approxima-
tion as a correction on average of∼0.08 dex across
all redshifts does not significantly change the lu-
minosity/density evolution. We use a smoothing
spline to interpolate the correction. The scatter
correction for both priors are shown in Figure 7.
All of these models have the same number of parameters
as we have chosen to fix the intrinsic scatterσ q and the
specificq(z) evolution.
In Figure 8, we show a comparison between all 5 meth-
ods, incorporating both priors on the pure luminosity
evolutionf(t). We find that either a scatter correction
or a decreasingq(z) out to intermediate redshiftsz∼2
alone can qualitatively reproduce the observedS 2n(S)
SFG peak. In particular, a minimalq(z) evolution de-
creasing by<0.1 dex byz∼2 or scatter correction of
∼0.08 dex is responsible for a∼20% change in the ob-
served source counts at the peak. However, when both
effects are combined, thez <4 luminosity evolution
peak produces a>3σdiscrepancy with theP(D) ex-
trapolated counts while thez≥4 luminosity evolution
peak produces a>3σdiscrepancy with direct source
counts between−5≤log(S)≤ −3. This suggests that
eitherq(z) must be close to constant out to intermedi-
Figure 8.Independent additions of intrinsic scatter (Model
1) or aq(z) evolution (Models 2 and 4) produce the best
agreement near the peak of theS 2n(S) source counts, while
the combination of both effects (Models 3 and 5) tend to
overestimate source counts. Colors distinguish the priors on
the luminosity evolution of the radio LF in the same scheme
as previous figures.
ate redshiftsz∼2–3 orσ q <0.3 dex, as supported by
observations, ifq(z) decreases out to these redshifts.
For direct model comparison, we use the Watanabe-
Akaike Information Criterion (WAIC), evaluating the
likelihood of the posterior samples to the fits of the ob-
served UV/IR SFRD history to the observed andP(D)–
extrapolated radio source counts. It is given by:
WAIC =−2
 X
i
log 1
S
X
s
p(yi|θs)−
X
i
V[logp(y i|θ)]
!
,
(21)
where the first term is the sum over the sample-averaged
point-wise likelihood, and the second term is the sum
of the sample variance of the point-wise likelihood, a
penalty term akin to the parameter penalty term found
in the ordinary Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) or

11
Bayesian information criterion (BIC). By nature of the
selection of the flux density bins used to construct the ra-
dio source counts and confusion and instrumental noise,
nearby source counts are likely to be correlated. How-
ever, this covariance is not well constrained and fit-
ting for the covariance is highly model dependent. We
therefore assume independentS 2n(S) measurements in
each bin and thus assume an independent Gaussian log-
likelihood. We evaluate over the grid of DEEP2 and
NVSS flux bins along with points in theP(D) region
down to log(S) =−7 in steps of ∆ log(S) = 0.2 dex,
consistent with the spacing chosen by M21b. We per-
form evaluations using 5000 samples of the posterior, In
Table 1, we show the ∆WAIC with respect to the fidu-
cial non-evolving model for each of the four models and
prior along with the associated standard error in the
difference. We confirm that the WAIC differences are
consistent with Pareto-smoothed importance sampling
leave-one-out cross validation.
Even though the significance levels are 1–2σfor the
Model 2 and 4 WAIC differences, the standard error in
the difference is dominated by the contribution of the
fiducial model indicating larger point-wise variances in
the predictive posterior density in the fiducial relative
to Models 2 and 4. Additionally, given that there is
improvement across both priors, we conclude that there
is evidence that both models provide improvement over
the fiducial, particularly that of Model 4, which across
both priors produces a∼2σimprovement. Corrections
to the SFRD arising from intrinsic scatter significantly
help for the prior with the later luminosity evolution
peak at>2σ, but worsens agreement for the prior with
the earlier luminosity evolution peak at a lower signifi-
cance (∼1.4σ).
We find that combining bothq(z) evolution and scat-
ter effects produces<2σimprovement for the later
luminosity evolution prior but produces a significantly
worse (∼2.5σ) model for the earlier luminosity evolu-
tion prior. If both scatter and evolvingq(z) are involved
changing the SFRD, then the radio source counts imply
an upper bound ofσ q ≲0.3 dex, noting that the addi-
tion of scatter along withq(z) consistently leads to a
more discrepant model with the observed radio source
counts than without scatter.
In terms of distinguishing whetherq(z) continues to
decrease at high redshifts, we select a densely sampled
grid of points in theP(D)–extrapolated region from
−7≤log(S)≤ −5.5, which is expected to contain
the greatest contributions to the source counts from
SFGs atz≥2 where the two models ofq(z) diverge.
For the prior with a later luminosity peak, we find a
∆WAIC24 =−21±4, indicating a significantly better
Figure 9.Top: A posterior predictive check shows that,
due to the large 1σuncertainties in theP(D)-extrapolated
source counts, there is little distinguishing power be-
tween the allowed luminosity evolution priors (dashed:
arg maxz f(z)<4, solid: arg max z f(z)≥4) and whether
q(z) breaks down or not at high redshifts. Bottom: While
the different priors produce different power law slope distri-
butions, the slopes are difficult to use to distinguish between
q(z) models.
Model 4, but for the prior with an earlier luminosity
peak, we find a ∆WAIC 24 = 10.1±0.8, indicating a
better Model 2. Performing a direct posterior predic-
tive check against the observedP(D) extrapolation 1σ
bounds in Figure 9, all priors and models are generally
consistent. Furthermore, the models consistent with a
later peak luminosity evolution remain consistent with
each other down to flux densities well below the thresh-
old that the DEEP2P(D) no longer provides mean-
ingful constraints on the source counts. We find sta-
tistically significant differences in the differential source
count power law slope distribution for flux densities be-
tween−7≤log(S)≤ −5.5 across both priors and mod-
els, but neither are consistent with the median slope of
∼1.44 found in the centralP(D) extrapolation over the

12
T able 1.WAIC comparison relative to the fiducial non-evolving model (WAIC 0). We report
∆WAIC0i with respect to the fiducial model for models i = 1, . . . ,5, with negative values indi-
cating a better model.
WAIC0 ∆WAIC01 ∆WAIC02 ∆WAIC03 ∆WAIC04 ∆WAIC05
arg maxz f(z)<4 609±85−162±75−117±53−133±82−140±60−82±74
arg maxz f(z)≥4 492±36 115±81−46±32 475±196−155±84 1046±410
same flux density range, and all are consistent with the
range of slopes allowed by the 1σbounds on the P(D)
extrapolation.
We conclude that the the currently observedP(D)
source count extrapolation is unable to distinguish be-
tween aq(z) that continues to decrease or eventu-
ally breaks down at high redshifts as CR losses from
the CMB and ionization/Bremsstrahlung in increasingly
denser environments takes over. However, based on
matching source counts, we find strong evidence for
a decreasingq(z) out to intermediate redshifts arising
from the strengthening of ISM magnetic field strengths
to counteract these increasing cosmic ray losses. Addi-
tionally, overestimation of the peak when scatter cor-
rections are added places constraints onσ q ≲0.3 dex.
This is consistent with the findings of direct radio–IR
correlation measurements out to intermediate redshifts
despite assuming a non-evolving spectral index fork-
correction (E. F. Bell 2003; I. Delvecchio et al. 2021).
This is because any stronger intrinsic scatter assump-
tion onσ q combined with a mildly decreasingq(z) leads
to an overestimation in theS 2n(S) source counts at the
SFG peak.
The relative insensitivity of the radio source counts
to a decreasing or increasingq(z) atz≥3 could be at-
tributed to the assumption of a constant low-luminosity
slopeα. Despite radio LFs atz≥3 providing contri-
butions to the counts at flux densities log(S)≤ −5, the
L < L ⋆ slope of radio LFs at 1≤z≤3 dominate the
source count contribution over this flux density regime
(see Figure 4 in M21b). However, it is possible that
the slope steepens with redshifts (e.g., as observed in
UV LFs; R. J. Bouwens et al. 2015; S. L. Finkelstein
et al. 2015), which could change the required luminos-
ity and density evolution to match the observed SFRD
and radio source counts. We do not attempt such a
model because current radio surveys are not sensitive to
individualL≪L ⋆ ≈10 21−22 W/Hz corresponding to
S1.4 GHz ≪1µJy atz≳3, and a non-evolving shape is
sufficient to explain observed radio LFs currently.
7.RADIO SOURCE COUNTS IN THE DSA ERA
Deeper radio source counts in the confusion–
dominated regime will help give tighter constraints on
allowed evolutionary models of the radio LF and radio–
FIR correlation, particularly at higher redshifts. In this
section, we focus on radio-continuum surveys with the
upcoming DSA to give predictions on the flux density
level down to which we will be able to obtain direct
source counts and subsequently aP(D) extrapolation.
The DSA plans to achieve a continuum sensitivity of
600 nJy in 1 hour. Therefore, for fiducial 100-hour deep
drilling fields, the DSA will achieve a continuum sensi-
tivity ofσ n∼60 nJy/beam, which is almost an order of
magnitude deeper than the DEEP2 field. We take the
direct source count limit to be the flux densityS 0 per
beam at which the number of independent beam solid
angles per radio source above that flux density threshold
isβ= 25. This is usually some signal-to-noise ratio∼5–
6 above the confusion limitσ c. For a differential source
count modeln(S), which will in general not be a power
law,βis defined as:
β= 1
N(> S 0)Ωb
,(22)
where Ωb is the synthesized beam solid angle and
N(> S 0) =
Z ∞
S0
n(S)dS.(23)
J. J. Condon (1974) show that iff(θ, ϕ) is the beam re-
sponse, the confusion limit can be evaluated integrating
the unresolved source contribution with flux densities
< S0 over the beam response:
σ2
c =
Z S0
0
Z
Ωb
x2n
 x
f(θ, ϕ)
 1
f(θ, ϕ) dΩdx,(24)
assuming radio sources are unresolved. This is a reason-
able assumption because for beam sizes on the order of
arcseconds,S 0 is well below 10µJy, below which sources
are likely unresolved at arcsecond resolutions (W. D.
Cotton et al. 2018). Under an assumption of power law
source countsn(S)∼S −γ,an analytic formula for confu-
sion is obtained as
σ2
c = Ωe
3−γ S3−γ
0 ,(25)

13
2 4 6 8 10
FWHM [arcsec]
10 8
10 7
10 6
c [Jy/beam]
400 nJy/beam
4 Jy/beam
DSA
DEEP2
Figure 10.Givenβ= 25 independent sources per beam
above a flux cutoffS 0 ≈2.3µJy, the confusion level of
the DSA assuming a 3 ′′ circular synthesized Gaussian beam
is∼400 nJy/beam.If the less conservativeβ= 16 is cho-
sen instead, the direct source count detection limit is about
S0 ≈1.2µJy.
where Ωe = Ωb/(γ−1).However, sincen(S) is not well-
represented by a power law, we numerically evaluate the
confusion limit over a grid of beam sizes, assuming a
circular Gaussian beam response and the source count
model derived by M21b, forθ FWHM ∈[1 ′′,10 ′′].Figure
10 shows the confusion level at 1.4 GHz as a function of
the synthesized beam size. For a typical beam size of
approximately 3 ′′ for the DSA,σ c ≈400 nJy/beam in-
dicating a direct source count limit ofS 1.4 GHz∼2.3µJy,
which is about a factor of∼6 above the confusion level.
Ifβ= 16 is chosen instead, we estimate a confusion level
σc ≈240 nJy/beam with a direct source count limit at
∼1.2µJy, which is nearly 10×deeper than the DEEP2
direct source count limit.
In terms of the direct source counts above 1µJy, if the
uncertainty onS 2n(S) goes as
σ∼
 1
Ω
 nX
i=1
S2
i
!1/2
,(26)
wherenis the number of sources in a logarithmic flux
density interval and Ω is the solid angle of the deep
field,σ∝ √nbin/Ω∝1/
√
Ω,assuming that the number
of sources in a given flux density bin grows linearly with
the solid angle on the sky. Consequently, with a primary
beam FWHM of 2.5 deg, the absolute uncertainties con-
tributed by Poisson errors on the source counts alone in
a single pointing will be smaller by∼2.2×for the same
logarithmic bin size. However, as observed by (A. M.
Matthews et al. 2021a), uncertainties arising from con-
fusion (up to∼7.5% near the DEEP2 6σ c threshold) and
Figure 11.L ⋆ SFG redshiftdirectdetection limits for dif-
ferent surveys, with the top and bottom corresponding to the
different luminosity evolution priors for Model 4. DSA lim-
its are determined by theS 0 confusion threshold forβ= 25
(shown for 1.4 GHz at 3 ′′ and 1.68 GHz at 2.5 ′′ resolution)
while SKA (1.65 GHz) and ngVLA (2.4 GHz at 100 mas
resolution) are not confusion limited and thus determined
by an SNR of 5 above the 100-hour continuum sensitivity.
α=−0.7 is assumed when extrapolating back up to the ob-
serving band. Detections ofL ⋆ galaxies is highly sensitive to
the radio LF luminosity evolution.
the absolute flux density uncertainty (typically∼3%)
dominate the source count uncertainty rather than Pois-
son uncertainty. Therefore, we do not expect a signifi-
cant improvement in the direct source count uncertain-
ties in the flux density bins nearest to the confusion
limit. However, for sufficiently large flux densities far
from the confusion level, which are dominated by Pois-
son uncertainty, DSA will see significant improvement
in the source count uncertainty, limiting to an assumed
3% flux density scale error.
Given the confusion limit of the DSA, it is unlikely to
be able to constrain the thez≳3 luminosity and den-
sity evolution of the radio LF from direct construction
without degeneracy.L ⋆ SFGs fall below the confusion
level, assumingβ= 25, byz∼2 for a central 1.4 GHz fre-

14
quency; restricting to the upper half of the band could
provide constraints out toz∼3. While this could mo-
tivate the case for higher frequency deep fields over a
large primary beam to identify such sources, longer ex-
posure times will be needed due to the decreasing radio
spectrum of SFGs. The ngVLA will be able to reach a
continuum sensitivity a factor of a few better than the
DSA in 1 hour, and similar to the SKA, will not be af-
fected by confusion, thus providing a promising avenue
for the direct construction of radio LFs down to even
deeper flux density thresholds. These surveys would be
potentially sensitive toL ⋆ galaxies out toz≳3 depend-
ing on the true luminosity evolution (see Figure 11).
While not sensitive to individualL ⋆ SFGs at high red-
shift, the DSA will be significantly more sensitive to the
total contribution to the flux density by these galaxies
due to being confusion-limited. In terms of theP(D)
extrapolation, statistical counts are expected to reach
down below the thermal noise limit. From T. Mauch
et al. (2020), the theoretical limit is defined by theβ
corresponding to when the probability that any beam
solid angle will contain no sources stronger than a given
limiting fluxS 0 is 50%, which isβ= 1/ln(2)≈1.44. At
DSA’s nominal angular resolution, this implies a theo-
retical limit ofS 0 ≈3 nJy/beam. We note that this may
change as the low flux density slope count is revealed. In
practice, as observed by (A. M. Matthews et al. 2021a),
uncertainty on the thermal noise itself limits theP(D)
extrapolation and sets the uncertainty on the source
counts in the confusion-limited regime. If the thermal
noise is estimated by taking random samples of source-
free beams where the primary beam attenuation is large,
then the fractional uncertainty on the thermal noise will
be reduced by a factor of 1/ √Nbeam ∝
p
Ω/Ωb.There-
fore, for a single pointing, DSA will achieve a fractional
uncertainty of∼0.3%, corresponding to an absolute un-
certainty on the thermal noise ofdσ n∼0.2 nJy/beam.
NearS p = 0 peak intensity and particularly for
Sp <0,P(D) can be approximated as a Gaussian, tak-
ing its width to be quadrature sum of the intrinsicP(D)
width and the thermal noise distribution width. Ifσ ′
c is
the convolvedP(D) width, then a crude approximation
gives
dσ′
c
σ′c
≈ σndσn
σ′2c
≈ σndσn
σ2c +σ 2n
,(27)
as an estimate for the fractional uncertainty of the width
of theP(D) distribution constructed from simulations
arising from an uncertainty on the noise level. Conse-
quently, relative to the DEEP2 source counts, the DSA
P(D) and its 1σinterval determined by the uncertainty
on the DSA thermal noise will have a fractional uncer-
tainty on the width that is∼10×more precise. Since un-
certainties in the source counts in the confusion-limited
regime are determined by varying the thermal noise and
the best-fitS 2n(S) extrapolation and finding the set of
S2n(S) models that fall in the 1σallowedP(D) dis-
tributions, they will be significantly tighter. The un-
certainty in the P(D)–based source counts is highly de-
pendent on the deep survey strategy, variousuvvisibil-
ity weighting schemes balancing the tradeoffs between
a higher resolution beam and smaller dirty beam side-
lobes, the quality of calibrations and the mitigation of
bright-source sidelobes, so simulations of theP(D) ex-
trapolation and uncertainty will be the subject of future
work. However, given the∼50% fractional uncertainty
at theβ min = 1.44 limit of log(S) =−6.3 for DEEP2,
we predict a comparable or better fractional uncertainty
down to log(S)≈ −8.5 with the DSA deep fields given
a significantly lower thermal noise and larger primary
beam size allowing for a more precise thermal noise es-
timate in a single pointing.
8.CONCLUSION
We have provided several modifications to the original
luminosity and density evolution of the local SFG radio
LF constrained by radio source counts in M21b, which
appear to indicate a stronger evolution in the cosmic
SFRD for redshifts belowz∼2. By adding additional UV
measurements at redshiftsz≳9 afforded by JWST, we
find that two different luminosity and density evolutions
of the local radio LF are allowed, where the peak in
the radio luminosity evolution is either above or below
z≈4; both appear to be discrepant with the directly
observed radio source counts over a flux density range
−5≤log(S)≤ −4 at a significance>3σ.
To examine the nature of the source count discrep-
ancy, we introduce a model of an evolving radio–FIR
correlation that is parameterized purely in terms of red-
shift and SFG total radio luminosity, two directly ob-
servable quantities, which, via relationships to magnetic
field strength, star formation rate, and ISM density, di-
rectly impact the rate of cosmic ray losses in the SFG
ISM. This parameterization allows for a compatibleq(z)
evolution incorporated into models of radio LF evolu-
tion. Changing cosmic ray loss rates changes the frac-
tion of radio emission that is thermal and consequently
the amount of FIR luminosity per unit radio luminos-
ity as a function of total radio luminosity and redshift.
Using empirically motivated redshift evolutions on SFG
effective radio size and density evolution, and assuming
equipartition between magnetic field energy densities,
turbulent kinetic energy densities generated by super-
novae, and interstellar radiation energy densities, we in-
fer aq(z) and magnetic field evolution generally consis-

15
tent with observations. In particular, due to increasing
magnetic field strengths in more turbulent star forming
environments counteracting losses by increasing inverse
Compton losses from the CMB and interstellar radia-
tion fields, the highest luminosity SFGs experience an
decreasingq(or equivalently, decreasing thermal frac-
tion) out to intermediate redshiftsz≲3. Addition-
ally, lower luminosity SFGs, experience a breakdown in
the radio–FIR correlation at lower redshifts than their
higher luminosity counterparts, wherebyqstarts to in-
crease with redshift. Recent observations have begun to
provide evidence for such a breakdown (e.g., I. H. Whit-
tam et al. 2025; R. G. Varadaraj et al. 2026), which the
ngVLA will be able to find more examples of, as it will
not be affected by confusion down to the flux density
levels where this effect can most directly be tested.
There remain a number of uncertainties in developing
a radio-luminosity parameterizedq(z) evolution, includ-
ing the origin of the radio-luminosity dependence onq
atz= 0 and the tie between radio luminosity, magnetic
field strengths, and the relevant ISM density evolution
dictating the ionization and bremsstrahlung cosmic ray
loss timescales. Additional uncertainties that may im-
pact agreement between the radio source counts and the
UV/FIR cosmic SFRD are but are not well understood:
(i) a changing radio LF shape at higher redshifts, partic-
ularly on the low-luminosity slope, and (ii) a changing
TIR to FIR ratio with redshift.
We also consider the effect of intrinsic scatter in con-
verting radio LFs to FIR LFs. Assuming that FIR is
a more direct tracer of the star formation rate than ra-
dio and that there is intrinsic scatter between FIR and
radio luminositiesσ q, the radio LF will be broadened
compared to the FIR LF. We find that a conservative
scatterσ q ≤0.3 dex, results in ∆SFRD≲0.1 dex, suffi-
cient to change the predictedS 2n(S) counts by∼20%.
We find that both the incorporation of a redshift and
luminosity-dependentq(z) evolution and a correction
associated with intrinsic scatter in the radio–FIR cor-
relation can independently reduce the source count dis-
crepancy observed over−5≤log(S)≤ −4. We find that
the best performing model is our model ofq(z) incorpo-
rating redshift-dependent changes in cosmic ray losses
alone, improving agreement with the source counts at
the∼2σlevel across both priors. This is a conservative
significance estimate because the fiducial non-evolving
models dominate the point-wise posterior density vari-
ance relative to the evolvingq(z) model.
The combination of bothq(z) and intrinsic scatter,
however, tends to result in an overestimation of the
source counts suggesting that ifq(z) decreases out to
intermediate redshifts, the scatter is bounded toσ q ≲
0.3 dex to prevent the overestimation of counts by>3σ
over the same−5≤log(S)≤ −4 flux density range.
We find no strong evidence that the DEEP2 direct and
P(D)–extrapolated radio source counts can distinguish
between a radio–FIR correlation that breaks down at
high redshifts or continues to decrease beyondz∼2-3
for SFGs of all radio luminosities. Deeper radio source
counts observed with telescopes like the DSA, aided by a
P(D) analysis, will be able to place stronger constraints
on the allowed evolutionary models of the radio LF out
to higher redshifts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded in part by Schmidt Sciences.
This paper depended on source count data originally
obtained from MeerKAT and the National Radio As-
tronomy Observatory’s Karl G. Jansky Very Large Ar-
ray (VLA). The MeerKAT telescope is operated by the
South African Radio Astronomy Observatory, which is a
facility of the National Research Foundation, an agency
of the Department of Science and Innovation. The Na-
tional Radio Astronomy Observatory and Green Bank
Observatory are facilities of the U.S. National Science
Foundation operated under cooperative agreement by
Associated Universities, Inc. We additionally thank
George Helou for useful discussions that helped improve
this paper.
Facilities:MeerKAT, NRAO: VLA, DSA
Software:arviz (O. A. Martin et al. 2026), astropy
(Astropy Collaboration et al. 2022), emcee (D. Foreman-
Mackey et al. 2013), scipy P. Virtanen et al. (2020),
numba (S. K. Lam et al. 2015)
REFERENCES
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Lim, P. L.,
et al. 2022, ApJ, 935, 167, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c74
Belfiori, D., Martin-Alvarez, S., Lopez-Rodriguez, E., &
Paladino, R. 2025, On the Universality of the Relation
Between Magnetic Fields and Star Formation in
Galaxies, https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.25909
Bell, E. F. 2003, ApJ, 586, 794, doi: 10.1086/367829

16
Best, P. N., Kauffmann, G., Heckman, T. M., & Ivezi´ c,ˇZ.
2005, MNRAS, 362, 9,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.09283.x
Bouwens, R. J., Illingworth, G. D., Oesch, P. A., et al.
2015, ApJ, 803, 34, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/803/1/34
B´ ethermin, M., Dole, H., Lagache, G., Le Borgne, D., &
Penin, A. 2011, A&A, 529, A4,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201015841
Calistro Rivera, G., Williams, W. L., Hardcastle, M. J.,
et al. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 3468,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1040
Cochrane, R. K., Kondapally, R., Best, P. N., et al. 2023,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 523,
6082, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1602
Condon, J. J. 1974, ApJ, 188, 279, doi: 10.1086/152714
Condon, J. J., Cotton, W. D., & Broderick, J. J. 2002, AJ,
124, 675, doi: 10.1086/341650
Condon, J. J., Matthews, A. M., & Broderick, J. J. 2019,
ApJ, 872, 148, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab0301
Condon, J. J., & Yin, Q. F. 1990, ApJ, 357, 97,
doi: 10.1086/168894
Condon, J. J., Cotton, W. D., Fomalont, E. B., et al. 2012,
The Astrophysical Journal, 758, 23,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/758/1/23
Cotton, W. D., Condon, J. J., Kellermann, K. I., et al.
2018, ApJ, 856, 67, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaaec4
Delhaize, J., Smolˇ ci´ c, V., Delvecchio, I., et al. 2017, A&A,
602, A4, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629430
Delvecchio, I., Daddi, E., Sargent, M. T., et al. 2021, A&A,
647, A123, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039647
Donnan, C. T., McLure, R. J., Dunlop, J. S., et al. 2024,
MNRAS, 533, 3222, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2037
Eddington, A. S. 1913, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 73, 359,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/73.5.359
Finkelstein, S. L., Ryan, Jr., R. E., Papovich, C., et al.
2015, ApJ, 810, 71, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/810/1/71
Foreman-Mackey, D., Hogg, D. W., Lang, D., & Goodman,
J. 2013, PASP, 125, 306, doi: 10.1086/670067
Gruppioni, C., Pozzi, F., Rodighiero, G., et al. 2013,
MNRAS, 432, 23, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt308
Hallinan, G., Ravi, V., Weinreb, S., et al. 2019, in Bulletin
of the American Astronomical Society, Vol. 51, 255,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1907.07648
Harwit, M., & Pacini, F. 1975, ApJL, 200, L127,
doi: 10.1086/181913
Helou, G., Soifer, B. T., & Rowan-Robinson, M. 1985,
ApJL, 298, L7, doi: 10.1086/184556
Isobe, Y., Ouchi, M., Nakajima, K., et al. 2023a, The
Astrophysical Journal, 956, 139,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acf376
Jim´ enez-Andrade, E. F., Murphy, E. J., Heywood, I., et al.
2021, The Astrophysical Journal, 910, 106,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abe876
Krause, M., Irwin, J., Wiegert, T., et al. 2018, A&A, 611,
A72, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731991
Lam, S. K., Pitrou, A., & Seibert, S. 2015, in Proc. Second
Workshop on the LLVM Compiler Infrastructure in HPC,
1–6, doi: 10.1145/2833157.2833162
Madau, P., & Dickinson, M. 2014, ARA&A, 52, 415,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081811-125615
Mandal, S., Prandoni, I., Hardcastle, M. J., et al. 2021,
A&A, 648, A5, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039998
Martin, O. A., Abril-Pla, O., Deklerk, J., et al. 2026,
Journal of Open Source Software, 11, 9889,
doi: 10.21105/joss.09889
Matthews, A. M., Condon, J. J., Cotton, W. D., & Mauch,
T. 2021a, The Astrophysical Journal, 909, 193,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abdd37
Matthews, A. M., Condon, J. J., Cotton, W. D., & Mauch,
T. 2021b, The Astrophysical Journal, 914, 126,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abfaf6
Mauch, T., & Sadler, E. M. 2007, MNRAS, 375, 931,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.11353.x
Mauch, T., Cotton, W. D., Condon, J. J., et al. 2020, ApJ,
888, 61, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab5d2d
Murphy, E. J. 2009, ApJ, 706, 482,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/706/1/482
Murphy, E. J., Condon, J. J., Schinnerer, E., et al. 2011,
ApJ, 737, 67, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/737/2/67
Novak, M., Smolˇ ci´ c, V., Delhaize, J., et al. 2017, A&A, 602,
A5, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629436
Pearson, C. P. 2001, MNRAS, 325, 1511,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04552.x
Rickard, L. J., & Harvey, P. M. 1984, AJ, 89, 1520,
doi: 10.1086/113652
Salpeter, E. E. 1955, ApJ, 121, 161, doi: 10.1086/145971
Saunders, W., Rowan-Robinson, M., Lawrence, A., et al.
1990, MNRAS, 242, 318, doi: 10.1093/mnras/242.3.318
Schleicher, D. R. G., & Beck, R. 2013, A&A, 556, A142,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321707
Schober, J., Schleicher, D. R. G., & Klessen, R. S. 2013,
A&A, 560, A87, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322185
Shibuya, T., Ouchi, M., & Harikane, Y. 2015, ApJS, 219,
15, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/219/2/15
Smolˇ ci´ c, V., Novak, M., Bondi, M., et al. 2017, A&A, 602,
A1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201628704

17
Tabatabaei, F., Khademi, M., Jarvis, M. J., et al. 2025,
The Astrophysical Journal, 989, 44,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade233
van der Kruit, P. C. 1973, A&A, 29, 263
Varadaraj, R. G., Saxena, A., Fakiolas, S., et al. 2026,
MNRAS, 547, stag473, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag473
Vernstrom, T., Scott, D., Wall, J. V., et al. 2014, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 440, 2791,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu470
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020,
Nature Methods, 17, 261, doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2
Whitler, L., Stark, D. P., Topping, M. W., et al. 2025, ApJ,
992, 63, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adfddc
Whittam, I. H., Jarvis, M. J., Murphy, E. J., et al. 2025,
MNRAS, 543, 507, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1505
Whitworth, D. J., Srinivasan, S., Pudritz, R. E., et al. 2025,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 540,
2762, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf901
Yoast-Hull, T. M., Gallagher, J. S., & Zweibel, E. G. 2016,
MNRAS, 457, L29, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slv195
Yoon, I. 2024, ApJ, 975, 15, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad7385