Title: The Gaia GSP-Spec catalogue of interstellar extinctions, and stellar luminosities, radii, and masses
Authors: Patrick de Laverny, Alejandra Recio-Blanco, Camila Navarrete, Pedro A. Palicio, Emanuele Spitoni
Published: 2026-06-02
Categories: astro-ph.SR, astro-ph.GA

Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. aa60323-26©ESO 2026
June 3, 2026
TheGaia GSP-Speccatalogue of interstellar extinctions, and stellar
luminosities, radii, and masses
Patrick de Laverny1, Alejandra Recio-Blanco1, Camila Navarrete1, Pedro A. Palicio1, and Emanuele Spitoni2
1 Université Côte d’Azur, Observatoire de la Côte d’Azur, CNRS, Laboratoire Lagrange, Bd de l’Observatoire, CS 34229, 06304
Nice cedex 4, France
2 I.N.A.F., Osservatorio Astronomico di Trieste, via G.B. Tiepolo 11, 34143, Trieste, Italy
Received ??, 2026 ; accepted ??
ABSTRACT
TheGaia/DR3GSP-Specmodule has published the atmospheric parameters of up to 5.6 million stars based on the analysis of their
Radial Velocity Spectrometer spectra. By combining these spectroscopic parameters withGaiaparallax and photometric measure-
ments, a large catalogue of interstellar colour excesses and extinctions, complemented with stellar luminosities, radii, and masses,
was constructed without relying on any stellar evolution or structure models. This catalogue also contains the associated uncertainties
estimated from Monte-Carlo realisations for about 4.6 million stars. We present a system of quality flags based on theGSP-Spec
quality parameters, the achieved numerical precision, and theGaiaastrometric quality. Adopting these flags, we defined a subsample
of high-accuracy and precision parameters of more than 1.5 million stars. The impact of possibleGSP-Specparameter inaccuracies
on the derived extinctions, luminosities, radii, and masses was also explored and revealed that the mass is the most affected quantity.
The radii and masses were validated by comparison with interferometric and asteroseismic data. This confirmed their high quality,
even when the targets were highly extincted by the interstellar medium. We also emphasise that they are fully compatible and ho-
mogeneous with theGSP-Specparameters. This allowed us to avoid systematics and biases that might be hidden when data from
different (and potentially) heterogeneous catalogues are combined. Finally, we present some example applications of this catalogue:
(i) exoplanet radii and masses, (ii) present-day mass distribution functions, (iii) identification of Galactic populations based on their
mass distribution, and (iv) Galactic halo accreted stellar luminosities and masses that confirm their merger epochs.
Key words.Stars: fundamental parameters, radius, mass. Interstellar reddening. Method: spectroscopy. Galaxy: stellar content
1. Introduction
Stellar parameters are essential for many fields in astrophysics,
from exoplanetary, stellar, and Galactic to extragalactic stud-
ies. In general, the main stellar atmospheric parameters (effec-
tive temperatureT eff, surface gravity log(g), and mean metal-
licity [M/H]), plus the individual chemical abundances are es-
timated from the analysis of the light received from stars with
photometric and/or spectroscopic methods. However, other fun-
damental stellar parameters cannot be directly derived from ob-
servations. This is generally the case, in particular, for the stellar
radii (R) and masses (M), not to mention ages. Atmospheric pa-
rameters and chemical abundances depend on our knowledge of
the physics of the studied stellar object. However, other funda-
mental parameters additionally depend on our capacity to predict
how these physics evolve with time. For example, these quan-
tities are often derived by adopting specific model-dependent
technics, such as isochrone fitting for the mass and ages (see, for
instance, Taniguchi et al. 2026). These projection techniques are
most often (and better) applied to main-sequence turn-offor sub-
giant stars because their atmospheric parameters strongly depend
on time for these specific evolutionary stages. Another success-
ful method for deriving these stellar fundamental parameters is
asteroseismology based on space observations, which can pro-
vide much better accuracies, but for only a few thousand red
giants (Schonhut-Stasik et al. 2024; Pinsonneault et al. 2025,
among others). The analysis of the stellar oscillations can in-
deed provide an accurate radius and mass, through seismic scal-
ing relations and knowingT eff(see, for instance, Miglio et al.
2013). However, these asteroseismic data are not available for
large samples of stars at any stage of their evolution, and in par-
ticular, for the main-sequence stars (Serenelli et al. 2017). For
accurate stellar radius measurements, we might also cite inter-
ferometric techniques, which can provide good results, but for
a rather small number of close stars with well-known distances
(Salsi et al. 2020).
All of these methods depend on the knowledge of the stel-
lar atmospheric parameters, in particular,T effand [M/H]. In this
context, the ESAGaiamission has revolutionised the availabil-
ity of these stellar parameters by providing accurate and precise
parallaxes for several hundred million stars (see, for the third
data release, Gaia Collaboration et al. 2023b). For a small frac-
tion of them, whose spectra was collected by the on-board Ra-
dial Velocity Spectrometer (RVS, Cropper et al. 2018), theGaia
GSP-Specmodule derived the main stellar atmospheric param-
eters (Teff, log(g), [M/H] a proxy of [Fe/H] 1, and theα-element
abundance enhancement with respect to iron [α/Fe]) for up to
5.6 million stars (see Recio-Blanco et al. 2023, for an extensive
description ofGSP-Spec).
We here directly estimate supplementary fundamental pa-
rameters from theGSP-Specparameters and adopt a different
method than those described above without relying on any stel-
lar evolution model. The interstellar colour excesses and extinc-
1 TheGSP-Specmetallicity parameter [M/H] indeed traces the [Fe/H]
abundance ratio (see, Recio-Blanco et al. 2023, for details).
Article number, page 1 of 11
arXiv:2606.03541v1  [astro-ph.SR]  2 Jun 2026

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa60323-26
tions towards eachGSP-Specstars are indeed computed from
their main atmospheric parameters and predicted colours. Then,
after computing the bolometric corrections and adopting com-
plementaryGaiaastrometric and photometric data, we estimate
the stellar luminosities. Finally, it is straightforward to derive
the stellar radii and masses whenT effand log(g)are known. All
these parameters are thus fully consistent among each other and
are free of any assumption of stellar evolution and/or structure.
Our work is structured as follows. We first describe in Sec. 2
the computation of the interstellar colour excesses and extinction
towards eachGSP-Specstar and derive the stellar luminosities,
radii, and masses in Sect. 3. Our catalogue content is presented
in Sect. 4. We explore the effect of possible inaccuracies in the
GSP-Specatmospheric parameters on the interstellar absorption,
stellar luminosity, radius, and mass computations in Sect.5. The
catalogue is then validated by a comparison with literature val-
ues in Sect. 6, and some application examples are discussed in
Sect. 7. Our conclusions are finally summarised in Sect. 8.
2. Interstellar absorption
To compute stellar luminosities and other related quantities (see
Sect. 3), the interstellar extinction in theGaiaband (A G) to-
wards eachGSP-Spectarget has to be estimated. For this pur-
pose, we first computed new colour excesses and then extinc-
tions by adopting a method that is fully consistent with the stellar
parameters derived byGSP-Spec, considering only additional in-
formation fromGaiatwo-band photometry. Our extinctions can
therefore be considered to be purely spectroscopic and have the
advantage of not being affected by possible (Teff, colour excess)
degeneracies, unlike certain photometric methods.
2.1. Interstellar colour excess
Since dust reddens stellar colours, the comparison of intrinsic
colours computed from the stellar atmospheric parameters with
observed ones allows us to estimate the colour excess caused by
the interstellar medium. This method assumes that the stars are
accurately and precisely parametrised, which is the case for a
very large subsample of theGSP-Specstars. Practically, this ex-
ercise was performed for theGaia B P andR P magnitudes, which
are available for the whole sample. The colour excess (or redden-
ing) in theGaiabands is thus simply expressed by
E(BP−RP) =(B P −R P)Observed −(B P −R P)Intrinsic .(1)
The star colours without absorption, (B P −R P)Intrinsic , were de-
rived with Eq. 1 of Casagrande et al. (2021, C21 hereafter, see
Eq. 2). This equation (calledF C21 hereafter) allowed us to esti-
mate the stellarT effbased on a polynomial that depends on the
observed intrinsic colour, log(g) and [M/H]. We recall that a very
good agreement in the low-extinction regime between theGSP-
Specparameters and the C21 relation was already confirmed by
Recio-Blanco et al. (2023, see their Fig. 19). This is expected
because the two studies relied on similar Solar abundances and
stellar atmospheric models, although they were fully indepen-
dent.
Based on this equationF C21 and adopting theGaia(B P −R P)
colour, the polynomial coefficients provided in the first line of
Tab. 2 of C21, and considering their dwarf and giant separation
as a function of the stellar colour, we solved the equation
Teff−F C21[ (BP −R P)Intrinsic ,log(g),[M/H] ]=0,(2)
in which we adopted theGSP-Spec T eff, log(g) and [M/H] val-
ues. However, this relation does not take the possible effect on
the metallicity of the stellar chemical content into account. We
therefore considered in Eq. 2 a mean metallicity corrected for the
stellar [α/Fe] content, adopting the relation proposed by Salaris
et al. (1993). For theGSP-Specstars without published [α/Fe]
(11% of the full catalogue), we assumed that theirαcontent fol-
lows the classical Galactic disc relation with metallicity, [α/Fe]=
0.0 dex for [M/H]≥0.0 dex, [α/Fe]= +0.4 dex for [M/H]≤-
1.0 dex and [α/Fe]=-0.4×[M/H] for -1.0≤[M/H]≤0.0 dex.
These [α/Fe]-corrected metallicities were adopted throughout
for estimating the other parameters, when necessary.
Furthermore, we recall that the adopted atmospheric param-
eters were deliberately published uncalibrated byGSP-Spec, and
we favoured the recommended calibrations here as a function of
Teff, as indicated hereafter. For the surface gravity and metal-
licity, we adopted the calibrations provided in Appendix A of
Recio-Blanco et al. (2024), and for [α/Fe] , we adopted the
calibration provided in Table 4 of Recio-Blanco et al. (2023)
as a function ofT eff. The surface gravity calibration was then
slightly improved to further increase the accuracy of log(g) . For
this purpose, a final second-order calibration considering grav-
ity and metallicity effects was applied, based on a comparison
with APOGEE/DR17 data (Abdurro’uf et al. 2022). We refer to
de Laverny et al. (2025) for details on this supplementary cali-
bration. We note that the adopted relations hereafter are weakly
dependent on the surface gravity (except the stellar mass deter-
mination). The values we computed are thus almost unaffected
by possible small calibration inaccuracies. We finally recall that
the recommended calibrations have published validity ranges.
For parameters found outside these ranges, we did not extrap-
olate the calibration polynomials and simply adopted the limit
correction values corresponding to the range boundaries.
Eq. 2 is easily solved numerically by adopting (B P −
RP)Observed as a first guess, and then by iterating until a solu-
tion is reached at a 10−5 level. Typically, the colour excesses are
quickly found in a few steps. Practically,E(BP−RP) were estimated
by solving Eq. 2 1000 consecutive times. We adopted random
values forT eff, log(g), [M/H], [α/Fe], and (BP−RP)Observed within
their error bars and assumed a normal distribution for these un-
certainties2. These Monte-Carlo realisations led to rather Gaus-
sian distributions ofE (BP−RP). The colour excess values we report
(see Sect. 4) are simply the median of the computed distribu-
tions. Their associated uncertainties are then half of the differ-
ence between the 84th and 16th quantiles of the distributions, and
hence, they correspond to a 1σuncertainty for a normal distri-
bution.
2.2. Interstellar extinction
From the previously derived interstellar reddening, we computed
the extinction in theGaiaband (A G). For this purpose, we esti-
mated the coefficients that relate this extinction and the colour
excess for every star,
kTGMA =A G/E(B P −R p),(3)
based on the tables provided with theGaiastellar parameters 3
(Creevey et al. 2023). Thesek TGMA coefficients depend on the
four atmospheric parameters derived byGSP-Spec:T eff, log(g),
[M/H], and [α/Fe]. As above, we also considered their associ-
ated uncertainties (including those ofE (BP−RP)) to compute 1,000
2 We remind that theGSP-Specparameter uncertainties mostly reflect
the spectraS/Nratios.
3 https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/gaia/dr3-astrophysical-parameter-
inference
Article number, page 2 of 11

Patrick de Laverny et al.: TheGSP-Speccatalogue ofE (BP−RP),A G, L, R and M
Monte-Carlo realisations that finally provided the median value
of theA G distributions and their uncertainties.
3. Stellar luminosities, radii, and masses
From the previously estimated interstellar extinction, we com-
puted the stellar luminosity (L), radius (R), and then, the mass
(M) for eachGSP-Specstar. It is important to note that the above
quantities are independent of any stellar evolutionary models and
Galactic priors (except for the adopted distances; see below). We
first computed the absolute stellar magnitude,
MG =G mag −5×log 10(d)+5−A G ,(4)
whereG mag andd(in pc) are the DR3 magnitudes in theGaia
band and the Bailer-Jones et al. (2021)geometric 4 stellar dis-
tances based onGaia/DR3 parallaxes, respectively. The absolute
bolometric magnitude is then
Mbol =M G +BC G ,(5)
whereBC G is the bolometric correction in theGfilter, computed
according to Casagrande & VandenBerg (2018). This depends
onT eff, log(g), and theα-corrected metallicity. The stellar lumi-
nosity expressed in Solar units is then easily obtained,
log10(L/L⊙)=−0.4×(M bol −M ⊙
bol),(6)
whereM ⊙
bol=4.74 is the adopted value for the absolute bolomet-
ric magnitude of the Sun (IAU 2015 resolution B2, Prša et al.
2016). TheGSP-Speceffective temperature then allowed us to
estimate the stellar radius with the Stefan-Boltzmann relation
(Stefan 1879; Boltzmann 1884),
R/R⊙ =
p
L/L⊙ ×(T ⊙
eff/Teff)2 ,(7)
whereRis expressed in Solar units, and the effective Solar tem-
perature is fixed atTeff⊙=5,777 K. The stellar mass in Solar units
was subsequently obtained using the surface gravity,
M/M⊙ =(R/R ⊙)2 ×(g/g ⊙),(8)
where log(g ⊙)=4.44 withgin cm 2/s. We point out that precise
stellar masses can only be derived from extremely precisegmea-
surements, whereas spectral analysis methods provide log(g) es-
timates with typical uncertainties of about 0.1-0.2 dex. Again,
we considered the uncertainties associated with all these quanti-
ties by performing 1,000 Monte-Carlo realisations, propagating
the uncertainties on each atmospheric parameter. As above, we
publish the median of the parameter distributions, and the asso-
ciated uncertainties were estimated based on the 84 th and 16 th
quantiles.
4. TheGSP-Speccatalogue of interstellar absorption
and stellarL,R, andM
The computed colour excesses, extinctions, luminosities, radii,
and masses together with their associated uncertainties are re-
ported in an electronic table (see Table 1 for its content) for
eachGSP-Specstar, when available. We also include in the table
the calibrated atmospheric parameter values that were adopted
in this paper.
4 These geometric distances were adopted to be consistent with Gaia
Collaboration et al. (2023a).
Table 1.Content of theGaia GSP-Speccatalogue of interstellar red-
dening, extinctions, stellar luminosities, radii, and masses.
Label Description
GDR3IdGaiaDR3 Identification
Teff Adopted effective temperature (K)
Teff_errT effuncertainty (K)
log(g) Adopted surface gravity (gin cm/s 2)
log(g)_err log(g) uncertainty
[M/H] Adopted metallicity (dex)
[M/H]_err [M/H] uncertainty (dex)
[α/Fe] Adopted enhancement inα-elts w.r.t. Fe (dex)
[α/Fe]_err [α/Fe] uncertainty (dex)
E_BpRp Colour excess in (B P-RP) (mag.)
E_BpRp_errE (BP−RP) uncertainty (mag.)
A_G Extinction in theG-band (mag.)
A_G_err A G uncertainty (mag.)
L Stellar luminosity (inL ⊙)
L_errLuncertainty (inL ⊙)
R Stellar radius (inR ⊙)
R_errRuncertainty (inR ⊙)
M Stellar mass (inM ⊙)
M_errMuncertainty (inM ⊙)
Flag_Param QF associated to theGSP-Specparameters
(0/1/2)=(High/Good/Moderate)-Quality
Flag_Ext QF associated to the extinction calculation
(0/1/2)=(High/Good/Moderate)-Quality
Flag_LRM QF associated to theL,R, andMderivation
(0/1/2)=(Very high/High/Medium)-Quality
(9)=Low-Quality astrometric parameters
and/orLRMfiltered out (see text)
Notes.The full version of this table is available at CDS.
4.1. Parameter accuracy and quality flags
Together with these parameters, we also publish three quality
flags (QF, best value=0) that allow one to select the best derived
quantities. Except for the first flag, the two additional quality
flags are specific to the derivation of the new parameters derived
here. These newQFs are defined as described below:
–The goal ofFlag Param is to summarise the flag chain ofGSP-
Specinto a single value for the use of the new data pre-
sented here. We recall that the 13 firstGSP-Spec QFs refer
to the quality of theT eff, log(g), and [M/H] estimates (see
for more details Sect.8 of Recio-Blanco et al. 2023), mostly
depending on the quality of the input RVS spectra. The best
parametrised (∼1.9 million stars, i.e.∼40% of the∼4.6 mil-
lion included in this catalogue) for which all their first 13
GSP-Specflags are equal to 0 therefore haveFlag Param=0.
Moreover,Flag Param=1 (2) refers to stars for which at least
one of these 13 first QFs is equal to 1 (2), and this affects
∼35% stars of the whole sample (2; 25% stars). We note
that about 20% of all theGSP-Specstars were rejected from
our catalogue because the quality of their parameters was too
low, as revealed by one of theirGSP-SpecQFs being equal
to 9 (some of them being also KM-giant flagged stars, see
Recio-Blanco et al. 2023).
–Flag Ext allows one to select targets with the best interstel-
lar absorption estimates. It should therefore be considered
when dealing withE (BP−RP) and/orA G, but also withL,R,
orMbecause these quantities rely directly on the interstel-
lar extinction estimate. It can take values of 0, 1, or 2 (from
Article number, page 3 of 11

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa60323-26
high quality to moderate quality, respectively) and was de-
termined by considering the accuracy reached when numeri-
cally solving Eq. 2. Stars whose (BP −R P)Observed colour was
found to be outside the validity range of theF C21 function
in Eq. 2 were filtered out. Typically, this occurred for stars
that are too cool. The very few stars for which Eq. 2 cannot
be numerically solved were also filtered out. We proceeded
similarly for stars whose effective temperature was outside
the recommended range by C21 (i.e. cooler than 3600 K or
hotter than 8500 K) and for those whose log(g) and/or [M/H]
was extrapolated with respect to the ranges of the synthetic
spectrum reference grid adopted byGSP-Spec. In summary,
as a consequence of these rejection criteria (including those
related toFlag Param), the total number of stars in the cata-
logue is∼4.6 million.
–Flag LRM assesses the quality of theL,R, andMcomputation.
Basically, this flag was estimated by propagating theFlagExt
value and considering whether the log(g) and [M/H] val-
ues adopted for the computation of the bolometric correction
are well found within the validity ranges recommended by
Casagrande & VandenBerg (2018). Four different values are
provided: 0, 1, and 2 for very high, high, and medium-quality
determinations; and determination with a quality that is too
low are identified byFlag LRM=9. Moreover, noLRMval-
ues are published for the∼1.4% stars withFlag LRM=9, and
when Eq. 2 cannot be solved and/or when noBC G were esti-
mated because their stellar atmospheric parameters are found
to lie outside the validity ranges provided by Casagrande &
VandenBerg (2018). In contrast, some stars withFlagLRM=9
have publishedLRMs. They have possibleGaiaastrometric
issues that might affect their distance (and thus,L) estimates.
These stars either have aGaiaastrometricruweparameter
larger than 1.4 or af idelityfactor lower than 0.5, following
Rybizki et al. (2022); both of these indicate a poor astromet-
ric solution. Possible non-single stars are also found in this
category and were identified by considering theGaiakey-
wordsduplicated_sourceandnon_single_star. In total, all
these astrometric criteria affect about 20% of all theGSP-
Specstars. We finally note that some variable stars might be
included in our catalogue. Future users should check their
parameters since theGSP-Specanalysis might have been af-
fected by the stacked-epoch RVS spectra.
Moreover, a final check was specifically performed for the
derived masses since it is well known that for some stars, the
surface gravity might be difficult to derive accurately from their
spectra. BecauseMvaries linearly withg(and not with log(g),
as indicated in Eq. 8), rather large uncertainties in log(g) lead
to hugeMuncertainties. For instance, a 0.3 dex in log(g) un-
certainty corresponds to a relative mass error larger than a fac-
tor of 2 (i.e.∼100% forM). This should be considered when
building working samples for specific scientific applications (see
below). Furthermore, we also searched for possible large incon-
sistencies between theGSP-Speclog(g) and a luminosity-based
surface gravity estimate, as was done in de Laverny et al. (2024).
These were simply estimated by computing log(g)Lum =log(g ⊙)
+log(M) - log(L)+4×log(T eff⊙), adopting a very wide range
of possible masses. About 10 4 stars with likely poorGSP-Spec
gravities were then identified when the difference between the
spectroscopic and luminosity-based surface gravities was larger
than 2 dex. Their masses were rejected from the catalogue, but
the other derived parameters remained included because they de-
pend very weakly on log(g).
Fig. 1.Stellar luminosity vs. effective temperature diagram for the high-
quality subsample (see text for its definition), colour-coded by the stellar
count. The dotted lines represent the iso-radius relations.
Finally, in addition to these quality flags, we also rec-
ommend to consider the reported uncertainties associated
with the different parameters in order to define high-quality
subsamples that are especially adapted for specific applications.
For instance, stellar radii and masses for stars with a large
luminosity uncertainty (e.g. >∼30%) should be considered with
caution. Moreover, the mass of stars with a surface gravity
uncertainty larger than∼0.3 dex could be filtered out. We also
encourage future users to also adopt the quality flag system
of Recio-Blanco et al. (2023) to more precisely select stars
with optimalT eff, log(g) and [M/H] derivations instead of
consideringFlag Param. The spectraS/Nand theGSP-Specχ 2
quality-fit parameter could also be considered.
4.2. Catalogue content and typical uncertainties
In the catalogue presented in Table 1, we finally publish the
colour excess and extinction for 4.6 million stars, that is,
82% of the wholeGSP-Speccatalogue. Luminosity and ra-
dius are provided for 99.7% of them, and the mass is pro-
vided for 99.5%. In this catalogue, 62% of the stars have their
threeQF≤1, meaning a good-quality derivation, and 1.52
million stars (33%) have very high quality parameters with
FlagParam=FlagRedd=FlagLRM=0. As an illustration of the cat-
alogue content, we show in Fig. 1 5 and 2 diagrams of the lu-
minosity versus effective temperature for a high-quality (HQ)
subsample, colour-coded by stellar count, the extinction, and the
stellar mass. These 1.53 millionHQstars (about one-third of the
total sample) were selected by applying the following criteria:
(FlagParam=0) & (Flag Redd ≤1) & (Flag LRM ≤1), plus a rela-
tive error on the luminosity lower than 30%. Only for exploring
the stellar masses, we then restricted thisHQsample to stars
5 In this figure, the overdensity features seen at someT effreference
grid points are caused by overfitting patterns produced by theGSP-Spec
algorithm in the high-S/N regime (see Recio-Blanco et al. 2023, for
more details).
Article number, page 4 of 11

Patrick de Laverny et al.: TheGSP-Speccatalogue ofE (BP−RP),A G, L, R and M
Fig. 2.Same as Fig.1, but colour-coded by interstellar absorption and stellar mass (from left to right).
with log(g)err <0.1 (i.e. equivalent to an error onglower than
25%), leading to about 900,000 stars with a rather well-defined
mass (20% of the total sample). The mean uncertainties associ-
ated with thisHQsample are equal to 0.02 and 0.03 mag for
E(BP−RP) andA G, and 6%, 3%, and 22% for the mean relative
uncertainties onL,M, andR, respectively. The largest relative
errors onRandMare equal to 16 and 40%. ThisHQsample is
also characterised by (i)∼24,000 stars with a luminosity lower
than 0.5L ⊙ and∼22,000 high-luminosity stars (L>500L ⊙), (ii)
∼20,000 dwarfs with a radius smaller than 0.8R ⊙ and∼500 gi-
ants defined byR>100R ⊙ (only two haveR>200R ⊙), and (iii)
∼9,000 stars are less massive than 0.6M ⊙ and∼2,300 are more
massive than 10M ⊙ (168 withM>50M ⊙). More exotic stars
should be explored outside theHQsample by relaxing the qual-
ity flags. This Fig. 1 shows that the different evolutionary stages
of stars of any masses are well represented. The majority of the
most reddened stars are the most luminous, massive, and hence,
distant stars belonging to the Galactic halo, whereas a few other
massive stars are much closer but deeply embedded in the thin
disc. In contrast, the main sequence is highly dominated by low-
mass dwarfs with low extinction since they are not very distant.
Finally, at any stage, a correlation betweenLandMis clearly
seen.
5. Effect of the atmospheric parameter accuracy on
the derivedA G,L,R, andM
The uncertainties onA G,L,R, andMprovided in Table 1 were
directly estimated from the uncertainties of the atmospheric pa-
rameters (T eff, log(g), [M/H], and [α/Fe]) reported in theGSP-
Specanalysis. We recall that these uncertainties result from the
RVS spectrum noise and are thus only related to the precision of
the parameter derivation. We next explore the effect of the accu-
racy of the atmospheric parameter derivation on the new quanti-
ties we derived.
For this purpose, we simply (i) considered some test stars
typical of the lower main sequence, the turn-off, the lower Red
Giant Branch (RGB), the clump of the Horizontal Branch, and
the Asymptotic Giant Branch (AGB; see Table 2 for their param-
eter values), (ii) varied their atmospheric parameter as if they
were inaccurate, (iii) rederived theirA G6,L,R, andM, and fi-
nally quantified the effect of these inaccuracies. For each test
star, we adopted Solar metallicity and [α/Fe], and we considered
no uncertainties on the distance and magnitudes. The inaccura-
cies we explored forT eff, log(g), [M/H], and [α/Fe] were 100 K,
0.25 dex, 0.1 dex, and 0.1 dex, respectively. These values are
typical of those associated with spectroscopic surveys.
First, as shown in Table 2, possible inaccuracies in [M/H]
and [α/Fe] do not affect any of our parameters at all, regardless
of the stellar type, because these two atmospheric parameters
only act in Eq. 2 and 3 and on the bolometric correction, and
the dependence of these relations on these parameters is rather
weak for an inaccuracy of 0.1 dex. Similarly, and for the same
reasons, the inaccuracy in log(g) does not affect the derivation
ofA G, andLandRare safely estimated (with an uncertainty of
∼1%) regardless of the stellar type. In contrast, an inaccurateTeff
by 100 K can lead to rather strong variation in the absorption of
0.05 up to 0.2 mag, and thus, to luminosity variations of typically
∼5-10%. The stellar mass and radius are less affected by∆T eff,
however, with a possible variation of up to∼3%. This effect is
stronger for the giant stars. It is simply caused by a significant
change in the theoretical stellar colour whenT effis varied (de-
rived from Eq. 2), which then affects Eq. 1, and, as shown in
Eq.7 and 8,∆Rand∆Mvary mostly as∆T eff/Teff−3. Finally, and
as expected when examining Eq. 8, the mass of all star types is
strongly modified by about∼75% for an inaccuracy in log(g) of
only 0.25 dex.
In summary, interstellar extinction and stellar luminosities
are accurately derived for stars with quite accurate effective tem-
peratures. Similarly, we also recommend adoption of the masses
published here for stars with very accurate stellar gravities. We
excluded masses from ourHQsample derived from log(g) with
uncertainties larger than 0.1 dex for this reason (among others;
see the previous section). We also refer to Sect. 6.3 and the
validations with asteroseismic masses, which confirm this be-
haviour.
6 In Table 2, we provide only the effect onA G since it is identical as
the one onE (BP−RP).
Article number, page 5 of 11

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa60323-26
Table 2.Effect of possible atmospheric parameter inaccuracies on the quantities derived here.
Main Sequence Turn-OffLower RGB Clump AGB
(5000 K, 4.5) (6500 K, 3.5) (4800 K, 3.0) (4500 K, 2.5) (4000 K, 1.5)
∆Teff=100 K∆(A G) 0.07 mag 0.05 mag 0.09 mag 0.11 mag 0.18 mag
∆(L,R,M) (5.1, 1.5, 2.9)% (4.8, 0.7, 1.6)% (5.9, 1.1, 2.3)% (6.8, 1.1, 2.3)% (11., 0.2, 0.3)%
∆log(g)=0.25 dex∆(A G) 0.01 mag 0.02 mag 0.02 mag 0.01 mag 0.01 mag
∆(L,R,M) (0.8, 0.4, 77.)% (1.1, 0.6, 75)% (1.5, 0.7, 75.)% (0.8, 0.4, 77.)% (1.1, 0.5, 76)%
∆[M/H]=0.1 dex∆(A G) 0.01 mag 0.01 mag 0.01 mag 0.01 mag 0.01 mag
∆(L,R,M) (1.1, 0.6, 1.2)% (0.7, 0.3, 0.9)% (0.7, 0.3, 0.7)% (0.6, 0.3, 0.6)% (0.8, 0.4, 0.8)%
∆[α/Fe]=0.1 dex∆(A G) 0.01 mag 0.01 mag 0.01 mag 0.01 mag 0.01 mag
∆(L,R,M) (0.7, 0.4, 0.6)% (0.4, 0.2, 0.6)% (0.4, 0.2, 0.5)% (0.5, 0.3, 0.3)% (0.6, 0.3, 0.9)%
Notes.These test stars are typical of different evolutionary stages. Their adopted effective temperatures and surface gravities are provided in the
second line. Solar [M/H] and [α/Fe] are adopted for all of them.
6. Validation with the literature
In this section, theGaia GSP-Speccatalogue of interstellar red-
dening and stellar radii and masses is compared to literature val-
ues for validation purposes. We first summarise some of our pre-
vious comparisons ofE (BP−RP),R, andMwith published values,
and we then focus on more global validations of our stellar radii
through interferometric angular diameters and of ourRandM
exploiting asteroseismic data. We note that we did not consider
stellar radii derived from surface brightness-colour relations for
these validations because they require specific calibrations that
might be affected by distance and reddening uncertainties, in
contrast to asteroseismic determinations (see, for instance, the
series of articles from Valle et al. 2024).
6.1. Previously published comparisons
6.1.1. Interstellar reddening
The computed colour excesses towards eachGSP-Specstar have
been extensively discussed and compared to literature values by
Barbillon et al. (2025). We refer to this paper for a detailed val-
idation of the derived 2D and 3DGSP-Specextinction maps. In
brief, a very good agreement with the literature was found, and
an excellent spatial correlation with already known interstellar
medium structures such as molecular clouds and spiral arms was
retrieved. This study therefore confirms the high quality of the
interstellar reddening values in the present catalogue.
6.1.2. Radii and masses of specific stars
To validate the stellar radii and masses we estimated, we
first referred to Recio-Blanco et al. (2024); de Laverny et al.
(2025); Navarrete et al. (2025) who validated these quantities
for specific stellar types, but for a rather small number of stars.
More global comparisons performed for larger numbers of stars
are presented in Sect. 6.2. First, Recio-Blanco et al. (2024)
considered a sample ofGSP-Specstars with extremely precise
atmospheric parameters. They found that our spectroscopic
masses and those derived from combined Kepler and APOGEE
data agree very well (APOKASC2, Pinsonneault et al. 2018)
for stars with similar log(g) values in the two catalogues. These
authors found a small bias of about 0.03M ⊙, associated with
a dispersion of 0.22M ⊙ (see their Fig. 4). Then, de Laverny
et al. (2025, see their Appendix A) explored the stellar radii
and masses for the exoplanet host stars in our catalogue and
compared them with values derived from asteroseismic and
spectroscopic data. Again, the agreement with the literature was
found to be very good, with no bias and a dispersion of 4% for
Rand a bias of 4% associated with a dispersion of 17% forM.
Finally, we also refer to Navarrete et al. (2025), who validated
our masses for extreme cases (red giant binaries) and also found
a satisfactory agreement with published values.
6.2. Global validation
In the following, we proceed with a more global validation
of our whole catalogue, for which we not only consider some
specific applications as described above. In order to facilitate
the comparison, we only considered homogeneous reference
catalogues of stellar radius and mass determinations, based
on direct technics (i.e. the least model dependent), such as
interferometry and asteroseismology.
6.2.1. Interferometric angular diameters
Our stellar radii can be directly compared to interferometric
observations that provide stellar angular diameters, which, com-
bined with the Bailer-Jones et al. (2021) distances we adopted,
allow us to obtain a completely independent measurement of
the stellar radius. For this comparison, we considered angular
diameters of dwarfs and giants from the catalogue of Salsi et al.
(2020, S20 hereafter), who implemented a selection of reliable
interferometric measurements from the JMMC Measured Stellar
Diameters Catalog (Duvert 2016). This catalogue contains 127
stars with a high-quality diameter measurement (adopting their
Rej_Keep flag), 66 of which are also found in our catalogue.
Fig. 3 shows a comparison between these interferometric stellar
radii and our spectroscopic ones. An impressive agreement is
found: the mean relative difference (computed as (R GSP−Spec
-R S20)/RS20) is equal to 1% with a dispersion of only 3%.
Moreover, this bias becomes null when we only consider the
44 stars belonging to ourHQsample, and the dispersion is
Article number, page 6 of 11

Patrick de Laverny et al.: TheGSP-Speccatalogue ofE (BP−RP),A G, L, R and M
Fig. 3.Comparison between the measured interferometric stellar radii
from Salsi et al. (2020) and our values. The 1:1 relation is shown as a
dashed line. Most error bars are too small to be visible. The colour-
coding represents theGSP-Specsurface gravity, which confirms the
dwarf or giant nature of the S20 stars. When our 44HQstars are consid-
ered alone, the bias becomes null and the dispersion improves slightly.
reduced to 2%s. The agreement between these two completely
independent radius determinations is therefore excellent and
validates the method we adopted, that is, not only the radius
determination, but also the different previous steps described
in Sect. 2 & 3: the derivation of the interstellar extinction, the
bolometric correction, and the luminosity from theGSP-Spec
parameters.
6.2.2. Asteroseismic radii and masses
We compared our best derived stellar radii and masses (HQ
subsample) to completely independent estimates based on
asteroseismic observations. For this purpose, we considered the
radii and masses of giant stars derived by the APOKASC-3
and APO-K2 studies (Pinsonneault et al. 2025; Schonhut-Stasik
et al. 2024, respectively) and the APOKASC values of Serenelli
et al. (2017) for dwarfs and subgiants. The APOKASC and
APO-K2 studies relied on Kepler (Borucki et al. 2008) and K2
datasets, respectively, which differ in several aspects: asteroseis-
mic data analysis, target selection, shorter K2 observations, and
so on. So, differences in radius and mass are expected between
these studies (see an illustration below). Moreover, we recall
that the asteroseismic radius depends onT eff1/2 and that our
spectroscopic radius is estimated from the square root of the
luminosity andT eff2 (see Eq.7). Similarly, the asteroseismic
mass is related toT eff3/2 and the spectroscopic mass to log(g)
(Eq. 8). In the following validations, we therefore restricted
the comparison samples to stars with a difference inT eff and
log(g) smaller than 100 K and 0.1 dex, respectively, between the
GSP-Specand asteroseismic 7 catalogues.
7 When available, we adopted their asteroseismic log(g) and not their
spectroscopic values
APOKASC: The third version of the APOKASC catalogue
(APOKASC-3) provides precise mass and radius estimates for
about 10,000 red giants (i.e. corresponding to about two-thirds
of their initial sample). These quantities were estimated based on
Kepler asteroseismic measurements,Gaia/DR3 astrometric data
(Gaia Collaboration et al. 2023b), and APOGEE/DR17 spectro-
scopic parameters (Abdurro’uf et al. 2022). In the following, we
only considered their best-quality parameters, which belong to
their Gold Category. Of their Gold stars, 4,533 are found in our
HQsubsample, and 2,019 of them satisfy the adopted differ-
ences of 100 K and 0.1 dex inT effand log(g). Their radius and
mass are compared in Fig. 4 (top panels). The stellar radii agree
very well with a mean relative difference (bias) of only 2% and
an associated standard deviation of 4%, in the sense of (GSP-
Spec- literature)/literature. For the mass comparison, the agree-
ment is also very satisfactory with a mean relative difference of
4% and a standard deviation of 15%. Moreover, most of the mass
dispersion is clearly produced by the largest log(g) differences.
When we only consider the 750 stars with∆log(g)<0.05 dex, the
dispersion in mass is reduced to 10%.
For the dwarfs and subgiants, 176 of ourHQstars are
also found in the Serenelli et al. (2017) catalogue of 415 stars.
We recall that this catalogue is based onKeplerasteroseismic
and APOGEE/DR13 spectroscopic data. Because of the lower
statistics, we did not apply any filter onT eff for the radius
comparison, which is again found to be excellent, with a mean
relative difference of 2% and a standard deviation of 4% (see
Fig. 4, middle panels). For the mass comparison, we selected
the 66 stars with an agreement in log(g) better than 0.1 dex. The
bias (7%) and standard deviation (15%) are slightly larger than
before, but this is explained by the differences in the adopted
atmospheric parameters. The stars that depart most strongly
from the 1:1 relation are those with the largest differences inTeff
and/or log(g). The larger error bars might also explain part of
the dispersion. In any case, this comparison again confirms the
high quality of the radius and mass spectroscopy determinations
when compared to the APOKASC values.
APO-K2: This catalogue contains data for about 7,500 RGB
and Red Clump stars, adopting K2-GAP DR3 asteroseismic data
(Zinn et al. 2022), and, as APOKASC-3,Gaia/DR3 astrometric
and APOGEE/DR17 spectroscopic data. About 2,500 of these
giant stars are found in our catalogue, and 1,254 belong to our
HQsubsample. The comparison of the two samples is shown in
the bottom panels of Fig. 4, and we also applied the same fil-
tering as for APOKASC-3 on∆T effand∆log(g) (565 stars were
left). As for the other comparison samples, the radii agree very
well (bias and dispersion are equal to 2% and 8%, respectively).
The slightly larger dispersion is simply explained by the larger
number of stars that differ inT effby more than 50-100 K. The
larger error bars are also associated with the seismic radii of
the largest stars. The mass comparison is also affected by the
rather large log(g) differences and rather large uncertainties in
both samples, although the agreement is still satisfactory (bias
of 5%).
6.3. Summary of the validations
The above comparisons confirm the high quality of our cata-
logue values, which rely on the spectroscopicGSP-Specparam-
eters. By selecting homogeneous, large, and high-quality refer-
ence catalogues of stellar radii and masses based on completely
independent and direct techniques (i.e. the least model depen-
dent) such as interferometry and asteroseismology, we found ex-
Article number, page 7 of 11

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa60323-26
Fig. 4.Comparison between theGSP-Specspectroscopic stellar radii (left panels) and masses (right panels) and those derived based on asteroseis-
mic data by Pinsonneault et al. (2025); Serenelli et al. (2017); Zinn et al. (2022), shown in the top, middle, and bottom panels, respectively. The
1:1 relation is shown as a dashed grey line. The colour-codes represent the difference inTeffand log(g) between the different samples in the sense
(GSP-Spec- literature), left and right panels, respectively. The mean relative differences and associated standard deviations indicated in each panel
are in the sense of (GSP-Spec- literature)/literature (see the associated text for more details).
Article number, page 8 of 11

Patrick de Laverny et al.: TheGSP-Speccatalogue ofE (BP−RP),A G, L, R and M
cellent agreement with the literature. In particular, this agree-
ment improved when we considered our high-quality subsam-
ple and when the effective temperatures and surface gravities
adopted by the different works agreed, leading to even smaller
dispersions. We emphasise that the agreement for the radii with
respect to interferometric and asteroseismic data is particularly
impressive (almost no biases, and dispersions of a few percent).
This validates the whole method we adopted, that is, not only
the radius determination, but also the derivation of the interstel-
lar reddening, the bolometric corrections, and the luminosities
from theGSP-Specparameters, based on which we estimatedR
andM. For the mass comparison with asteroseismic data, typi-
cal relative differences are about 5% with dispersions of 15-20%.
These numbers are improved by a factor of∼2 when we consider
the smaller differences in the adoptedT effand log(g), and this
confirms the global very good agreement for such a difficult pa-
rameter derived directly from the spectroscopic data. Moreover,
this section again supports what we showed in Sect. 5, that is, the
stellar mass is most sensitive to the uncertainty in log(g). There-
fore, this atmospheric parameter has not only a significant effect
onM, but is also the main driver of its uncertainty. Finally, we
also point out that some of the comparison sources used in this
section have rather high extinctions (e.g. about 10% of our se-
lected APOKASC-3 stars haveA G>0.2, and∼50 of them have
AG>0.5). This further reinforces our validation, because even
with extinction, accurate stellar radii and masses are recovered.
7. Example applications of the catalogue
In order to illustrate the wide range of possible applications of
our catalogue, we focus this section on different studies starting
from exoplanet topics to Galactic ones. We recall that 2D and
3D interstellar dust maps based on our catalogue have been pre-
sented by Barbillon et al. (2025).
7.1. Radii and masses of exoplanets
A first example of an application of theGSP-Speccatalogue
of stellar radii and masses was presented by de Laverny et al.
(2025), who published a large, homogeneous, and precise cata-
logue of radii and masses of 3,556 exoplanets hosted by 2,573
stars. These new planet parameters were derived by rescaling the
previously published planet parameter values, adopting the stel-
lar radii and masses we estimated here. The lower uncertainty
of the planet radii compared to literature values allowed these
authors to improve the characterisation of the decrease in the
number of small planets around 1.8 R Earth (evaporation valley,
Fulton et al. 2017). Among other results, a dichotomy between
dense and inflated planets was also found. Denser planets de-
fined byR p ≤1.1 R Jup appeared to be more massive for more
metal-rich host stars. Conversely, inflated planets orbiting more
metal-poor stars were found to be more massive. It was proposed
that this bimodality might reveal that the diversity of giant exo-
planets might depend on their Galactic birth locus. Dense giant
planets were indeed found to be more numerous than inflated
ones for supra-Solar metallicities, as in the central Milky Way
regions. We refer to de Laverny et al. (2025) and forthcoming
articles investigating the host star chemical properties for more
details on theGaiaspectroscopic catalogue of exoplanets.
Fig. 5.Present-day mass function of a subsample of bright giant stars
(see text for details about the adopted filtering selection) compared to
the IMF of Scalo and Kroupa, whose power-law indexes are equal to
2.7 and 2.3, respectively.
Fig. 6.Same as Fig. 5, but for the three metallicity bins indicated in
the legend. The total number of stars in each histogram is also reported.
The Scalo IMF is that of Fig. 5.
7.2. Stellar mass distributions
In order to explore the stellar mass distribution of our catalogue,
which indeed corresponds to the Present-Day Mass Function
(PDMF) and to compare it to theoretical Initial Mass Function
(IMF), we first defined the most complete subsample, that is, a
subsample not affected by observational biases. We focused on
giant stars to do this because theGSP-Speccatalogue is known
to be less complete for dwarfs. Then, following Fig. 2 of Recio-
Blanco et al. (2023), the rise inGSP-Specstellar counts with the
G-magnitude clearly decelerates for stars fainter than∼12.5. We
therefore show in Fig. 5 the mass distribution of a subsample of
almost 300,000 giant stars found in our catalogue, characterised
byL>200L ⊙ andG<12. Adopting theHQsubsample for our
application biases the subsample by favouring high-S/Nspec-
tra and leading to a rougher distribution with a number of stars
more massive than∼2.5M ⊙ that is too large (and unrealistic).
This figure shows that the PDMF of our giant stars agrees well
with the IMF of Scalo (1986) over the range∼1.2 -∼3.5 M ⊙.
Conversely, the Kroupa (2002) IMF8 predicts a number of stars
more massive than∼1.5M ⊙ that is too large and is not con-
firmed by our catalogue. We recall that the Scalo IMF was de-
rived from Galactic field star counts and is therefore a composite
IMF of many star-forming regions. It is thus expected that it fits
our data well based on stellar counts in the Solar vicinity.
8 The IMF power-law indexes of the Salpeter and Kroupa distributions
are too close (2.35 and 2.3) to be distinguishable in this figure.
Article number, page 9 of 11

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa60323-26
Table 3.Median masses and Galactic orbital properties.
Metallicity range Massσ(V Z) Eccentricity
(units) (M ⊙) (km/s)
[M/H]≥0.0 dex 1.7 22.0 0.13±0.09
-0.3≤[M/H]<-0.2 dex 1.2 27.1 0.15±0.10
[M/H]≤-0.5 dex 0.9 58.4 0.32±0.25
Notes.The Galactic orbital properties correspond to the dispersion of
the vertical velocity and the mean eccentricity plus its dispersion. The
considered stars are the giants belonging to the three metallicity bins
shown in Fig. 6.
This rather good agreement between our PDMF and the
Scalo IMF can be understood by examining Fig. 6, which shows
the PDMF for the same sample of giant stars, but only those be-
longing to three specific metallicity ranges. These ranges were
defined in order to have rather similar number of stars and to
span the metal-poor to the metal-rich regime. A rather smooth
variation can be seen with a larger number of massive stars with
increasing metallicity. but these PDMFs differ from the Scalo
IMF, regardless of the normalisation factor. In particular, this fig-
ure shows that most stars with supra-Solar metallicities are more
massive than the Sun, with several stars havingM>2M ⊙. In
contrast, almost all the most metal-poor stars ([M/H]<-0.5 dex)
have masses lower than 1.5 M ⊙, and their mass distribution is
closest to the Scalo IMF. All of this is quantified in the first col-
umn of Tab. 3, which reports the median mass of these three
metallicity ranges. The median absolute deviations associated
with these medians are similar for the three ranges and equal
to∼0.5 M ⊙. This increased number of massive stars for higher
metallicities can easily be interpreted when we consider that
theGSP-Specsampled volume spans different Galactic popula-
tions. We indeed report in Tab. 3 some Galactic orbital param-
eters for the three metallicity bins that were computed by Pali-
cio et al. (2023). In particular,σ(V Z), the Galactic vertical ve-
locity dispersion can be viewed as an age proxy of the stellar
populations. This quantity indeed increases with time (see, for
instance, Hayden et al. 2018, and references therein) because of
the progressive dynamical heating of the disc.σ(VZ) is larger for
the most metal-poor regime composed by lower-mass and thus,
older, stars whose orbits have been heated. In contrast, the orbits
of the most metal-rich and massive stars, which are younger, did
not have time to be significantly perturbed (lowerσ(VZ)). All of
this is fully consistent with the increasing eccentricities of the
Galactic orbits (mean and dispersion, reported in the third col-
umn of Tab. 3) with decreasing metallicity.
We therefore conclude that the agreement between the
PDMF and IMF shown in Fig. 5 is caused by an age effect. The
most metal-poor massive stars have already ended their life and
are thus absent from the blue histogram of Fig. 6, whereas the
lower-mass stars in the same metallicity bin had enough time
to evolve as giants. Conversely, most of the low-mass metal-
rich stars are still on the main-sequence and are therefore not
included in the green histogram. As a consequence, based on the
mass distributions alone, we can claim that the most metal-rich
bin of Fig. 6 is dominated by young stars that mostly belong to
the Galactic thin disc, whereas the most metal-poor bin contains
older stars of the Galactic thick disc or halo.
7.3. Galactic halo accreted stars
It is now widely admitted that the Galactic halo is in part com-
posed of several substructures (some of them are called streams)
Fig. 7.Mass and luminosity ofHQcandidate accreted stars identified
through their orbit by Gaia Collaboration et al. (2023a). The considered
accretion debris systems are indicated in the legend, together with the
number of their member stars. The relative uncertainties in luminosity
are equal to a few percent and are not visible in the logarithmic scale.
that are interpreted as signatures of past or ongoing merger
events. Therefore, some stars belonging to the Galactic halo
were formed in external galaxies in ancient epochs. Such merger
debris stars can be identified through their specific Galactic or-
bits. For instance, they are located in specific regions in a dia-
gram of the total energy (E) versusL Z (vertical component of
the angular momentum) (see, for instance, Fig. 25-27 in Gaia
Collaboration et al. 2023a).
We adopted the list of candidate accretedGSP-Specstars
identified by Gaia Collaboration et al. (2023a). They belong to
theGaia-Enceladus-Sausage accreted galaxy (GES, Belokurov
et al. 2018; Myeong et al. 2018; Helmi et al. 2018), the Sequoia
(Myeong et al. 2019), the Thamnos (Koppelman et al. 2019;
Helmi 2020), and the Helmi streams (Helmi et al. 1999). We
cross-matched this list with theHQsubsample defined above,
including the restriction log(g) err <0.1 dex in order to select
the most accurate derived masses. We show in Fig. 7 the stel-
lar masses of the accretion debris candidate stars versus their
luminosity. Most of these stars are high-luminosity stars with
masses close to or lower than about 1 M ⊙ (considering the un-
certainties). These masses are fully consistent with the astero-
seismic masses of GES stars derived by Montalbán et al. (2021).
We also confirmed that these stars are all cool giants that left
the main sequence a long time ago. The stellar masses of red
giants are indeed a good proxy for their age, and typical ages
for such post-main-sequence low-mass stars are older than∼10-
12 Gy. This is fully compatible with the accretion epochs of the
considered mergers. It is indeed thought that the GSE accretion
occurred about 10 billion years ago (Helmi et al. 2018), about
5-8 Gyr ago for the Helmi stream (Koppelman et al. 2019), and
between 8-11 Gyr ago for Sequoia; Thamnos is probably older
(Dodd et al. 2025).
There are a few stars in Fig 7 that belong to GES or the Helmi
stream, however, that are more massive than∼1.5 M ⊙ (therefore
younger than the other candidates) or too faint to be giants. As
already pointed out by Gaia Collaboration et al. (2023a), their
sample of accreted stars belonging to the Helmi stream or GES
is contaminated by disc stars because these streams lie close to
the Galactic disc in theE−L Z plane. We therefore confirmed
this contamination when we examined the stellar masses and/or
luminosities. Based on these derived quantities, the contamina-
tion is stronger for the Helmi stream (it might reach up to∼20 %)
than for GSE, which is closer to∼10 %. We thus emphasise that a
Article number, page 10 of 11

Patrick de Laverny et al.: TheGSP-Speccatalogue ofE (BP−RP),A G, L, R and M
selection of merger debris stars based on purely kinematical cri-
teria should be complemented by an examination of their chemi-
cal content (see, for instance, Fig 29 of Gaia Collaboration et al.
2023a), but also their mass (as proposed here) and/or age.
8. Summary
We have presented a new catalogue of interstellar colour ex-
cesses and extinctions, together with stellar luminosities, radii
and masses for about 4.6 million stars. These data were com-
puted from theGaia/GSP-Specatmospheric parameters (T eff,
log(g), [M/H] , and [α/Fe], derived from the analysis of the RVS
spectra), combined withGaia/DR3 astrometry and photometry.
These parameters are therefore fully compatible and homoge-
neous with theGaia/DR3 spectroscopic data. This procedure al-
lowed us to avoid systematics and biases that might be hidden
when data from different (and potentially) heterogeneous cata-
logues are combined. The uncertainties associated with all these
new parameters were estimated based on 1,000 Monte-Carlo
simulations for each star. We also included three quality flags
in this catalogue that should be considered, together with the
associated uncertainties, to define high-quality parameter sub-
samples. An example of such aHQsubsample, containing 1.5
million stars, is provided.
The high quality of the catalogue for dwarfs and giants (even
when they are highly extincted by the interstellar medium), was
confirmed through different validations based on published in-
terstellar maps, interferometric radii, and asteroseismic radii and
masses. We found that the radius determinations have a sim-
ilar precision as interferometric and asteroseismic determina-
tions when similar effective temperatures were considered by us
and the asteroseismic works. The relative mean differences be-
tween our mass determinations and the Kepler determinations
are as small as a few percent, associated with a dispersion of 10-
20%, when the agreement in surface gravity is good. This new
catalogue, its large statistics, homogeneity, and high quality al-
lowed us to explore different astrophysical problematics. Some
example applications were described from exoplanets (de Lav-
erny et al. 2025) to properties of the Galactic halo. For instance,
we found that (i) the Present-Day Mass Function of the bright-
est giant stars is compatible with the Kroupa IMF when any
metallicities are considered because of the different evolution-
ary timescales of low- and high-mass stars found in the different
Galactic populations, (ii) the main Galactic populations can be
identified directly based on their mass distribution, and (iii) the
estimated low masses for the accreted halo stars are compatible
with the epoch of their accretion into the Milky Way.
We finally emphasise that part of the methods we presented
were adopted to calibrate theGaia/DR4GSP-Specdata that will
be published in December 2026 (Palicio et al., in preparation).
Moreover, a new version of this catalogue will be published
after theGaia/DR4, based on the new atmospheric parameter
values derived from the RVS spectra. Its precision will be im-
proved by the new implementations in theGSP-Specpipeline.
Improvements in the parameter accuracy are also expected be-
cause the uncertainties associated with the DR4 stellar parame-
ters are lower since the S/N of the RVS spectra increases from
DR3 to DR4. This catalogue size will also be extended by about
a factor of 5-6 (i.e. a few tens of million stars) because more
spectra are parametrised byGSP-Specfor the fourthGaiadata
release.
Acknowledgements.This work has made use of data from the European
Space Agency (ESA) missionGaia(https://www.cosmos.esa.int/gaia), pro-
cessed by theGaiaData Processing and Analysis Consortium (DPAC,
https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/gaia/dpac/consortium). Funding for the DPAC
has been provided by national institutions, in particular the institutions partici-
pating in the Gaia Multilateral Agreement.
We acknowledge funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program under SPACE-H2020 grant agreement number 101004214
(EXPLORE project).
This work has made use of the IPython package (Pérez & Granger 2007), NumPy
(Harris et al. 2020), Matplotlib (Hunter 2007), Pandas, TOPCAT (Taylor 2005)
and the SIMBAD database, operated at CDS, Strasbourg, France (Wenger et al.
2000). We also thank L. Casagrande for helpful discussions and the anonymous
referee for his sensible comments. E.S thanks I.N.A.F. for the 1.05.24.07.02 Mini
Grant – LEGARE “Linking the chemical Evolution of Galactic discs AcRoss di-
versE scales: from the thin disc to the nuclear stellar disc” (PI E. Spitoni)
References
Abdurro’uf, Accetta, K., Aerts, C., et al. 2022, ApJS, 259, 35
Bailer-Jones, C. A. L., Rybizki, J., Fouesneau, M., Demleitner, M., & Andrae,
R. 2021, AJ, 161, 147
Barbillon, M., Recio-Blanco, A., de Laverny, P., & Palicio, P. A. 2025, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2511.12156
Belokurov, V ., Erkal, D., Evans, N. W., Koposov, S. E., & Deason, A. J. 2018,
MNRAS, 478, 611
Boltzmann, L. 1884, Annalen der Physik, 258, 291
Borucki, W., Koch, D., Basri, G., et al. 2008, in IAU Symposium, V ol. 249,
Exoplanets: Detection, Formation and Dynamics, ed. Y .-S. Sun, S. Ferraz-
Mello, & J.-L. Zhou, 17–24
Casagrande, L., Lin, J., Rains, A. D., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 507, 2684
Casagrande, L. & VandenBerg, D. A. 2018, MNRAS, 479, L102
Creevey, O. L., Sordo, R., Pailler, F., et al. 2023, A&A, 674, A26
Cropper, M., Katz, D., Sartoretti, P., et al. 2018, A&A, 616, A5
de Laverny, P., Ligi, R., Crida, A., Recio-Blanco, A., & Palicio, P. A. 2025,
A&A, 699, A100
de Laverny, P., Recio-Blanco, A., Aerts, C., & Palicio, P. A. 2024, A&A, 691,
A182
Dodd, E., Ruiz-Lara, T., Helmi, A., et al. 2025, A&A, 698, A277
Duvert, G. 2016, VizieR Online Data Catalog: JMDC : JMMC Measured Stellar
Diameters Catalogue (Duvert, 2016), VizieR On-line Data Catalog: II/345.
Originally published in: JMMC center (2016)
Fulton, B. J., Petigura, E. A., Howard, A. W., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 109
Gaia Collaboration, Recio-Blanco, A., Kordopatis, G., et al. 2023a, A&A, 674,
A38
Gaia Collaboration, Vallenari, A., Brown, A. G. A., et al. 2023b, A&A, 674, A1
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357
Hayden, M. R., Recio-Blanco, A., de Laverny, P., et al. 2018, A&A, 609, A79
Helmi, A. 2020, ARA&A, 58, 205
Helmi, A., Babusiaux, C., Koppelman, H. H., et al. 2018, Nature, 563, 85
Helmi, A., White, S. D. M., de Zeeuw, P. T., & Zhao, H. 1999, Nature, 402, 53
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing In Science & Engineering, 9, 90
Koppelman, H. H., Helmi, A., Massari, D., Price-Whelan, A. M., & Starkenburg,
T. K. 2019, A&A, 631, L9
Kroupa, P. 2002, Science, 295, 82
Miglio, A., Chiappini, C., Morel, T., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 429, 423
Montalbán, J., Mackereth, J. T., Miglio, A., et al. 2021, Nature Astronomy, 5,
640
Myeong, G. C., Evans, N. W., Belokurov, V ., Sanders, J. L., & Koposov, S. E.
2018, MNRAS, 478, 5449
Myeong, G. C., Vasiliev, E., Iorio, G., Evans, N. W., & Belokurov, V . 2019,
MNRAS, 488, 1235
Navarrete, C., Recio-Blanco, A., de Laverny, P., & Escorza, A. 2025, A&A, 696,
A82
Palicio, P. A., Recio-Blanco, A., Poggio, E., et al. 2023, A&A, 670, L7
Pérez, F. & Granger, B. E. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 21
Pinsonneault, M. H., Elsworth, Y . P., Tayar, J., et al. 2018, ApJS, 239, 32
Pinsonneault, M. H., Zinn, J. C., Tayar, J., et al. 2025, ApJS, 276, 69
Prša, A., Harmanec, P., Torres, G., et al. 2016, AJ, 152, 41
Recio-Blanco, A., de Laverny, P., Palicio, P. A., et al. 2024, A&A, 692, A235
Recio-Blanco, A., de Laverny, P., Palicio, P. A., et al. 2023, A&A, 674, A29
Rybizki, J., Green, G. M., Rix, H.-W., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 510, 2597
Salaris, M., Chieffi, A., & Straniero, O. 1993, ApJ, 414, 580
Salsi, A., Nardetto, N., Mourard, D., et al. 2020, A&A, 640, A2
Scalo, J. M. 1986, Fund. Cosmic Phys., 11, 1
Schonhut-Stasik, J., Zinn, J. C., Stassun, K. G., et al. 2024, AJ, 167, 50
Serenelli, A., Johnson, J., Huber, D., et al. 2017, ApJS, 233, 23
Stefan, J. 1879, Sitzungsber. Kaiserl. Akad. Wiss. Math. Naturwiss. Cl. II. Abth.,
79, 391
Taniguchi, D., de Laverny, P., Recio-Blanco, A., Tsujimoto, T., & Palicio, P. A.
2026, A&A, 707, A260
Taylor, M. B. 2005, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Se-
ries, V ol. 347, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XIV , ed.
P. Shopbell, M. Britton, & R. Ebert, 29
Valle, G., Dell’Omodarme, M., Prada Moroni, P. G., & Degl’Innocenti, S. 2024,
A&A, 690, A327
Wenger, M., Ochsenbein, F., Egret, D., et al. 2000, A&AS, 143, 9
Zinn, J. C., Stello, D., Elsworth, Y ., et al. 2022, ApJ, 926, 191
Article number, page 11 of 11