Title: Interaction of Fast Magnetoacoustic Wave with the Localized Coronal Null and Generation of the Energetic Alfvén Wave Packet
Authors: Akash Bairagi, Abhishekh K. Srivastava, Sripan Mondal, T. V. Zaqarashvili, Astrid Veronig, P. Bourdin, Ding Yuan, Ryun-Young Kwon
Published: 2026-06-04
Categories: astro-ph.SR

Draft version June 5, 2026
Typeset using LATEXdefaultstyle in AASTeX7.0.1
Interaction of Fast Magnetoacoustic Wave with the Localized Coronal Null and Generation of the
Energetic Alfv´ en Wave Packet
Akash Bairagi, 1 Abhishekh K. Srivastava
 ,2 Sripan Mondal
 ,1 T.V. Zaqarashvili
 ,3, 4, 5 Astrid Veronig
 ,3
P. Bourdin
 ,3 Ding Yuan
 ,6 and Ryun-Young Kwon
 7
1Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi-221005, India.
2Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi-221005, India. Email:- asrivastava.app@itbhu.ac.in
3Institute of Physics University of Graz, A-8010 Graz, Austria.
4Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics at Space Research Center, Ilia State University, Kakutsa Cholokashvili Ave 3/5, 0179
Tbilisi, Georgia.
5Evgeni Kharadze Georgian National Astrophysical Observatory, Mount Kanobili, 0301 Abastumani, Georgia.
6Key Laboratory of Solar Activity and Space Weather, School of Aerospace, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong,
518055, China. Email:- yuanding@hit.edu.cn
7Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, Daejeon 34055, Republic of Korea. Email:- rkwon@kasi.re.kr
ABSTRACT
In the present paper, we have performed 2.5D resistive magnetohydrodynamic simulations of the
interaction of a fast magnetoacoustic wave with a localized coronal magnetic null point. As a result,
an Alfv´ en wave packet is generated by the mode conversion when a fast magnetoacoustic perturbation
interacts with the null point. The field-aligned plasma flows are also generated due to the non-linear
effects. When the fast mode wavefront interacts with the null, some parts of this wavefront get refracted
around it, while some other part is trapped at the null region. Subsequently, the velocity fluctuation out
of the plane and in-phase magnetic field fluctuations have evolved and propagated with the local Alfv´ en
speed along the separatrixes at one side of the coronal null region. The resulting disturbance behaves
as an incompressible and energetic Alfv´ en wave packet. A secondary fast magnetoacoustic wave is
also produced and propagates. In the synthetic SDO/AIA observations, no intensity fluctuations are
evident in the region where the Alfv´ en wave packet propagates, while the fast magnetoacoustic wave
fronts are clearly evident. Our results suggest that given the appropriate physical conditions at the
null, when the fast mode wave is incident, Alfv´ en packets can be excited due to the mode conversion,
further carrying substantial momentum and energy flux in the solar corona.
Keywords:Sun: corona; Magnetic field; Magnetohydrodynamics; Alfv´ en waves
1.INTRODUCTION
From many decades a multitude of observational studies have been reported, suggesting that different kinds of
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) wave and oscillation are ubiquitous in the solar atmosphere (e.g., I. De Moortel et al.
2002a,b; V. M. Nakariakov & E. Verwichte 2005; V. Kukhianidze et al. 2006; T. J. Okamoto et al. 2007; B. De Pontieu
et al. 2007; T. V. Zaqarashvili et al. 2007; M. Goossens et al. 2011; D. B. Jess et al. 2023, and references cited therein).
According to theoretical studies, in the uniform medium the fast, slow magnetoacoustic waves and Alfv´ en waves are
distinct in nature (e.g., L. J. Porter et al. 1994; J. P. Goedbloed et al. 2010), but their mutual correlation is important
in the complex inhomogeneous solar atmosphere (e.g., A. N. Wright 1991). Through imaging, it is difficult to detect
the Alfv´ en waves, but changes in the Doppler shifts allow observation of torsional Alfv´ en wave velocity fluctuations
(e.g., T. V. Zaqarashvili 2003).
If we observationally manifest the presence of fast magnetoacoustic waves into the solar corona, large-scale coronal
EUV waves have been observed by the Extreme-ulraviolet Imaging Telescope (EIT) onboard SOHO (e.g., D. Moses
et al. 1997; B. J. Thompson et al. 1998). They are detected as the bright moving fronts in EUV and soft X-ray images,
Email: asrivastava.app@itbhu.ac.in, yuanding@hit.edu.cn, rkwon@kasi.re.kr
arXiv:2606.06082v1  [astro-ph.SR]  4 Jun 2026

2
with speeds mostly between 200−400 km s −1, but events with 1000 km s−1 have also been observed (e.g., A. Warmuth
& G. Mann 2011; N. V. Nitta et al. 2013; N. Muhr et al. 2014). They are generally interpreted as large-amplitude or
shocked fast magnetoacoustic waves that propagate through the corona, as a response to the impulsive energy release
and mass motion during flare/CME events (e.g., A. Warmuth 2015; D. M. Long et al. 2017). The compression of the
plasma at the coronal base and transition region, due to the pressure pulse exerted by the passing waves, causes the
enhanced emission front observed in EUV and soft X-ray images. Because fast magnetoacoustic waves can propagate
in all directions through the corona, they may appear in EUV images as an expanding three-dimensional dome (e.g.,
A. M. Veronig et al. 2010), while their outer-coronal counterpart is also observed in the coronagraphs as a propagating
white-light disturbance across coronal structures and sometime observed as the halo front of CMEs (e.g., R.-Y. Kwon
et al. 2013, 2014, 2015). When the coronal wave is shocked, it also disturbs the denser chromosphere, producing the
so-called Moreton waves observed in theH α spectral line (e.g., G. E. Moreton & H. E. Ramsey 1960; Y. Uchida 1968).
Recently, the quasi-periodic fast wave trains were also seen propagating outward from the flaring regions in the solar
corona (e.g., L. Ofman & W. Liu 2018; T. Wang et al. 2026). There are possibilities that such fast magnetoacoustic
perturbations can interact with the inhomogeneities of the coronal magnetic fields (e.g., nulls, QSLs etc) to further
lead the reconnection generated plasma dynamics and heating (A. K. Srivastava et al. 2025).
In particular, a magnetic null is a singular point in the solar atmosphere, where the magnetic induction becomes
zero (| ⃗B| ≈0). Both potential and non-potential field extrapolations of the photospheric magnetic field provide us
with the existence of numerous magnetic nulls in the solar corona, and their properties have been analyzed by D. S.
Brown & E. R. Priest (2001). The distribution of null points is different in the different layers of the Sun, and their
distribution depends on the complexity of the magnetic topology (e.g., J. A. McLaughlin et al. 2010). Using potential
field extrapolation from MDI magnetograms, approximately 1.7×10 −3 Mm−2 null points have been calculated by
R. M. Close et al. (2004). Many dynamical processes have been found to be centered around these magnetic null points,
such as magnetic reconnection through the collapse of the null by an external EUV wave like velocity perturbation
(e.g., A. K. Srivastava et al. 2025). K. Murawski et al. (2011) showed that initial heating or cooling of the null points
after the nano-flares may lead to the generation of entropy modes, which can be observed in the corona. Another
model by S. Mondal et al. (2025b) has shown the collapse of the null point by boundary motion and the propagation
of fast magnetoacoustic waves through the generation of sausage oscillations of the current sheet. Thus, waves and
nulls may dynamically interact with each other, and MHD waves near the magnetic null points can be associated with
a variety of physical processes in the coronal plasma.
The interaction of MHD waves with a magnetic null can generate different physical processes, such as mode conver-
sion, mode coupling, etc. When a fast magnetoacoustic wave approaches a magnetic null due to the spatial Alfv´ en-speed
gradient, mode conversion between fast, slow, and Alfv´ enic perturbations may occur in the vicinity of theβ= 1 layer
(e.g., T. V. Zaqarashvili & B. Roberts 2006; J. A. McLaughlin et al. 2010), such that:
β= 2
γ
c2
s
c2
A
(1)
Here,γrepresents the adiabatic index with value 5/3, whilec s,c A are the sound and Alfv´ en speed, respectively. At
β= 1,c s is nearly equal toc A in the equipartition layer. A series of studies have been performed on MHD waves near
2D and 3D magnetic null points withβ= 0 regime (e.g., J. A. McLaughlin & A. W. Hood 2004, 2005, 2006; J. A.
McLaughlin et al. 2008). Those papers mainly focus on the accumulation of linear MHD waves near the null region
and distinct properties of the different wave modes. In continuation, through the stratified atmosphere, the generation
of a high frequency slow mode wave from the fast magnetoacoustic wave at the null inβ̸= 0 regime is shown in the
numerical model given by I. C. Santamaria et al. (2017). Recently, P. Kumar et al. (2024) has provided observational
evidence of the fast to slow mode conversion through a coronal 3D null using data from SDO/AIA. Also, the analytical
description by P. S. Cally (2011) has suggested that mode conversion from fast to Alfv´ en mode in magnetic regions of
the solar atmosphere is possible at and beyond the fast wave reflection height, whereω=c Ak. Though, at the null
point, Alfv´ en waves cannot be crossed, but nonlinear Alfv´ en perturbations can generate longitudinal and transverse
velocity perturbations due to the ponderomotive force (e.g., J. O. Thurgood & J. A. McLaughlin 2013).
As we know, whatever the source of the waves (e.g., photospheric drivers,in-situgeneration, mode conversion, etc),
these MHD candidates are one of the major energy sources, thereby transporting energy in the atmosphere of the sun
(e.g., I. Arregui 2015; A. K. Srivastava et al. 2021). The energetics of fast mode waves and the energy distribution to
slow mode near the coronal null under a stratified atmosphere have been modeled by L. A. Tarr et al. (2017). The fast

3
and slow magnetoacoustic waves may easily dissipate in the lower corona, while Alfv´ en waves carry energy further to
the higher corona and may facilitate heating (e.g., D. G. Wentzel 1974). Due to the inhomogeneous magnetic topology
viaresonant absorption, phase mixing, nonlinear wave-wave interactions, the dissipation of Alfv´ en waves may occur
in the upper solar corona to sustain the high temperature overcoming thermal conductive and radiative losses (e.g.,
M. Goossens & A. De Groof 2001; L. Del Zanna & M. Velli 2002; T. V. Zaqarashvili & B. Roberts 2002). When the
amplitude of Alfv´ en waves becomes nonlinear, they drive magneto-sonic waves (e.g., V. M. Nakariakov et al. 1997;
T. V. Zaqarashvili et al. 2006) and dissipate faster in the solar corona and coronal holes. The attenuation of Alfv´ en
waves also depends on the straight and curved magnetic field geometries, where the dissipation rate of Alfv´ en waves
may be more dominant on the curved magnetic field lines compared to their straighter portion (e.g., M. Gruszecki
et al. 2007).
In the present work, through the interaction with the null region, we have concentrated on comprehending the mode
conversion process from fast to Alfv´ en wave packets (e.g., T. V. Zaqarashvili & B. Roberts 2002). The goal of this paper
is to understand how the magnetic null contributes to the generation of Alfv´ en wave packet. In addition, we address
the energy flux of the Alfv´ en wave packet at different points on the separatrix and the cause behind the dissipation of
the Alfv´ en wave packet near the null point on the curved parts of the magnetic field. The initial perturbation coming
towards the model coronal null is similar to the fast magnetoacoustic wave. A portion of it is trapped within the
deformed null, which further facilitates the mode conversion and generation of the Alfv´ en wave packet propagating
in the large scale solar corona away from the null region. We organize our paper in the following way: a detailed
description of the model and non-ideal MHD equations is given in the Numerical Setup and Methods (Sect. 2), all the
analysis is covered in the Result section (Sect. 3) following the Discussion and Conclusion in the Sect. 4.
2.NUMERICAL SETUP AND METHODS
We have used the open source ’Message Passing Interface-Adaptive Mesh Refinement-Versatile Advection Code (MPI-
AMRVAC)’ to perform our numerical experiment (e.g., R. Keppens et al. 2012; O. Porth et al. 2014; C. Xia et al. 2018;
R. Keppens et al. 2023; Y. Zhou et al. 2024). Throughout the simulation, we have included fully ionized hydrogen
plasma to mimic the lower corona of the Sun. In our model, we simulate the interaction of fast magnetoacoustic wave-
like perturbations with the magnetic singularities to investigate the physical processes occurring near the magnetic
null.
The spatial dimensions of our simulation domain in thex- andy- directions are, respectively, 700 Mm and 200 Mm
(x= [-600, 100 Mm];y=[0 Mm, 200 Mm]). The duration of the simulation time is 1025 s with a temporal cadence of
5.15 s. The grid spacings at the coarse level in thexandydirections are 3.125 Mm and 1.563 Mm, respectively. The
effective maximum resolution is 3584×2048 grid points after the fourth order refinement with the grid-spacings being,
approximately 195 km and 98 km in thexandydirection, respectively.
To study the physical dynamics of the system, we have solved the non-ideal basic MHD equations numerically. For
performing temporal integrations, we used two step methods, and to find flux at the cell surface, we have followed the
Harten-Lax vanLeer (HLL) scheme (A. Harten 1997). The utilized MHD equations are given as:
∂ρ
∂t +∇ ·(ρ⃗ v) = 0 (2)
∂ ⃗B
∂t + ⃗∇ ·(⃗ v⃗B− ⃗B⃗ v) +⃗∇ ×(η ⃗J) = 0 (3)
∂
∂t (ρ⃗ v) +∇ ·[ρ⃗ v⃗ v+ (p+⃗B2/2)⃗I−
⃗B ⃗B
4π ] = 0 (4)
∂e
∂t + ⃗∇ ·[e⃗ v+ (p+ ⃗B2/2)⃗ v−
⃗B ⃗B
4π ·⃗ v] =η⃗J 2 − ⃗B· ⃗∇ ×(η ⃗J) + ⃗∇ ·⃗ q+Lrad (5)
where,
e= p
γ−1 + ρv2
2 + B2
8π (6)
⃗∇ · ⃗B= 0, ⃗J= ⃗∇ × ⃗B.(7)
Here,ρ,p, ⃗B,⃗ v,ηand ⃗Jare plasma mass density, plasma pressure, magnetic field, velocity, magnetic diffusivity
and current density, respectively. The heat flux vector (⃗ q) isκ || ⃗∇||T, whereκ || is thermal conduction tensor along

4
the magnetic field. In addition, radiative cooling (L rad) is taken into account for our simulation. As usual,eis the
total energy density comprised of internal, kinetic, and magnetic energy densities, respectively. For the hydrogen
plasma system, we have considered the adiabatic exponentγ= 5/3. The abundance ratio of hydrogen and helium
for our model is 10:1, for which the corresponding densityρ= 1.4m pnH withm p,n H being the proton mass and
the number density, respectively. The initial uniform temperature and density of our system are set as 10 6 K and
2.34×10 −15 g cm −3. Gravity is not taken into account for our localized coronal dynamics. The normalization values
for number density, length, time, temperature, mass density, pressure, magnetic field, velocity, and current density
are, respectively,n ∗ = 10 9 cm−3,L ∗ = 10 9 cm,t ∗ = 85.87 s,T ∗ = 10 6 K,ρ ∗ = 1.4n ∗mp = 2.34×10 −15 g cm −3,
P ∗ = 2.3n∗kBT ∗ = 0.3174 dyne cm −2,B ∗ =
√
4πP ∗ = 2 G,V ∗ =B ∗/√4πρ∗ = 116 km s −1 andJ ∗ =B ∗c/
√
4πL∗ =
4.77 statA cm −2.
In addition, we have included thermal conductionκ || = 10−6T
5
2 erg cm −1 s−1 K−1 (L. Spitzer 1962) parallel to the
magnetic field, which helps to distribute thermal energy along the field, while perpendicular conduction is ignored.
We adopted uniform magnetic diffusivity throughout the simulation domain with a normalized value ofη= 2×10 −4,
which corresponds to the physical value ofη= 2.33×10 12 cm2 s−1 (S. Mondal et al. 2024). We do not consider any
current-dependent enhancement of the resistivity. Therefore, the initial uniform magnetic diffusivity is applicable for
the entire duration of the simulation. Radiative cooling helps to balance the energy of the coronal abundances. For
our model, we used the ‘Dere’ radiative loss function (K. P. Dere et al. 2009), for which,
Lrad ∝
Z
nenH dV .(8)
To mimic the dynamics of the large scale corona, we used continuous boundary condition for the top, right, and left
boundaries, such that the normal derivatives of all the physical variables are zero at the boundary, and second order
extrapolation of magnetic field has been used across the boundary. The pressure and density are kept fixed to their
respective initial conditions and all velocity components are kept zero at the bottom boundary. In addition,B x and
Bz are symmetric at the bottom boundary andB y kept fixed with the initial value. No background and localized
heating has been included in our simulation. In addition, the initial current-free bipolar 2.5-dimensional magnetic field
topology (see, e.g., P. Syntelis & E. R. Priest 2020; S. Mondal et al. 2025b) is given below,
Bx(x, y) =B 0 + F
π
 x−x 0
(x−x 0)2 + (y−y 0)2 − x+x 0
(x+x 0)2 + (y−y 0)2

(9)
By(x, y) = F(y−y 0)
π
 (x+x 0)2
(x−x 0)2 + (y−y 0)2 − (x−x 0)2
(x+x 0)2 + (y−y 0)2

(10)
Bz = 0.5B∗ (11)
Here,F= 2×10 12 G cm, is the flux strength andB 0 = 12 G the uniform horizontal magnetic field along thex
direction. The two poles are located atx= 5 Mm andx=−5 Mm (i.e,x 0 = 5 Mm) in a depth of 20 Mm (i.e,
y0 =−20 Mm) from the bottom boundary of the simulation box. In addition, the invariant guide field strength (B z)
is initially set to 1 G throughout the simulation domain.
In the model solar corona, initialv y pulse further generates large-scale fast waves. To mimic such fast wave per-
turbation, a spatial Gaussian velocity pulse has been imposed in they-direction at initial time, such that (S. Mondal
et al. 2024),
vy(x, y, t= 0 s) =v 0 exp

−(x−x s)2
w2x
− (y−y s)2
w2y

(12)
Here, (xs, ys) = (25,0) Mm is the location of the implemented velocity pulse andv 0 = 30V ∗ is the velocity amplitude
att= 0 s initially. The pulse is implemented att= 0 s, and is not Gaussian in time. It is a delta-like time dependence,
i.e., non-zero only at the initial time. Although the initial velocity amplitude is large at the epicenter, but when it
reaches near the null, the amplitude becomes 60 km s −1, which is in agreement with observations (e.g., Y. Shen & Y.
Liu 2012; G. Mann et al. 2023). We used a Gaussian velocity pulse that mimics the generation of fast magnetoacoustic
waves with a propagation speed around 600 km s −1 moving in the ambient solar corona. Our motivation is to examine
what the physical processes that undergo near the magnetic null when a fast magnetoacoustic perturbations related
to the wave are incident on it. The amplitude 3480 km s −1 is the initial number taken in the numerical experiment
that assumes a gigantic blast at the epicenter of the flare-like energy release. We assume a virtual source region

5
Figure 1.The density map att= 26 s is shown with bipolar magnetic field topology over plotted as cyan streamlines.
The yellow dashed box is the region of interest for our further analysis and the black contour is aβ= 1 region. The fast
magnetoacoustic wave-like perturbations is evident in the bottom-right part moving towards the null region. An animation of
real time duration 10 s showing the entire dynamics in density from 0 to 1025 s is available in the online version.
where energetic transient activity might source and generate these perturbations. We admit that the initially taken
number for the amplitude in the numerical experiment is large locally in the corona, however, it decays very quickly
to reach a reasonable value while propagating in the corona (see Appendix also). In principle, we are interested only
in the evolution of the velocity pulseakinof the fast magnetoacoustic waves reaching 54 Mm away from the source (or
epicenter) of the disturbances towards the null region where its amplitude becomes 60 km s −1 in the vicinity of the
null region, which is comparable with the observed magnetoacoustic perturbations in the solar corona (e.g., G. Mann
et al. 2023). We have analyzed the profile of the velocity driver prior interaction with the magnetic null and added
the details of the analysis in the Appendix section. The velocity amplitude of the driver becomes 0.7c A (60 km s −1)
at the time of interaction with the null patch, which is a reasonable value of the wave amplitude for the solar corona.
It should be noted that the local Alfv´ en speed (c A) is also decreasing, and theV/c A values vary spatially while the
fast wave is reaching to the null region in the solar corona (refer to the Appendix and its Figure).
We used a single Gaussian spatially dependent velocity pulse att= 0 s on one leg of the bipolar magnetic topology
(see Figure 1). This pulse evolves spatially as a fast-mode wave and is focused towards the magnetic null due to the
Alfv´ en speed gradient. Also, the speed of the fast magnetoacoustic wave front depends on the typical coronal plasma
conditions and magnetic field value. The spatial widths of the pulse in thexandydirections arew x = 8 Mm and
wy = 5 Mm, respectively. This perturbation gives the response to density and thus perturbing intensity subsequently.
Also, from the initial stage a perturbation in the normal component of the velocity (v z) has been generated due to the
change of theB z components which then generates a Lorentz force. The fast magnetic-acoustic perturbations consist
of the resultant perturbations in all the velocity components (v total
xy andv z) and also in density (thus also in intensity).
On the other hand, pure Alfv´ enic perturbations are truly incompressible, resulting in perturbations in thev z velocity
andB z field.
In Figure 1, we have shown the density (map) with bipolar magnetic field lines att= 26 s and the temporal evolution
animation of the density from 0 to 1025 s is available online. The initial perturbation in density is visible at one leg of
the bipolar structure and is propagating towards the localized magnetic null, represented as theβ= 1 black contour.
The yellow dashed box is the region where the Alfv´ en and fast modes are later disentangled. We have also used a
uniform guide field (B z) as 1 G in the positivez-direction throughout the simulation region. At the null region, the
magnetic field strength is negligible, but at theβ= 1 regionB x andB y are not zero, instead they have a comparable
value to make the plasma pressure equal to the magnetic pressure. The details of the result are presented in Sect. 3.

6
Figure 2.First, second and third columns arev total
xy (planar velocity), AIA 193 synthesized Intensity, andv z (out-of-plane
velocity) map att= 103 s,237 s,294 s,376 s and 701 s, respectively. Att= 103 s, the velocity pulse is incident on the
null region (black contour) and further deformed it, which is visible inv total
xy , synthesized AIA 193 running difference andv z
maps. In thev z map att= 237 s and 294 s, an Alfv´ en wave packet is also seen to be generated through theβ= 1 layer,
whereasv total
xy and the AIA 193 intensity signal demonstrate the propagation of refracted and newly generated (red arrow) fast
magnetoacoustic wave fronts. The independent and distinct propagation of a fast wavefront and Alfv´ en wave packet is seen in
the map att= 376 s andt= 701 s. The field-aligned plasma flow is also evident inv total
xy and synthesized AIA 193 running
difference images surging behind the Alfv´ enic perturbations along the left side separatrix field lines due to non-linear effects.
An animation ofv total
xy , AIA 193 running difference andv z from 0 to 1025 s are available in the online version. The real time
duration of the animation is 10 s.

7
Figure 3.First column is the map of total planar Lorentz force (L total
xy ) plus the plasma pressure gradient force (−∇P) at
t= 103 s,237 s,294 s,376 s and 701 s, respectively. The signal in the planar Lorentz force has been observed for the fast
wavefront propagation, but no detectable signal is present in conjunction with the generation ofv z fluctuations. Also, the
magnitude of plasma pressure gradient force maps in the middle column shows the effect very near to the null point for the
generation of plasma flow just behind the Alfv´ enic fluctuations. The last columns represents the evolution of the magnetic
tension (Ltension
z ) part associated with the Alfv´ en wave packet. The evolution of all the force components from 0 to 1025 s are
available online as an animation with real time duration 10 s.

8
Figure 4.From left to right:v total
xy ,v z and compressibility ( ⃗∇ ·⃗ v) on the x-y plane for four time steps. The yellow and blue
contour represent the fast magnetoacoustic and Alfv´ en part, respectively to distinguishvtotal
xy andv z components of the velocity.
The associated velocity amplitude range of the contour has been taken 30 km s −1 to 35 km s −1. The FOV of all the panel
shown here is equivalent to the yellow dotted box shown in Figure 3 with dimension [X,Y]=[(-70 Mm to -10 Mm), (60 Mm to
110 Mm)]. An animation of the above variables from 0 to 1025 s are available in the online version with real time duration 10 s.

9
3.RESULTS
After checking the stability of our simulation without any perturbations, a Gaussian velocity pulse was implemented
below theβ= 1 layer at one leg of the magnetic topology. The pulse evolves spatially and temporally and generates
propagating fast magnetoacoustic waves, undergoes interaction with the null region, and possible mode conversion
from fast to Alfv´ en mode occurs through the vicinity of the equi-partition (c s =c A) layer. To examine the possible
mode conversion from fast to Alfv´ en (basically, quasi-Alfv´ en packet due to the nonzero guide field), we discuss the
evolution of different plasma and magnetic properties in the following sub-sections.
3.1.Temporal evolution of planar velocity (v total
xy ), AIA 193 synthesized intensity and normal velocity component (v z)
Figure 2 and corresponding animation shows the temporal evolution ofv total
xy (
q
v2x +v 2y) (left column), the running
difference of the synthesized AIA 193 intensity images (middle column), and the map ofv z (right column). When a
velocity pulse similar to a fast wavefront is implemented for its evolution at the bottom boundary of the simulation
box, it starts to propagate towards the magnetic null due to the spatial gradient of the Alfv´ en speed. Att= 103 s, it
shows that some parts of thev total
xy component are trapped at the null region while the others are refracted to the left
side of the null, which are also visible in the synthesized AIA 193 intensity, andv z map.
It should be noted that fast magnetoacoustic wave-like perturbations possess bothv total
xy andv z. We provide the
Gaussian velocity perturbation initially in they-direction, which later evolves as a fast mode front. But when it
propagates, it must perturb theB z, through whichv z arose. When it interacts with the null it can not cross the null,
however, from the vicinity of the equipartition layer newv z fluctuations have formed, which then propagate as an
Alfv´ en wave packet. So, initially thevz perturbations arise due to the effect of the fast mode perturbation. However,
later along the separatrix field lines, only the true incompressible,v z fluctuations related to the Alfv´ en wave packet is
formed and seen propagating. The details of this process is illustrated in forthcoming paragraphs below.
As stated above, after the interaction, the null gets deformed and some part of the front bends and propagates
independently from the top of the separatrix towards the left side of the null region. However, att= 237 s and
294 s, thev z maps depict that a fluctuation inv z has generated from the vicinity of the equi-partition layer (c s =c A,
black contour) and propagated along the magnetic field with Alfv´ enic speed around 730 km s −1 to 760 km s −1 (see
sub-section 3.4). On the other hand, att= 294 s, a collimated non-periodic plasma flow is left behind the fluctuations
vz, which is generated due to the planar Lorentz force (L total
xy ) and the plasma pressure gradient force (see Figure 3) in
the neighborhood of theβ= 1 layer. So, those generated longitudinal components do not represent the slow mode, and
they are the response of the magnetic field perturbation known as an effect of Ponderomotive force (J. O. Thurgood
& J. A. McLaughlin 2013).
The amplitude of thev z fluctuation in form of the Alfv´ en wave packet is very high near theβ= 1 contour, through
which another magnetoacoustic front is generated. This front carried some parts of the energy of the Alfv´ en wave
packets to the ambient atmosphere in the upward direction, which is represented by red arrows in the running difference
AIA 193 images at 294 s and in agreement with the study of V. M. Nakariakov et al. (1997), for the driving of the
higher amplitude magneto-sonic waves due to the nonlinear Alfv´ en waves. Att= 376 s and 701 s, thev z maps depict
the independent propagation of the Alfv´ en packet along the magnetic field lines, which is not visible on thev total
xy and
AIA 193 intensity maps. So, our representation of the generation of the Alfv´ en packet from the null due to the external
perturbation follows the theoretical argument for the velocity perturbations (vz). While, the fast mode is accompanied
with the intensity fluctuations as seen in the synthetic AIA images, as well as inv total
xy . In the next section, we will
show the physical significance of the different components of the Lorentz force and the plasma pressure gradient force
for the generation of the wave modes.
3.2.Lorentz force and plasma pressure force during the generation of different wave modes
In magneto-plasma systems, the Lorentz force plays an important role for the generation of the different wave modes.
For our 2.5D system,L total
xy is the total Lorentz force or the planar force on the X-Y plane and the normal direction
(invariant direction) is only associated with the magnetic tension force (L tension
z ), while ⃗∇Pis the plasma pressure
gradient force (see Figure 3 and associated animation). So, here
|Ltotal
xy |=
q
(JyBz −J zBy)2 + (JzBx −J xBz)2, L tension
z = (JxBy −J yBx),| ⃗∇P|=
p
(∂P/∂x) 2 + (∂P/∂y) 2 (13)

10
Figure 3 demonstrates that att= 103 s, the magnitude of the total force is (|L total
xy − ⃗∇P|), where ⃗∇Pis significant
in the null region due to the incidence of the fast magnetoacoustic wave, but the magnetic tension also has some parts
within the null point due to the spatial change ofB x andB y along the magnetic field. Later, outside the deformed null
region,L tension
z is responsible for the generation of fluctuations in thev z component of the velocity. In the vicinity
of theβ= 1 layer, the mode conversion from fast to Alfv´ en wave takes place, and all force components are separated
corresponding to the different modes. At,t= 237 s,294 s,376 s and 701 s, the planar component of force and the
plasma pressure force only drive the fast mode and plasma flow through the null region, respectively. However, the
magnetic tension component drives the Alfv´ en wave packet along the magnetic field lines. So, all the maps represent
significant contributions of all the force components for the generation of different MHD wave modes. Next, we will
describe the wave dynamics in the surroundings of the deformed null region, where the possible detachment of different
wave modes occurred.
3.3.Separation of different propagating modes from high to low plasma beta
In this section, we demonstrate the behavior ofv total
xy ,v z and ⃗∇ ·⃗ v(see Figure 4 and its animation) between the
yellow dashed box-region shown in Figure 3. Here, the yellow contour corresponds to thev total
xy component and the
blue contour represents thev z component with the velocity amplitude ranging between 30 km s −1 and 35 km s −1.
CASE-I(t= 165 s): On the mapv total
xy , one can see that some parts are trapped in the null region and others part
bends and crosses the null region and propagates independently. In addition, thev z signal seen to generate from the
equi-partition layer and compressibility has a significant value near the equi-partition layer. So, initially, it is very
difficult to separate all the signals in a distinguished manner.
CASE-II(t= 201 s,258 s and 278 s): Now as time progresses, thev total
xy signal propagates from the high beta to
low beta medium as a fast wave (yellow dotted arrows). However, thev z signal propagates just behind it (see blue
arrows), whereas the collimated plasma flow stays behind these two candidates. Another magnetoacoustic front has
been generated due to the nonlinearv z near to theβ= 1 layer, which is represented by red arrows in thev total
xy and
⃗∇ ·⃗ vmaps att= 201 s and 258 s. This is the secondary fast mode wave front generated due to non-linear effects.
From here, at later times, the generated Alfv´ en perturbations accelerate along the magnetic field due to the higher
Alfv´ en speed, and all modes are separated and distinguishable at some distance from very close to the null region.
Also, the independently propagating fast wavefront is dissipating in the medium, but the Alfv´ en wave is propagating
to very far-reaching regions in the solar corona. So, we conclude that the mode conversion is happening through the
vicinity of the equi-partition layer and that the planar velocity and compressibility are showing a significant signal for
the magnetoacoustic mode and plasma flows. On the other hand, thev z signal only represents the Alfv´ en mode.
We must note that it is very difficult to separatev z andv total
xy near the null point initially, because they both are
generated simultaneously and Alfv´ en packets accelerate further due to the higher Alfv´ en speed in the low plasma beta
region. Thev total
xy arises due to the dominant plasma pressure and magnetic force near the null region, as shown in
Figure 3. We know that in the null region the acoustic nature is dominated and this quasi-stationary plasma flow is
driven due to the effect of the plasma pressure gradient ( ⃗∇P) force and the planar Lorentz force (L total
xy =| ⃗J× ⃗B|xy),
which we have depicted in Figure 3. As the flow is generated from the vicinity of the null region, the plasma pressure
gradient force is dominated over the Lorentz force and the flow velocity is field aligned along the separatrix on the
xy-plane. Also, the field aligned collimated plasma flows are essentially not the entropy mode as they are propagating
away from the null region, although with a lesser speed. It is also not a slow mode because there are no periodic
longitudinal perturbations observed (see Figure 4). In addition, now we will analyze the properties of the evolved
Alfv´ en wave packet in sub-section 3.4.
3.4.Properties of Alfv´ en wave packet along the separatrix
In Figure 5, we have analyzed the properties of the Alfv´ en wave packet along the separatrix magnetic field lines
extending smoothly into the large-scale corona. To do this analysis, we introduced a curve slitS 3 (black dotted line)
along the propagation direction of the wave packet, which is visible in thev z map, with the starting point of the slit
taken from theβ= 1 layer. As the guide field (B z) is non zero throughout the simulation, the fluctuations inB z
is represented by ∆b z = (B z −0.5)B ∗. The time distance profile ofv z and ∆b z alongS 3 is in the same phase and
shows a uniform periodic propagation. Also, the propagation speed of the crest and trough of the Alfv´ en wave packet
in response tov z and ∆b z is 730 km s −1 to 760 km s −1, respectively (see Figure 5(A) and (B)). The propagation
speed of the packets is Alfv´ enic in nature. Now, different positions like ’a (yellow)’, ’b (blue)’, ’c (green)’, ’d (red)’,

11
(A) (B)
(C) (D)
Figure 5.The left panel shows thev z map att= 701 s with a curved slitS 3, starting from right to left along the path of
the propagating Alfv´ en wave packet. The independent points a (yellow), b (blue), c (green), d (red), e (magenta), f (cyan), g
(orange), h (purple) and i (gray) have been taken on theS 3 to understand the properties ofv z at different locations. Panel
(A) and (B) are time-distance profiles ofv z and ∆b z = (Bz −0.5)B ∗ alongS 3 and all the horizontal dotted line representing
independent positions onS 3 (the line colors kept same as the color of chosen points). Panel (C) and (D) represent the temporal
profile ofv z and ∆b z at those points and bothv z and ∆b z are in the same phase and in agreement with the properties of the
Alfv´ en waves.
Figure 6.Left panel: Zoomed region of the plasma beta map with range 0 to 1 att= 283 s. The black solid contour isβ= 1
layer, whereas the black dotted curved slit (S 2) is taken from bottom right to top left through the null region. Middle panel:
time distance profile with embeddedβ= 1 layer ofv z alongS 2. Through the equipartition layer the periodic fluctuations are
seen to generate and propagate along the separatrix. Right panel: time distance profile of the planar velocity (v total
xy ) alongS 2.
No periodic fluctuations are observed inv total
xy but a flow of plasma is seen surging just behind thev z signal.

12
’e (magenta)’, ’f (cyan)’, ’g (orange)’, ’h (purple)’ and ’i (gray)’ onS 3 have been considered and these locations
are depicted as dotted horizontal lines in the time-distance map to find out the profile ofv z and ∆b z. In addition,
Figure 5(C) and (D) represent the temporal evolution ofv z and ∆bz at those fixed locations and at each point periodic
perturbations propagate with the same periodicity. The amplitude ofv z is decreasing, at those points that exist on
the curve magnetic field and the Alfv´ en packets propagate with uniform amplitude along the horizontal magnetic field
without any kind of dissipation. This findings is in agreement with the study by M. Gruszecki et al. (2007), that the
dissipation of the Alfv´ en wave is more prominent in the curved magnetic tube compared to the linear magnetic tube.
In summary, we can say that the generated Alfv´ en wave packet from the null region shows dissipation (60 % of the
initial energy; see sub-section 3.6) at the curved magnetic field and propagate transversely with the Alfv´ enic speed to a
very far distance without any kind of dissipation along the horizontal magnetic field line. The cause of this dissipation
may be due to phase mixing for the Alfv´ en speed gradient across the separatrix of the curved magnetic field line. This
study requires a specific set-up and more detailed analyses keeping the scientific aspects of phase-mixing at central
place. In the next sub-section we will show that how the mode conversion was initiated through the null region.
3.5.Importance of magnetic null for the fast to Alfv´ en wave mode conversion
Magnetic null points or singularities exist at different layers of the Sun’s atmosphere and multiple studies suggested
that they can play an important role for different wave mode conversions. In Figure 6, we show how the null region
generates Alfv´ en mode from the fast mode incident on it. The first panel (left-most) of Figure 6 is the zoomed map
of theβregion with a limit from 0 to 1. The solid black line is the contourβ= 1, which deformed after interaction
with the fast wave. To understand the temporal behavior of the null, we implemented a curved slitS 2 (black dotted
line) from the bottom separatrix to the upper separatrix passing through the null intersecting it almost diagonally.
The middle panel is the time distance profile ofv z alongS 2 with aβ= 1 contour. The interesting thing is that the
area of the contour in the left-panel does not change with time, and it comes back to its original position after 1.5
oscillations. During this oscillation, the periodic fluctuations ofv z (red-blue-red pattern) have generated from the
vicinity of the equi-partition layer and propagate along the separatrix as an Alfv´ en wave packet. Within the null
region, belowβ= 1, this velocity component is accompanied by incident fast magnetoacoustic waves (along with the
planar velocity component), where it clearly shows the parabolic profile indicating deceleration and trapping partly.
Also, the oscillation period of theβ= 1 contour is nearly the same as the period of the Alfv´ en wave packet generated
and moving ahead above theβ= 1 region. Similarly, the third panel is the time-distance profile of the planar velocity
(vtotal
xy ) component, which represents the propagation of the magnetoacoustic mode within the null region as also
depicted above. As we can see, during the oscillation of theβ= 1 layer, no periodic perturbation has been generated
in the planar component of velocity through theβ= 1 layer, but a collimated flow of plasma is surging just behind the
vz signal due to the effect of the planar Lorentz force and the plasma pressure gradient force (see Figure 3). So, thev z
signal associated with Alfv´ en mode is completely independent with thev total
xy , during the propagation from the high
beta to the low beta plasma in the neighborhood corona. This means that, due to the presence of a guide field (B z),
the magnetic null plays a key role for the generation of Alfv´ en mode from the fast mode due to a mode conversion
process in the high beta null region. In continuation, next we will analyze the energetics of the Alfv´ en wave packet.
At this point, it is also important to describe the behavior of the plasma in the null region and surrounding as
established in our numerical model. The numerical resistivity is defined asη num ∝c Aδx, whereδxis the minimum
grid size achieved after the final level of AMR refinements. Given the large spatial domain of the Sun’s corona and
typical Alfv´ en speed (minimum 60 km s−1 at the null patch and 700 km s −1 in the nearby corona) based on typical
physical conditions, and achieving the best spatial resolution ofδx= 195 km after four level AMR refinements, we
reach the numerical resistivity in the range of 10 14 cm2 s−1 to 10 15 cm2 s−1. The range of such a spatial resolution
of a few hundred kilo-meter is typical for modeling the dynamics of the large scale corona (V. Liakh & R. Keppens
2025). The physical resistivity is 10 12 cm2 s−1 in the given frame-work, which further demonstrates that the numerical
resistivity is dominant in the present case. Given all these conditions at work, the Lundquist number (S) of the system
is 3.6×10 3. Such a moderate values of the Lundquist number are also used in modelling the coronal X-point/Current-
sheet dynamics, and dissipative Alfv´ enic motions etc in various numerical models (e.g., L. Ofman & J. M. Davila 1995;
S. Sen & R. Keppens 2022, references cited therein). These physical conditions are able to generate the Alfv´ en wave
packets from the null region due to mode conversion and their propagation in the near by region. After the deformation
and oscillation of 1.5 cycle, the null patch and surroundings regions seize their oscillatory motions diffusing through
the plasma.

13
Figure 7.Temporal evolution of the wave energy flux (WEF) for the Alfv´ en wave packet at the different positions on the
slitS 3 (see Figure 5). Here, the dotted and solid line respectively correspond to kinetic and total energy (kinetic+magnetic)
associated with the WEF. At point ’a’ the packet has an energy flux of about 2140 W m −2, which then decreases gradually at
the different points due to the curved magnetic field. Thereafter it reaches a constant value of 860 W m −2 and propagates up
to very far distance along the horizontal field line.
3.6.Alfv´ en wave energy flux at different locations
In order to characterize the energy carried out by the Alfv´ en packet in the medium, we calculate the Wave Energy
Flux (WEF) at those fixed locations on the slitS 3 (see Figure 5). The WEF is defined as (e.g., B. De Pontieu et al.
2007; A. K. Srivastava et al. 2017),
W EF=
1
2 ρv2
z + (∆bz)2
8π

vA (14)
Here, the first and second terms are associated with the kinetic and magnetic part, respectively. Also,v z, ∆bz are the
perturbation of thev z andB z amplitude due to the propagation of the Alfv´ en packets andρ,v A are the background
plasma density and Alfv´ en phase speed (similar to localcA), respectively. When the Alfv´ en packets pass through the
separatrix, some parts of the nonlinear Alfv´ en wave energy is transferred to the magnetoacoustic wave, as a result
dissipation of some part of the energy flux has occurred on the curved magnetic field. In Figure 7, we show the temporal
evolution of the total energy (solid line) and kinetic energy (dotted line) associated with the WEF. At point ’a’, the
WEF of the packet is approximately 2140 W m −2 and then the energy starts to decrease due to the curved magnetic
field, and further energy remains constant to a value 860 W m −2 at the locations that exist on the horizontal field
lines. The fractional dissipation of the wave energy in the curved part of the magnetic field may be most likely due to
the phase-mixing process (P. Chmielewski et al. 2014), while rest of the energy remain in the propagating wave-packet.
This amount of energy suggests that the packet may be energetically significant for coronal energy transport to realize
coronal heating, solar wind acceleration, and compensation of radiative losses (G. L. Withbroe & R. W. Noyes 1977).

14
This means that, the Alfv´ en wave packet generated through mode conversion can carry a sufficient amount of energy
to a very far distance.
4.DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION
In this work, we present a comprehensive study on fast magnetoacoustic wave-like perturbations to Alfv´ en mode
conversion through a magnetic null point. Under 2.5D magnetic configuration and coronal plasma conditions, an initial
velocity perturbation in theydirection has been implemented, which then interacts with the null and undergoes a
possible mode conversion to Alfv´ en packet near to the equi-partition layer. The properties of the Alfv´ en wave packet
are as follows:
(i) Thev z signal is seen to propagate along the separatrix, while no corresponding signal in intensity and planar
velocity (v total
xy ) are evident (see Figure 2).
(ii) Bothv z and ∆bz perturbations associated with the Alfv´ en packet show a high spatial and temporal correlation
along the separatrix and are in phase throughout the motion along the magnetic field (see Figures 5(A) and (B)) (L.
Del Zanna & M. Velli 2002).
(iii) The propagation speed of the crest and trough that correspond to the Alfv´ en packet is in the range between
730 km s −1 and 760 km s −1, which is consistent with an Alfv´ enic interpretation and calculated from the time-distance
map ofv z alongS 3 (see Figure 5).
(iv) Planar projection w.r.t. the direction of the guide-fieldB z depicts the Alfv´ enic nature of these evolved transverse
wave-packets.
(v) Finally, these wave-packets contain the sufficient amount of energy to fulfill the radiative losses of the localized
solar corona.
Previously, numerous studies have been performed on different mode generation near the null point, such as I. C.
Santamaria et al. (2017); L. A. Tarr et al. (2017) shown fast to high frequency slow mode formation around the 2D null
point in the stratified model atmosphere. It was also shown that initial heating or cooling of the null points due to the
reconnection during nano-flares may lead to the generation of entropy modes which can be observed in the corona (K.
Murawski et al. 2011). N. Yadav et al. (2022) performed a 3D simulation on wave propagation near the magnetic null
and provided us with a new mode decomposition technique. Another 2D model gives insight that, under theβ= 0
condition, nonlinear Alfv´ en velocity perturbations can generate transverse velocity perturbations around the null due
to the effect of the ponderomotive force (J. O. Thurgood & J. A. McLaughlin 2013). A series of papers by T. V.
Zaqarashvili & B. Roberts (2002); P. S. Cally & M. Goossens (2008); P. S. Cally (2011); S. C. Hansen & P. S. Cally
(2012) has suggested, that Alfv´ en waves can easily be generated through mode conversion from a fast magnetoacoustic
wave at and beyond fast wave reflection height in the solar atmosphere. The Alfv´ en waves can be also generated near
β≈1 from slow magnetoacoustic waves through nonlinear wave-wave interaction (T. V. Zaqarashvili & B. Roberts
2006).
For our case, we tried to find out how null point plays an important role for fast magnetoacoustic pulse to Alfv´ en wave-
packet mode conversion. The Alfv´ en wave can easily travel from the photosphere to the corona with less dissipation, so
this wave acts as an energy source for many magneto-plasma processes, such as the acceleration of the solar wind (J. V.
Hollweg 1978; T. V. Zaqarashvili et al. 2006), acceleration of particles (Y. Voitenko & M. Goossens 2004) and many
more. In addition, fast magnetoacoustic waves in the form of large-scale EUV waves can be initiated by flare/CME
events (A. Warmuth 2015; D. M. Long et al. 2017), but these waves are not the major energy sources of the corona.
During propagation, these waves convert to the other wave modes due to the interaction with the magnetic singularities
(e.g., nulls, QSLs, etc). Further, the converted modes are able to carry energy and heat the solar corona under different
dissipation mechanisms. However, in the present work, an interesting physical condition became evident uniquely. The
fast magnetoacoustic wave-like perturbation in form of a Gaussian pulse mimicked the propagation of an externally
driven, EUV wave-like large-scale perturbations (R. Chandra et al. 2016; P. F. Chen et al. 2016). When it is incident
on a singularity (like a null region with a patch of high plasma beta) within the large scale corona with a guide field,
it gets partly trapped, partly refracted, and finally mode conversion takes place to generate an Alfv´ en wave packet.
The uniform guide field throughout the simulation only assists the evolved Alfv´ enic fluctuations through the mode
conversion. However, 2.5D simulation of external velocity driven reconnection in the coronal current sheet have also
been performed by S. Mondal et al. (2024, 2025a), which is not our case in the present work. Whereas, J. O. Thurgood
& J. A. McLaughlin (2013) used an ideal 2.5D system in their 2D magnetic null model, to perform the Alfv´ en to fast
wave generation from the vicinity of the magnetic null, as a contrary example.

15
In future more realistic 3D simulations are required to understand these fluctuations and their inter-conversion in
detailed manner. Definitely, the 2.5-D is a simpler set-up compared to full 3-D simulations, where null is a singular
patch lying in the X-Y plane instead of the null-ring or any other complex discontinuities that may present in 3D (e.g.,
D. S. Brown & E. R. Priest 2001; S. K. Solanki et al. 2003; P. D´ emoulin 2006; D. I. Pontin et al. 2013, references cited
therein). However, it is sufficient to have 2-D null patch and magnetic separatrices in the plane to understand the mode
conversion in the current set-up. Another simplification is that a fast wave has a planer projection of the Gaussian
envelope and almost circular patches propagating in the given plane, whereas in 3-D the wave would appear as spherical
or Gaussian dome-shaped fronts propagating up with different speed (e.g., L. Ofman 2009). Another point is that
visual magnetic field perturbations in form of complex, diverging, and twisted magnetic topologies could be realized in
the generated Alfv´ en waves as always in form of toroidal waves (e.g., J. O. Thurgood & J. A. McLaughlin 2013) rather
than the simple velocity and magnetic field perturbations only out-of-plane as estimated in 2.5-D simulations in the
form of true incompressible mode. Moreover, the different values of the energy fluxes will be present in various wave
modes considering the presence of the full 3 rd dimension (e.g., S. Sabri et al. 2022; N. Yadav et al. 2022, references
cited therein). These limitations in the current 2.5-D simulation do not hinder the clear physics of the fast to Alfv´ en
wave mode conversion and its finest details obtained in the current model. The full 3-D numerical modeling will be a
future objective by implementing various realistic magnetic discontinuities in place.
According to G. L. Withbroe & R. W. Noyes (1977), the total energy losses (conduction+radiation) in the quiet
region, coronal hole and active region in the corona are, approximately 300 W m −2, 70 W m −2 and 10 4 W m −2. D.
Banerjee et al. (2009), has calculated the WEF of the upward propagating Alfv´ en wave from the coronal polar region
approximately, 1850 W m −2, which may heat the corona and accelerate the solar wind. In addition, B. De Pontieu
et al. (2007) estimated that the Alfv´ enic energy flux in the chromosphere level is of the order of 4 to 7 kW m−2, which
is enough to heat the quiet corona and accelerate the solar wind. In our case, we have measured the WEF of the Alfv´ en
packet at each location in the direction of it’s propagation. Initially, the WEF at region ’a’ was 2140 W m −2, then the
energy dissipates on the curve magnetic field, but on the horizontal magnetic field the energy becomes non-dissipative
in nature and propagates up to a very far distance with value 860 W m −2 (see Figure 7). The dissipation of WEF is
greater on the curve magnetic field, which is in agreement with the study by M. Gruszecki et al. (2007). The initial
energy of the Alfv´ en wave packet was 2140 W m−2, which was more than sufficient to balance the radiative coronal
losses and heat it locally. Even after the dissipation of the energy and its reduction to the value of 860 W m −2,
the energy flux is enough to overcome the conductive and radiative energy loss in the corona and can heat the quiet
corona and accelerate the solar wind in coronal holes. If, those energy is responsible for the heating, then we need
to understand what are the energy dissipation mechanism which is present in the atmosphere?. From many decades
phase mixing (J. Heyvaerts & E. R. Priest 1983; J. Ireland & E. R. Priest 1997) and resonant absorption (J. A. Ionson
1978) have been believed to be the main energy dissipation mechanism of Alfv´ en waves. Moreover, the turbulent
dissipation of the Alfv´ en wave packets, particularly as investigated by N. Magyar et al. (2017, 2019) may also be a key
mechanism for the heating of the solar corona and the acceleration of the solar wind. These literature reported that
unidirectional Alfv´ en wave packets, traveling in the same direction, can generate turbulence and dissipate energy, even
without the presence of traditional counter-propagating waves, due to non-linear self-interaction across magnetic field
inhomogeneities. In our case, we do not consider any of these processes and these are a subject of our future study.
Here we have shown that the fast-mode front undergoes mode conversion in the null region to the Alfv´ en wave packet,
which is not a periodic and continuous Alfv´ en wave. The Alfv´ enic fluctuations related to the wave packet are only
flowing in a localized spatial domain through the separatrix along the magnetic field lines, so we have calculated the
point-wise ′W′ to understand the energy carried out by the Alfv´ en wave packet at different locations momentarily on
the separatrix. This is the reason why we have shown the point-wise energy distribution of the Alfv´ en wave packet so
that its contribution to transporting the packed energy within it to different spatial locations lying on the magnetic
separatrix of the localized corona could be estimated. Also, the point-wise ′W′ are in the order of 10 3 W m −2, and we
depict that the total energy of the packet will be in this range to compensate for losses in the localized solar corona.
We do not claim here that it will be sufficient to solve the global aspect of energy transport and subsequent heating of
the entire corona. However, recurrent Alfv´ en wave packets triggered above the null region due to mode conversion, if
dissipated, can produce the sufficient amount of energy to heat the solar corona locally (N. Magyar et al. 2017, 2019).
From the observation point of view, mode conversion from fast to slow magnetoacoustic wave at a coronal null point
has been demonstrated by P. Kumar et al. (2024). Alfv´ en waves are ubiquitously present in the solar atmosphere,
and they may be generated from mode conversion, but it is still very difficult to detect and visualize Alfv´ en waves

16
through mode conversion in the localized corona due to instrumental limitations. There are numerous nulls present
at different heights in the solar atmosphere including the corona, and EUV wave like perturbations are also present
in some or other forms sweeping out such random field corona with specific magnetic field topologies. Therefore,
such fast to Alfv´ en mode conversion and thein situgeneration of the Alfv´ en waves/packets are highly inevitable
processes. Numerically, we can easily distinguish the Alfv´ en signal and their generation should depend on the magnetic
singularities and topologically confined regions in the solar corona. Right now we have implemented non periodic
velocity perturbations, which evolve in time and interact with the magnetic null results in the generation of a single
Alfv´ en wave packet from the vicinity of equi-partition layer. In the future, we will perform the simulation with a
periodic velocity perturbation in time, and we expect that multiple Alfv´ en packets will be generated from the null
region, which will further carry the continuous momentum and energy from the null region and extend up to a very
large distance in the medium. We expect to observe this process and detection of associated dynamics through the
upcoming advance coronal spectrometers, like Multi-slit Solar Explorer (MUSE) (B. De Pontieu et al. 2022). MUSE
may be able to detect the existence of Alfv´ enic fluctuations in the vicinity of coronal nulls generatedviathis mode
conversion process, and capture the associated dynamics (S. Mondal et al. 2026).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Authors thank the reviewer for his/her valuable remarks that improved the manuscript. TVZ and FB were supported
by Austria-India collaboration project WTZ Indien IN 01/25. AKS, AB, and SM also acknowledge the support of
Indo-Austrian Project for this research. AB acknowledges the TA support from IIT (BHU). SM thanks the PMRF
fellowship and research grant for supporting his scientific research. D.Y. is supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC: 12473050), the Guangdong Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholars
(2023B1515020049), the Shenzhen Science and Technology Project (JCYJ20240813104805008), and the Specialized
Research Fund for the State Key Laboratory of Solar Activity and Space Weather. TVZ was also supported by the
Austrian Science Fund (FWF) project PAT7550024 and by Shota Rustaveli National Science Foundation of Georgia
(project FR-21-467). R.-Y.K. acknowledges support by basic research funding from the Korea Astronomy and Space
Science Institute (KASI; KASI2026185005).
APPENDIX
A.EVOLUTION OF THE FAST MAGNETOACOUSTIC PERTURBATIONS PRIOR INTERACTION WITH
THE MAGNETIC NULL
In Figure 8 we have shown the map ofv/c A (top left) along with a curved slitS 1 (red dotted line), started from
the one leg of the magnetic topology at the bottom boundary of the numerical domain for tracking the fast-mode
perturbation prior to its interaction with the null. Also, we have shown the background profile of the normalized
Alfv´ en speed (cA/V ∗) alongS 1 att= 0 s. The Alfv´ en speed profile is not uniform for our model, as it has high value
at the bottom layer of the numerical domain due to the higher magnetic field strength. However, as we go towards
the region of interest (i.e., null region) and surroundings of the null region, local Alfv´ en speed drops at each instance
(e.g., see top-right panel of Figure 8 fort= 0 s). Thev/c A profile alongS 1 is showing the amplitude of the fast-mode
perturbation normalized with the local Alfv´ en speed. During the evolution of the perturbation towards the magnetic
null, the amplitude of the fast-mode front at the time (57 s) of interaction with theβ= 1 layer is of the order of 0.7c A,
which is a reasonable wave amplitude value of 60 km s −1. Finally, the fast wave undergoes a mode conversion process
through the magnetic null region.

17
Figure 8.Top left panel isv/c A map of the fast magnetoacoustic perturbation att= 5 s and dotted red line represents a
curved slit chosen from bottom to top through the null region. The FOV of the zoomed region of the numerical domain is,
x= [−20 Mm,60 Mm],y= [0 Mm,80 Mm], respectively, and the black circular contour represent theβ= 1 layer. Top right
panel is the spatial variation of the normalized Alfv´ en speed (cA/V ∗) alongS 1 att= 0 s, and vertical blue dotted line represent
theβ= 1 layer on the path ofS 1. Bottom panel is the spatial characteristics of the ratio of magnetoacoustic perturbation
amplitude and local Alfv´ en speed (v/cA) on the slitS 1 att= 5 s,t= 26 s andt= 57 s, respectively.
REFERENCES
Arregui, I. 2015, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London Series A, 373, 20140261,
doi: 10.1098/rsta.2014.0261
Banerjee, D., P´ erez-Su´ arez, D., & Doyle, J. G. 2009, A&A,
501, L15, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200912242
Brown, D. S., & Priest, E. R. 2001, A&A, 367, 339,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20010016
Cally, P. S. 2011, in Astronomical Society of India
Conference Series, Vol. 2, Astronomical Society of India
Conference Series, 221–227
Cally, P. S., & Goossens, M. 2008, SoPh, 251, 251,
doi: 10.1007/s11207-007-9086-3
Chandra, R., Chen, P. F., Fulara, A., Srivastava, A. K., &
Uddin, W. 2016, ApJ, 822, 106,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/822/2/106
Chen, P. F., Fang, C., Chandra, R., & Srivastava, A. K.
2016, SoPh, 291, 3195, doi: 10.1007/s11207-016-0920-3
Chmielewski, P., Murawski, K., Musielak, Z. E., &
Srivastava, A. K. 2014, ApJ, 793, 43,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/793/1/43
Close, R. M., Parnell, C. E., & Priest, E. R. 2004, SoPh,
225, 21, doi: 10.1007/s11207-004-3259-0
De Moortel, I., Ireland, J., Hood, A. W., & Walsh, R. W.
2002a, A&A, 387, L13, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20020436
De Moortel, I., Ireland, J., Walsh, R. W., & Hood, A. W.
2002b, SoPh, 209, 61, doi: 10.1023/A:1020956421063
De Pontieu, B., McIntosh, S. W., Carlsson, M., et al. 2007,
Science, 318, 1574, doi: 10.1126/science.1151747
De Pontieu, B., Testa, P., Mart´ ınez-Sykora, J., et al. 2022,
ApJ, 926, 52, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac4222

18
Del Zanna, L., & Velli, M. 2002, Advances in Space
Research, 30, 471, doi: 10.1016/S0273-1177(02)00320-4
D´ emoulin, P. 2006, Advances in Space Research, 37, 1269,
doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2005.03.085
Dere, K. P., Landi, E., Young, P. R., et al. 2009, A&A, 498,
915, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200911712
Goedbloed, J. P., Keppens, R., & Poedts, S. 2010,
Advanced Magnetohydrodynamics
Goossens, M., & De Groof, A. 2001, Physics of Plasmas, 8,
2371, doi: 10.1063/1.1343090
Goossens, M., Erd´ elyi, R., & Ruderman, M. S. 2011, SSRv,
158, 289, doi: 10.1007/s11214-010-9702-7
Gruszecki, M., Murawski, K., Solanki, S. K., & Ofman, L.
2007, A&A, 469, 1117, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20066924
Hansen, S. C., & Cally, P. S. 2012, ApJ, 751, 31,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/751/1/31
Harten, A. 1997, Journal of Computational Physics, 135,
260, doi: 10.1006/jcph.1997.5713
Heyvaerts, J., & Priest, E. R. 1983, A&A, 117, 220
Hollweg, J. V. 1978, SoPh, 56, 305,
doi: 10.1007/BF00152474
Ionson, J. A. 1978, ApJ, 226, 650, doi: 10.1086/156648
Ireland, J., & Priest, E. R. 1997, SoPh, 173, 31,
doi: 10.1023/A:1004903128146
Jess, D. B., Jafarzadeh, S., Keys, P. H., et al. 2023, Living
Reviews in Solar Physics, 20, 1,
doi: 10.1007/s41116-022-00035-6
Keppens, R., Meliani, Z., van Marle, A. J., et al. 2012,
Journal of Computational Physics, 231, 718,
doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2011.01.020
Keppens, R., Popescu Braileanu, B., Zhou, Y., et al. 2023,
A&A, 673, A66, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245359
Kukhianidze, V., Zaqarashvili, T. V., & Khutsishvili, E.
2006, A&A, 449, L35, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:200600018
Kumar, P., Nakariakov, V. M., Karpen, J. T., & Cho, K.-S.
2024, Nature Communications, 15, 2667,
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-46736-4
Kwon, R.-Y., Ofman, L., Olmedo, O., et al. 2013, ApJ, 766,
55, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/766/1/55
Kwon, R.-Y., Zhang, J., & Olmedo, O. 2014, ApJ, 794, 148,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/794/2/148
Kwon, R.-Y., Zhang, J., & Vourlidas, A. 2015, ApJL, 799,
L29, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/799/2/L29
Liakh, V., & Keppens, R. 2025, A&A, 696, A158,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202453300
Long, D. M., Bloomfield, D. S., Chen, P. F., et al. 2017,
SoPh, 292, 7, doi: 10.1007/s11207-016-1030-y
Magyar, N., Van Doorsselaere, T., & Goossens, M. 2017,
Scientific Reports, 7, 14820,
doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13660-1
Magyar, N., Van Doorsselaere, T., & Goossens, M. 2019,
ApJ, 882, 50, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab357c
Mann, G., Warmuth, A., & ¨Onel, H. 2023, A&A, 675,
A129, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346378
McLaughlin, J. A., Ferguson, J. S. L., & Hood, A. W. 2008,
SoPh, 251, 563, doi: 10.1007/s11207-007-9107-2
McLaughlin, J. A., & Hood, A. W. 2004, A&A, 420, 1129,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20035900
McLaughlin, J. A., & Hood, A. W. 2005, A&A, 435, 313,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20042361
McLaughlin, J. A., & Hood, A. W. 2006, A&A, 452, 603,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20054575
McLaughlin, J. A., Hood, A. W., & De Moortel, I. 2010,
Space Science Reviews, 158, 205–236,
doi: 10.1007/s11214-010-9654-y
Mondal, S., Bairagi, A., & Srivastava, A. K. 2025a, ApJ,
979, 207, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ada1d6
Mondal, S., Srivastava, A., Bairagi, A., Martinez Sykora,
J., & De Pontieu, B. e. a. 2026, ApJL, 000, 00,
doi: inpreparation
Mondal, S., Srivastava, A. K., Pontin, D. I., & Priest, E. R.
2025b, ApJ, 989, 222, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adf18e
Mondal, S., Srivastava, A. K., Pontin, D. I., Yuan, D., &
Priest, E. R. 2024, ApJ, 963, 139,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad2079
Moreton, G. E., & Ramsey, H. E. 1960, PASP, 72, 357,
doi: 10.1086/127549
Moses, D., Clette, F., Delaboudini` ere, J.-P., et al. 1997,
SoPh, 175, 571, doi: 10.1023/A:1004902913117
Muhr, N., Veronig, A. M., Kienreich, I. W., et al. 2014,
SoPh, 289, 4563, doi: 10.1007/s11207-014-0594-7
Murawski, K., Zaqarashvili, T. V., & Nakariakov, V. M.
2011, A&A, 533, A18, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201116942
Nakariakov, V. M., Roberts, B., & Murawski, K. 1997,
SoPh, 175, 93, doi: 10.1023/A:1004965725929
Nakariakov, V. M., & Verwichte, E. 2005, Living Reviews
in Solar Physics, 2, 3, doi: 10.12942/lrsp-2005-3
Nitta, N. V., Schrijver, C. J., Title, A. M., & Liu, W. 2013,
ApJ, 776, 58, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/776/1/58
Ofman, L. 2009, SSRv, 149, 153,
doi: 10.1007/s11214-009-9501-1
Ofman, L., & Davila, J. M. 1995, J. Geophys. Res., 100,
23413, doi: 10.1029/95JA02222
Ofman, L., & Liu, W. 2018, ApJ, 860, 54,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac2e8
Okamoto, T. J., Tsuneta, S., Berger, T. E., et al. 2007,
Science, 318, 1577, doi: 10.1126/science.1145447
Pontin, D. I., Priest, E. R., & Galsgaard, K. 2013, ApJ,
774, 154, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/774/2/154

19
Porter, L. J., Klimchuk, J. A., & Sturrock, P. A. 1994, ApJ,
435, 482, doi: 10.1086/174830
Porth, O., Xia, C., Hendrix, T., Moschou, S. P., & Keppens,
R. 2014, ApJS, 214, 4, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/214/1/4
Sabri, S., Ebadi, H., & Poedts, S. 2022, ApJ, 924, 126,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac3b5f
Santamaria, I. C., Khomenko, E., Collados, M., & de
Vicente, A. 2017, A&A, 602, A43,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629729
Sen, S., & Keppens, R. 2022, A&A, 666, A28,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202244152
Shen, Y., & Liu, Y. 2012, ApJL, 752, L23,
doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/752/2/L23
Solanki, S. K., Lagg, A., Woch, J., Krupp, N., & Collados,
M. 2003, Nature, 425, 692, doi: 10.1038/nature02035
Spitzer, L. 1962, Physics of Fully Ionized Gases
Srivastava, A. K., Shetye, J., Murawski, K., et al. 2017,
Scientific Reports, 7, 43147, doi: 10.1038/srep43147
Srivastava, A. K., Ballester, J. L., Cally, P. S., et al. 2021,
Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics), 126,
e029097, doi: 10.1029/2020JA029097
Srivastava, A. K., Mondal, S., Priest, E. R., et al. 2025,
ApJ, 984, 36, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adc379
Syntelis, P., & Priest, E. R. 2020, ApJ, 891, 52,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab6ffc
Tarr, L. A., Linton, M., & Leake, J. 2017, ApJ, 837, 94,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa5e4e
Thompson, B. J., Plunkett, S. P., Gurman, J. B., et al.
1998, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 2465,
doi: 10.1029/98GL50429
Thurgood, J. O., & McLaughlin, J. A. 2013, A&A, 555,
A86, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321338
Uchida, Y. 1968, SoPh, 4, 30, doi: 10.1007/BF00146996
Veronig, A. M., Muhr, N., Kienreich, I. W., Temmer, M., &
Vrˇ snak, B. 2010, ApJL, 716, L57,
doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/716/1/L57
Voitenko, Y., & Goossens, M. 2004, ApJL, 605, L149,
doi: 10.1086/420927
Wang, T., Liu, W., Ofman, L., Sun, X., & Jin, M. 2026,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2603.13456,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2603.13456
Warmuth, A. 2015, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 12, 3,
doi: 10.1007/lrsp-2015-3
Warmuth, A., & Mann, G. 2011, A&A, 532, A151,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201116685
Wentzel, D. G. 1974, SoPh, 39, 129,
doi: 10.1007/BF00154975
Withbroe, G. L., & Noyes, R. W. 1977, ARA&A, 15, 363,
doi: 10.1146/annurev.aa.15.090177.002051
Wright, A. N. 1991, Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 1951,
doi: 10.1029/91GL02630
Xia, C., Teunissen, J., El Mellah, I., Chan´ e, E., & Keppens,
R. 2018, ApJS, 234, 30, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aaa6c8
Yadav, N., Keppens, R., & Popescu Braileanu, B. 2022,
A&A, 660, A21, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202142688
Zaqarashvili, T. V. 2003, A&A, 399, L15,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20030084
Zaqarashvili, T. V., Khutsishvili, E., Kukhianidze, V., &
Ramishvili, G. 2007, A&A, 474, 627,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20077661
Zaqarashvili, T. V., Oliver, R., & Ballester, J. L. 2006,
A&A, 456, L13, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20065805
Zaqarashvili, T. V., & Roberts, B. 2002, PhRvE, 66,
026401, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.66.026401
Zaqarashvili, T. V., & Roberts, B. 2006, A&A, 452, 1053,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20053565
Zhou, Y., Li, X., & Keppens, R. 2024, ApJ, 968, 123,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad4466