Title: Generative Diffusion Priors for 3D Mapping of the Dark Universe
Authors: Brandon Zhao, Diana Scognamiglio, Olivier Doré, Katherine L. Bouman
Published: 2026-05-30
Categories: astro-ph.CO, cs.CV, cs.LG

Generative Diffusion Priors for 3D Mapping of the Dark Universe
Brandon Zhao1∗ Diana Scognamiglio2,3 Olivier Dor´e2,4 Katherine L. Bouman1,4
1Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology
2 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
3Department of Physics, Duke University
4Cahill Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics, California Institute of Technology
∗byzhao@caltech.edu
Abstract
Reconstructing the three-dimensional distribution of dark
matter from weak-lensing observations is a central but
highly ill-posed inverse problem in cosmology. Unlike stan-
dard 3D reconstruction with multiple viewpoints, we ob-
serve the universe from a single line of sight, through noisy
shape distortions of galaxies with uncertain distances, so
meaningful recovery of the 3D matter field requires strong
prior assumptions. Existing methods either produce point
estimates with handcrafted priors or use neural ensembles
for approximate Bayesian uncertainty, and struggle to cap-
ture the non-Gaussian, filamentary structure of the cosmic
web. With the advent of new high-resolution cosmological
simulations, we now have an alternative source of prior
knowledge that captures the nonlinear statistics of struc-
ture formation with far greater fidelity than analytic pre-
scriptions. We leverage these simulations to build a new
datasetConicus3D, which enables us to learn a data-
driven diffusion-model prior capturing the full 3D distribu-
tion of dark matter structure across cosmic time. Building
on recent plug-and-play approaches, we modify a diffusion-
based posterior sampling scheme to the 3D weak-lensing
setting, combining the learned prior with a differentiable
physical forward model. On realistic simulations targeting
a modern weak lensing survey, our approach yields substan-
tially improved 2D and 3D reconstruction accuracy over
baseline methods. Moreover, it produces posterior samples
whose statistics closely track the underlying simulations,
while remaining robust to moderate shifts in cosmology.
1. Introduction
Reconstructing the three-dimensional distribution of dark
matter is a central challenge in modern cosmology. Be-
cause dark matter drives structure formation, recovering its
3D distribution is essential for testing gravity, constraining
dark energy, and interpreting galaxy surveys to model the
dynamics of the universe at large scales.
Dark matter does not emit or absorb light, so its struc-
ture must be inferred indirectly through its gravitational ef-
fects, most notably through the weak lensing (WL) of back-
ground galaxies. Recovering the underlying mass distribu-
tion from such indirect observations is an ill-posed inverse
problem, and traditional reconstruction methods typically
rely on smoothness-based priors which tend to overly damp
high-frequency features.
Recent advances in cosmological simulations now offer
high-resolution, large-volume realizations of structure for-
mation across cosmic time [27, 31, 33, 47]. These datasets
capture the full statistical complexity of the evolving dark
matter field, enabling machine-learning approaches that
learn directly from simulated universes. Modern generative
models, in particular, provide powerful tools for represent-
ing these high-dimensional distributions as priors in inverse
problems [51].
Building on these developments, we introduce a new
dataset,Conicus3D, and diffusion-based generative prior
for 3D cosmological mass mapping. Our dataset, derived
from state-of-the-art N-body simulations, consists of dark
matter light cones paired with 2D lens-plane projections
that preserve the relevant physics for lensing-based infer-
ence. Using this dataset, we train a score-based diffusion
model that learns the 3D statistical distribution of cosmic
structure and serves as a prior within a posterior sampler to
generate physically realistic mass reconstructions.
We demonstrate our method on the inverse problem of
WL mass mapping, performing posterior sampling for to-
mographic reconstruction within simulations modeled after
the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) COSMOS-Web
survey [9]. Our approach achieves substantially higher spa-
tial fidelity than previous methods [42, 49], produces pos-
terior samples whose statistics match true simulations, and
arXiv:2606.00803v1  [astro-ph.CO]  30 May 2026

Figure 1. Lightcone structure and redshift-conditional diffusion model. Left: The large-scale matter distribution is represented as a 3D
lightcone, built from a sequence of lens planes slicing the dark matter density field at increasing comoving distance (redshift). Right: Each
lens plane is modeled with a redshift-conditional 2D diffusion prior that learns the statistics of simulated overdensity maps at that redshift.
During generation, we start from Gaussian noise on each plane, append one-hot redshift encodings, and denoise with a U-Net score model
to obtain a coherent 3D lightcone. This redshift-conditioned factorization enables efficient generation of realistic volumetric dark matter
fields consistent with lightcone geometry.
generalizes robustly to cosmologies beyond the training do-
main. Our key contributions are:
•Conicus3D: A first-of-its-kind 3D dark matter light-
cone dataset, derived from state-of-the-art N-body simu-
lations [15, 27] and tailored for WL mass mapping, made
publicly available for training and benchmarking by the
computer vision and astrophysics communities;
• A diffusion-based posterior sampling framework that
combines data-driven priors with WL observables to en-
able robust, uncertainty-aware cosmological inference.
All data, simulated measurements, and code will be pub-
licly released with documentation, establishing a repro-
ducible testbed that invites broad participation in advancing
3D dark matter mass mapping.
2. Background
In the standardΛCDM cosmological model, the universe
began hot and nearly uniform, seeded by tiny quantum fluc-
tuations in the primordial density field. As the universe ex-
panded and cooled, gravity amplified those fluctuations into
the cosmic web of dark matter halos, filaments, and voids
that now host galaxies and gas. A central goal of cosmology
is to determine how matter is arranged and how it evolves:
the statistics of the initial conditions, the growth of structure
over time, and the astrophysical processes that modulate it.
Observationally, we infer this history indirectly, by measur-
ing how light is deflected as it travels through the universe.
The focus of this work is a probe known as weak gravita-
tional lensing, which measures the tiny, coherent “shearing”
of galaxy shapes as their light passes through uneven distri-
butions of matter. For a single galaxy, the induced distor-
tion is subtle and masked by the galaxy’s unknown intrinsic
shape, but averaging over many galaxies recovers a shear
field that statistically traces the underlying dark matter.
In cosmology, distance is often expressed in terms of
redshiftz, which measures how much cosmic expansion
has stretched a galaxy’s light. Larger redshift corresponds
tomore distantgalaxies that we observe atearliercosmic
times. Throughout this work, we treat redshift as a coor-
dinate along the line of sight. Moreover, galaxy distances
can be estimated from their colors via photometric redshifts;
these redshift estimates provide a noisy but informative 3D
signal along the line of sight that can be used to constrain
the radial structure of the matter field.
Because light travels at a finite speed, increasing redshift
also means looking deeper into the past. As a result, cosmo-
logical probes such as WL measure integrated signals along
our past light cone, offering a layered view of the evolving
matter distribution (see Fig. 1). 3D reconstruction therefore
reveals not only where matter structures exist, but when they
emerge in the history of the Universe.
3. Related Work
Weak Lensing Mass MappingWeak Lensing (WL)
mass mapping is the inverse problem of reconstructing the
distribution of total (mostly dark) matter along our past light
cone from its gravitational-lensing imprints on galaxy im-
ages. In WL, deflections are small and can be approxi-
mated as stretching or magnification of intrinsically ellipti-
cal galaxy shapes. The induced shape change depends on a
weighted line-of-sight projection of the matter overdensity,
known as the convergenceκ, which traces the integrated
mass between the source galaxy and the observer. Because
the cosmic matter field is dominated by dark matter, this
task is referred to asdark matter mass mapping.
Kaiser and Squires [20] first showed that the 2D shear
fieldγ, describing coherent shape distortions as a func-
tion of sky position, can be analytically inverted to yield
a projected 2D convergence map of the intervening mass.
In practice, however, we only observe noisy estimates of
γinferred from galaxy ellipticities, contaminated by each
galaxy’s unknown intrinsic shape (“shape noise”). Previ-
ous work proposes smoothing the observed galaxy shape
field before inversion [20], while regularized approaches

such as a Gaussian prior [40] and sparsity [25] have also
been proposed. More recent developments include deep-
learning-based reconstructions employing U-Net convolu-
tional architectures [19] and diffusion models [5, 6, 37],
which learn nonlinear priors directly from simulated data.
Related simulation-based reconstruction work has also used
diffusion models trained on simulation to probabilistically
infer dark matter fields from biased galaxy tracers [32].
While significant progress has been made in the develop-
ment and implementation of 2D mass mapping algorithms,
the problem of inferring the three-dimensional matter distri-
bution from WL observations is extremely challenging and
remains a largely unsolved problem. While observed galaxy
redshifts (distances from the observer) can be estimated
to give a 3D signal, the combination of intrinsic shape
noise, large uncertainties in redshift estimation, and a single
viewpoint limitation make the 3D mass mapping problem
highly ill-posed. Existing approaches from the astrophysics
community involve the use of strong regularizers such as
a Gaussian prior [42], sparsity constraints [26], singular
vector truncation [44] or multiresolution wavelet methods
[28] to obtain highly oversmoothed point estimates. Re-
cent machine learning-based works [49, 50] have explored
neural-field representations and ensemble models that pro-
vide approximate uncertainty quantification but do not cor-
respond to exact Bayesian posterior sampling. Our ap-
proach targets the exact posterior with respect to the chosen
simulation-derived prior. Alternatively, rigorous Bayesian
forward modeling approaches such as the BORG frame-
work [35, 36] infer the 3D density field by sampling ini-
tial conditions and evolving them through gravity solvers,
ensuring physical consistency but at significant computa-
tional expense. In this work, we introduce a diffusion-based
framework that leverages outputs from state-of-the-art N-
body simulations as physically motivated, data-driven pri-
ors. This approach produces high-resolution posterior sam-
ples of the 3D matter field consistent with both WL observa-
tions and structure-formation physics. While we can use the
mean of this posterior as a point estimate, being able to also
sample the posterior will enable crucial uncertainty quan-
tification as well as statistical estimation for downstream
cosmological analyses. This direction is closely related to
recent work using diffusion models trained on cosmologi-
cal simulations for field-level emulation and parameter in-
ference [29, 30], but differs in that we infer the matter field
indirectly through noisy WL measurements.
Diffusion Models for Inverse ProblemsDiffusion mod-
els have recently achieved state-of-the-art performance
across a wide range of scientific inverse problems [51].
A straightforward yet common approach for general sci-
entific inverse problems treats a diffusion model as a pos-
terior estimator, incorporating the measurements as condi-
tioning through concatenation to the model input. However,
this ignores the physics underlying the actual measurement
model and thus can produce physically implausible solu-
tions. From a Bayesian perspective, if the measurement
process is defined by a known likelihoodp(y|x), the diffu-
sion model acts as a score estimator for the data-driven prior
p(x), approximating its log-gradient∇ x logp(x). To gen-
erate an unconditional prior samplex 0, a diffusion model
smoothly removes noise from an unstructured initial noise
samplex T by solving a stochastic differential equation.
Many methods have been proposed for combining an un-
conditional diffusion model prior with a known measure-
ment likelihood to sample from the resulting posterior.
Early work such as DPS [11] uses guidance-based tech-
niques to “nudge” samples along the likelihood gradient
during training; however, the resulting samples are not the-
oretically guaranteed to correspond to a proper posterior. To
address this limitation, a family ofPlug-and-Play[45] dif-
fusion samplers has been developed, which incorporate the
likelihood score term directly into the reverse process in a
principled way. In this work, we propose a modified version
of the DAPS (Decoupled Annealing Posterior Sampling,
[51]) framework, which unifies the learned diffusion prior
with a known forward model to perform physically consis-
tent posterior sampling. This enables us to reconstruct mat-
ter fields that fulfill observational constraints and preserve
the statistics learned from cosmological simulations.
4.Conicus3D- 3D Lightcone Dataset
We introduceConicus3D, a large-scale 3D lightcone
dataset designed for training and evaluating dark matter
mass-mapping algorithms on state-of-the-art, realistic N-
body simulations of the universe. By providing a compre-
hensive and well-documented resource derived from high-
fidelity cosmological simulations, our goal is to make the
challenge of 3D WL mass reconstruction more accessible
to both the astrophysics and computer-vision communities.
Upon release,Conicus3Dwill contain:
• 20,000 in-distribution dark matter lightcones, generated
from a fiducial cosmology corresponding to the baseline
parameters of the AbacusSummit suite [15, 27].
• 800 out-of-distribution lightcones, produced under alter-
native cosmological parameters that yield different statis-
tical properties, enabling controlled evaluation of gener-
alization performance across cosmological shifts.
• Mock galaxy shape catalogs, containing realistic galaxy
positions, redshifts, and projection weights, along with
open-source code for sampling additional shape catalogs
to simulate observational noise and selection effects.
Dataset ConstructionConicus3Dis derived from the
AbacusSummit simulations [15, 27], which evolve over 300
billion particles under varying cosmological models. Each

Figure 2. Weak Lensing Measurements. (Left) As light from dis-
tant galaxies propagates through the universe, it is deflected by
intervening matter, producing small differences between the in-
trinsic (unlensed) shapee int and the observed shapee obs. These
subtle distortions provide a powerful probe of the 3D dark matter
distribution. (Right) To characterize cosmic shear, galaxy shapes
are often represented in the complex ellipticity plane, whose com-
ponents encode the axis ratio and orientation of an ellipse. In typi-
cal WL surveys, shape noise is more than two orders of magnitude
larger than the shear signal, so the lensing effect, described by the
shearγand approximately additive in ellipticity space, must be
extracted statistically by combining many measurements from a
dense field of galaxies to recover the coherent imprint of the un-
derlying matter distribution. Figure adapted from [38, 49].
N-body simulation can be viewed as a function of (1) the
cosmological parameters, which determine the statistical
properties of the initial matter field and the cosmic expan-
sion history, and (2) a random phase field, which sets the
initial perturbations of the simulation. Evolving these ini-
tial conditions forward generates realistic projections of the
dark matter field across redshift.
To create each lightcone volume, we process particle
counts from the AbacusSummit base simulation, projecting
the simulated particles directly onto the observer’s lightcone
geometry. We compute density contrasts (overdensities) for
a sequence of redshift shells extending toz≈2, and bin the
results into 20 lens planes equally spaced in comoving dis-
tance. Finally, we crop each plane to the COSMOS survey
footprint so that the resulting lightcone volumes match the
geometry and sky coverage of real observations.
Broader ApplicationsWhile our dataset is primarily
designed for 3D dark matter mass mapping, its struc-
ture makes it naturally extensible to a wide range of in-
verse problems on the lightcone. Many astrophysical
observables—such as Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) [34], CMB
secondary anisotropies [1, 8], and 21-cm intensity maps
[7]—can be interpreted as line-of-sight projections of the
underlying matter field across cosmic time. The same light-
cone geometry, redshift binning, and comoving-distance
sampling used in this work provide a unified framework for
simulating and reconstructing these observables.
5. Methods
5.1. Weak Lensing Measurements
As light from distant galaxies travels toward us, its tra-
jectory is continuously deflected by the intervening (dark-
dominated) matter distribution. In the WL regime, these
deflections are small and manifest as slight distortions in the
observed galaxy shapes. To quantify these small changes,
approximately elliptical galaxy shapes are described using
a complex ellipticity parametere. Given an approximately
elliptical galaxy with axis ratiorand orientation angleϕ,
we can define the magnitude and phase of its ellipticityeas
in [38]:
|e|= 1−r
1 +r ∠e= 2ϕ. (1)
WL measurements relate a galaxy’s observed ellipticityeobs
to its intrinsic ellipticitye int, which describes what its ob-
served shape would be in the absence of lensing. In the
regime of WL, the lensing effects of intervening matter can
be approximately described as a shearγ, which is additive
in the ellipticity domain ([38]):
eobs −e int =γ. (2)
An overview of shear measurements and the complex el-
lipticity can be found in Fig. 2. In practice, although the
observed shapee obs can be measured directly from an im-
age, a galaxy’s intrinsic shapee int is much more difficult to
estimate. In traditional WL surveys,e int is completely un-
known [38]. The standard assumption is that the true shape
of galaxies are randomly distributed without a preferred
overall direction, soe int is modeled as an additive Gaussian
“shape noise”. To mitigate the effects of the shape noise,
WL surveys combine measurements from many galaxies
into a galaxy catalog containing the sky position, redshift
(distance), and observed shapes of millions of galaxies, con-
stituting the measurements for 3D mass mapping.
The shearγobserved in a survey image arises from the
cumulative lensing occurring along the line of sight be-
tween us and the galaxy. More precisely, the shear is a
projection followed by a 2D convolution of theoverden-
sityδ= (ρ−¯ρ)/¯ρintersected by a ray of light as it trav-
els towards earth. Hereρis the continuous matter density
field and¯ρis the mean density of the universe at the time
of the intersection. In this section we introduce only the
specific equations governing the forward model; a more de-
tailed derivation can be found in the supplement.
ProjectionTo compute the shear from the matter over-
density fieldδ, we first introduce the convergenceκ[38],
which for a source galaxy with sky positionθand comov-

ing distance1 wis:
κ(θ, w) =Qδ= 3H2
0Ωm
2c2
Z w
0
dw′ w′(w−w ′)
w
δ(w′θ, w′)
a(w′) ,
(3)
whereH 0 andΩ m are cosmological parameters andcis
the speed of light. The scale parametera(w)represents the
known expansion of the universe that occurs as light travels
towards us, andδis the matter overdensity. In the case of
standard WL surveys,whas a degree of uncertainty, as it is
inferred from photometric estimates of the galaxy redshift.
In this case, we take the convergence to be the expected
value over the estimated distribution of the galaxy comov-
ing distancew, thereby incorporating photometric redshift
uncertainty directly into the forward model.
Convolutionγis obtained by convolving the convergence
κwith a complex kernelD(θ) =−1/(θ ∗)2 ([38]):
γ(θ, w) =Pκ= 1
π
Z
C2
d2θ′D(θ−θ ′)κ(θ′, w). (4)
Here, the angular positionθ=θ 1 +iθ 2 is expressed in
complex coordinates, and the asterisk∗represents complex
conjugation. Notably, the forward operators in Eqns. 3 and
4 are both linear with respect to the overdensityδ, so obtain-
ing the overdensity from the shear measurements is a linear
inverse problem. Combining Eqns. 2, 3 and 4 gives the full
formulation with the effects of the additive shape noiseε:
eobs =PQδ+ε ε∼ N(0, σ shape). (5)
This assumption of additive Gaussian noise implies a Gaus-
sian likelihood for the observed ellipticities across the
galaxy catalog. Reconstructingκ=Qδrather than the full
3D overdensity is known as 2D mass mapping, and is much
more well-constrained. A majority of the uncertainty in 3D
mass mapping comes from the inversion of the projection
operatorQ. Although some resolution in the radial direc-
tion can be inferred using the known distances to (i.e., red-
shifts of) galaxies, uncertainty in these redshift estimations
coupled with shape noise and single-view geometry make
the backprojection severely ill-posed.
5.2. Lightcone Diffusion Model
Diffusion models are powerful generative models which
generate data by learning to reverse a diffusion noising pro-
cess applied to the data distribution. In this work, we de-
rive our data-driven prior by estimating the score of the
data distributionp(δ)of possible lightconesδ. As is com-
mon in WL analyses, we represent each lightconeδas a
set of discrete lensplanes{δ (z)}M
z=1, and take the distribu-
tions of lensplanes at different redshifts to be independent,
1Comoving distance refers to a distance measure that factors out the
expansion of the universe.
i.e.p(δ) = QM
z=1 p(δ(z)). Because the lensplanes cover
such large distance scales, this is a reasonable assumption to
make [42]; this can also be seen empirically in the simulated
dataset (see Fig. 5). We then train a conditional diffusion
model usingConicus3Dto estimate the prior distributions
p(δ(z)|z)for each ofMredshift values, which are fixed be-
forehand. Our diffusion model uses a standard DDPM UNet
architecture operating on128×128lens-plane images. In
this way, we can use a traditional image denoising model to
generate 3D lightcones, by denoising a batch of images with
a list of one-hot vectors corresponding to different redshifts;
see Fig. 1 for an illustration.
5.3. Decoupled Annealing Posterior Sampling
Given our data-driven lightcone priorp(δ), and the physics-
based likelihoodp(γ|δ)from the forward model above, we
wish to sample from the resulting posterior distribution
p(δ|γ)∝p(γ|δ)p(δ). (6)
To do so, we propose a modified version of the Decoupled
Annealing Posterior Sampling (DAPS) algorithm, which
has been shown to be successful on a wide range of scien-
tific inverse problems in the InverseBench framework [48].
DAPS samples a target “clean” posteriorp(δ 0|γ)by se-
quentially generating samples from noise annealed poste-
riorsp(δ t|γ)fromt=Tto0. To generate samplesδ t
fromδ t+∆t, DAPS alternates between (1) samplingδ 0|γ ∼
p(δ0|δt+∆t, γ), and (2) samplingδ t ∼ N(δ 0|γ, σ2
t2I). This
process is repeated for decreasingtuntilδ 0 are sampled
from the target posterior [48].
The original DAPS algorithm samplesp(δ 0|δt, γ)∝
p(δ0|δt)p(γ|δ0)with score-based methods such as
Langevin dynamics, approximating the intractablep(δ 0|δt)
with a Gaussian distribution with diagonal covariance
Σt. While this approximation enables efficient posterior
sampling, it does not encode any information about pos-
sible spatial correlations that may exist inδ. Motivated
by the cosmological principles of translation invariance
and isotropy, we propose a physically informed covariance
which is instead diagonalized in Fourier Space according
to the matter power spectrum (PS)P k:
Σ−1
t =F −1 diag
 
σ−2
t +P −1
k

F. (7)
In our experiments, we estimateP k empirically by aver-
aging over the training data. This Fourier-diagonal covari-
ance structure arises in any inverse problem over approxi-
mately stationary fields, including adaptive optics [24], geo-
physical inversion [18], and CMB map-making [13], sug-
gesting that our spectral sampling strategy could improve
diffusion-based posterior sampling in these settings; see
Supplement Sec. 15 for further discussion. A detailed ex-
planation and pseudocode of our specific implementation
can also be found in the supplement.

Figure 3. Two-dimensional mass reconstruction results from simulated WL data. For three representative lightcone volumes (rows),
we show the projected convergence (κ) maps for the ground truth, our method, the Neural Ensemble baseline, and the Wiener filter
reconstruction (columns); for each method, we use the posterior mean as a point estimate. Our reconstructions recover sharp cluster peaks
and filamentary features that closely match the trueκmaps, while the baselines exhibit oversmoothing and reduced contrast in high-density
regions. The third row highlights performance under a cosmology mismatch; even in this out-of-distribution setting, our method maintains
high-fidelity 2D mass reconstructions that better preserve the locations and amplitudes of prominent structures.
While the posterior mean provides a strong map-level
reconstruction, most WL science evaluates non-linear func-
tionals of the field posterior. Our sampler targets the full
posterior, combining a data-driven diffusion prior with the
physical likelihood so that each draw preserves small-scale
power and realistic radial structure. This ensures that
statistics computed from the ensemble—not only from the
mean—are unbiased and well calibrated, which is crucial
when moving from simulations to real data.
6. Experiments
6.1. Mock Weak Lensing Survey
We evaluate our method on simulated WL data modeled af-
ter the JWST COSMOS-Web survey [9], which targets one
of the most extensively studied extragalactic fields, large
enough to capture a representative portion of the cosmic
large-scale structure. While the shear catalogs for JWST
COSMOS-Web are not publicly available, we consider
mock surveys that reproduce the footprint, source density,
and shape-noise characteristics of the real COSMOS-Web
observations [39]. We assume a footprint of 0.54 deg2 with
a mean redshift catalog source density of≈261 galaxies
arcmin−2, an intrinsic shape-noise dispersion ofσ e ≈0.25
[39], and Gaussian photo-zdispersionσ z = 0.11(1 +z).
We compare against two publicly available baseline meth-
ods for 3D mass mapping: the analytical Wiener filter re-
construction [42] and the neural ensemble estimator [49].
We first present results for recovering the projected 2D
convergence fieldκ(a weighted integral of the overdensityδ
along the line of sight) from a simulated light cone. Figure 3
and Table 1 show the reconstructedκmaps and quantitative
comparisons. For each method, we compute the posterior
mean projected overdensity across 128 samples and evalu-
ate agreement with the ground-truth map using the mean-
subtracted Pearson cross-correlation coefficient, which is
appropriate since the WL forward model is invariant under
constant additive shifts inκ. Our method achieves signif-
icantly higher correlation with the true convergence field
than both the Wiener filter and neural ensemble baselines,
demonstrating the ability of the diffusion-based posterior
sampling framework to recover fine-scale structure while
maintaining physically consistent large-scale modes. In
Fig. 4 we reconstruct the 3D overdensity fieldδfor the same
simulated light cones up to redshiftz= 1. We again com-
pute the posterior mean across 128 samples as a point esti-
mate of the overdensity. Because of single-view limitations,

Figure 4. Three-dimensional mass reconstruction results from simulated WL data. Each row corresponds to a different simulated lightcone
volume, and columns compare the ground-truth overdensity field to reconstructions from our diffusion-based posterior sampler, the Neural
Ensemble baseline [49], and the Wiener filter method [42]; for each method, we use the posterior mean as a point estimate. Our recon-
structions better recover the spatial morphology of clusters and filaments and place structures at the correct redshift slices, whereas the
baselines tend to smear overdensities along the line of sight or miss small-scale features. The third row illustrates the challenging case of
a misspecified cosmology with massless neutrinos, where our method still tracks the true 3D structure more faithfully despite a mismatch
between the prior cosmology and the ground-truth simulation.
103 104
ℓ (radians)
10−11
10−10
κ angular power spectrum
Ground Truth
Ours
Neural
Ground Truth
Ours
Neural
10−2
ℓ (distance)
104
4 × 104
δ radial power spectrum
Ground Truth
Ours
Neural
White Noise
103 104
ℓ (radians)
10−11
10−10
10−9
10−8
10−7
κ angular power spectrum
In-Dist Recon
In-Dist GT
OOD Recon
OOD GT
Prior
Figure 5. Sample quality. Our diffusion-based posterior sampler produces 3D mass-field realizations whose statistics match those of
realistic dark matter simulations. Left: Angular PSC κ
ℓ of the convergenceκfor individual samples. Our samples retain the correct high-ℓ
(small-scale) power, whereas the Neural Ensemble [49] baseline over-smooths small-scale modes when the noise power exceeds the signal
power and the reconstruction becomes prior-dominated. Center: Radial PS of the overdensityδacross lens planes. Our samples are nearly
flat in this radial spectrum, indicating decorrelation between different redshift planes and avoiding the spurious line-of-sight correlations
seen in the neural ensemble outputs. Because many downstream WL statistics are nonlinear functionals of each sample (e.g., peak counts,
voids), matching these sample-level power spectra is essential for unbiased cosmological inference and calibrated uncertainties. Right: Our
diffusion prior is trained under a fiducial cosmology, which implies an expected angular PS forκ(“Prior”). We plot five power spectra:
the ground truth and reconstruction for an in-distribution cosmology (In-Dist GT / In-Dist Recon), the ground truth and reconstruction for
an out-of-distribution cosmology with massless neutrinos (OOD GT / OOD Recon), and the prior from our diffusion model. When the
true cosmology matches the training cosmology, prior samples and reconstructions reproduce the same spectrum. In the out-of-distribution
case, the true power is significantly higher, but our posterior samples still match the ground-truth spectrum due to likelihood guidance,
showing that the method adapts to the observed universe even when the prior cosmology is misspecified.

V ol. Methodρ 3D
blur(↑)ρ 3D(↑)ρ 2D(↑)
1
Ours 0.83 0.23 0.87
Neur. [49] 0.79 0.21 0.86
Wien. [42] 0.71 0.21 0.77
2
Ours 0.83 0.27 0.88
Neur. [49] 0.80 0.21 0.87
Wien. [42] 0.72 0.23 0.83
3
Ours 0.92 0.18 0.98
Neur. [49] 0.86 0.09 0.96
Wien. [42] 0.84 0.13 0.92
Table 1. Quantitative comparison of reconstruction quality. We
summarize 3D and 2D mass-mapping performance for three simu-
lated JWST-scale lightcone volumes. We report the Pearson cross-
correlation coefficients averaged over lensplanes between recon-
structed and ground-truth maps:ρ 3D
blur where both lightcones are
first blurred with a Gaussian kernel of widthσ= 4lensplanes
in the line-of-sight direction,ρ 3D for the full-resolution 3D fields,
andρ 2D for the projected 2D convergence maps (higher is better
in all cases). Our diffusion-based method consistently achieves
higher correlations than both the Neural Ensemble and Wiener fil-
ter baselines across all three volumes in 2D and 3D.
and large amounts of noise, it is only possible to reconstruct
the overdensity field with a limited radial resolution. Uncer-
tainty in the radial position of structures results in point es-
timates with a blur along the line of sight. For each method,
we additionally blur the ground truth and reconstructed vol-
umes with a Gaussian filter of lengthσ= 4lensplanes in
the radialzdirection (see supplement for detailed analysis
ofzblur lengths). We then report the cross-correlation (av-
eraged across lensplanes) of each reconstruction with the
ground truth, blurred and unblurred. Our method outper-
forms the 3D reconstruction baselines in each volume.
6.2. Cosmology Mismatch
Because our method is supervised, a key question is
whether or not we can generalize well under a reasonable
error in our prior assumptions. Thus, we repeat the exper-
iment described in Sec. 6.1 but for a ground truth light-
cone generated under different cosmological assumptions.
In particular, we consider a cosmology with massless neu-
trinos, which results in significantly higher amplitudes in
the PS. Recovery results are shown in row 3 of Figs. 3,
4. Our method generalizes well despite a mismatch in the
statistics of the prior and ground truth volumes. In this
case, the OOD cosmology produces higher power and thus
stronger lensing signal, allowing the likelihood to partially
overcome the mismatched prior.
In addition, we compare the PS of both the fiducial (as-
sumed) cosmology and the out-of-distribution cosmology,
the PS for both of our reconstructions, and the PS for uncon-
ditional PS in Fig. 5. Although our prior samples match the
fiducial cosmology of the training set, our method is able
to generate posterior samples with angular PS matching the
ground truth due to likelihood guidance.
6.3. Sample Quality
Beyond point estimation, our method’s principal advantage
is the ability tosamplefrom a realistic posterior whose
statistics are consistent with the true dark matter distribu-
tion. We assess sample realism using the angular PS of the
recovered 2D convergence maps (Fig. 5); matching both
amplitude and scale-dependence indicates correct two-point
statistics.
Although all methods have access to the same theoretical
PS, smoothness regularization in the Neural Ensemble esti-
mator inevitably damps small-scale structure in each recon-
struction. This suppression wipes out high-frequency power
and produces convergence maps that look overly smoothed
(Fig. 5). In contrast, our diffusion-based posterior gener-
ates high-resolution samples whose angular power spectra
match the ground truth across all scales. This fidelity is
essential for extracting reliable cosmological information
from WL data. Many key probes, such as peak and void
counts [22], Minkowski functionals [23], bispectra [12],
halo and filament finders [21, 43], cross-correlation with
galaxies, clusters [10, 46], or CMB lensing [17], depend di-
rectly on the detailed small-scale and radial structure in each
possible 3D realization of the matter field. If the samples
are oversmoothed or exhibit spurious correlations across
redshift planes, the resulting cross-correlation amplitudes,
cosmological parameter constraints, and covariance esti-
mates will be systematically biased. Our samples robustly
reproduce the correct angular power and remain decorre-
lated along the line of sight, ensuring that downstream
non-Gaussian statistics remain unbiased and that ensemble-
based uncertainty propagation is physically meaningful.
6.4. Uncertainty Calibration
Another important aspect of our method is the ability to es-
timate uncertainty from the statistics of samples recovered
from our posterior sampler. Results are shown in Fig. 6. We
show a very clear correlation between sample standard de-
viation and error with the ground truth, with a near perfect
correspondence for a majority of the lightcone voxels. Ad-
ditionally, although both our method and the neural ensem-
ble method offer “samples” for uncertainty quantification,
only our method can be interpreted as a proper Bayesian
posterior. Together with the sample-level power-spectrum
agreement in Fig. 5, this behavior indicates that posterior-
predictive intervals for non-linear summaries (e.g., peak
counts, cross-correlations in COSMOS-Web) should be cor-
rectly calibrated on real data.

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
Sample Std
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5Mean Absolute Error
Sample Uncertainty Calibration
Ours (r=0.92)
Neural (r=0.90)
Bin Fraction (Ours)
Bin Fraction (Neural)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Proportion per bin
Figure 6. Uncertainty calibration. For each voxel, we compute
the standard deviation of the posterior samples (“sample std”) and
the mean absolute error (MAE) between the posterior mean and
the ground truth. We then bin voxels by sample std and plot the
average MAE per bin, along with the fraction of voxels in each bin.
Both our method (r = 0.92) and the neural ensemble estimator (r =
0.90) [49] show a strong correlation between predicted uncertainty
and actual error, but only our samples correspond to a well-defined
Bayesian posterior distribution.
7. Conclusion
In this work, we introduce a first-of-its-kind 3D dark matter
lightcone dataset tailored for WL mass mapping. Build-
ing on this resource, we propose a diffusion-based posterior
sampler that reconstructs the 3D matter distribution from
noisy 2D shear observations. Our approach significantly
outperforms Neural Ensemble and Wiener filter baselines in
3D/2D correlation and power-spectrum fidelity on simula-
tions designed to mimic JWST observations, and remains
effective even under cosmology mismatch, indicating ro-
bustness to realistic modeling uncertainties. Important di-
rections for future work include analyzing the sensitivity of
reconstructions to the choice of simulation-derived prior, in-
cluding different cosmological parameter settings and simu-
lation codes. By releasing our dataset, code, and evaluation
protocol, we aim to create a reproducible testbed that opens
3D cosmological mass mapping to a far broader research
community. Our work brings humanity closer to seeing the
dark universe in three dimensions, yielding reconstructions
that not only reveal its structure with unmatched fidelity, but
also unlock richer and more powerful downstream analyses.
8. Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Supranta Boruah, Bhu-
vnesh Jain, and Carolina Cuesta–Lazaro for helpful discus-
sions. Part of this work was done at Jet Propulsion Labo-
ratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract
with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(80NM0018D0004) and funded through the President’s and
Director’s Research and Development Fund (PDRDF). This
work was also supported by the Stanback Innovation Fund
and NSF Career award 2048237.
References
[1] Nabila Aghanim, Subhabrata Majumdar, and Joseph Silk.
Secondary anisotropies of the cmb.Reports on Progress in
Physics, 71(6):066902, 2008. 4
[2] Bradley Atcheson, Ivo Ihrke, Wolfgang Heidrich, Art Tevs,
Derek Bradley, Marcus Magnor, and Hans-Peter Seidel.
Time-resolved 3d capture of non-stationary gas flows.ACM
transactions on graphics (TOG), 27(5):1–9, 2008. 4
[3] Matthias Bartelmann and Peter Schneider. Weak gravita-
tional lensing.Physics Reports, 340(4-5):291–472, 2001. 3,
4
[4] Max Born and Emil Wolf.Principles of optics: electromag-
netic theory of propagation, interference and diffraction of
light. Elsevier, 2013. 4
[5] Supranta S Boruah, Michael Jacob, and Bhuvnesh Jain.
Diffusion-based mass map reconstruction from weak lensing
data.Physical Review D, 111(8):083542, 2025. 3
[6] Supranta S Boruah, Michael Jacob, Bhuvnesh Jain, Riya
Maiya, and Raghav Venkataramanan. High-resolution weak
lensing mass mapping from des-y3 data using diffusion-
based prior.arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14667, 2025. 3
[7] Philip Bull, Pedro G Ferreira, Prina Patel, and Mario G San-
tos. Late-time cosmology with 21 cm intensity mapping ex-
periments.The Astrophysical Journal, 803(1):21, 2015. 4
[8] John E Carlstrom, Gilbert P Holder, and Erik D Reese. Cos-
mology with the sunyaev-zel’dovich effect.Annual Review
of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 40(1):643–680, 2002. 4
[9] Caitlin M Casey, Jeyhan S Kartaltepe, Nicole E Drakos,
Maximilien Franco, Santosh Harish, Louise Paquereau,
Olivier Ilbert, Caitlin Rose, Isabella G Cox, James W
Nightingale, et al. Cosmos-web: an overview of the jwst
cosmic origins survey.The Astrophysical Journal, 954(1):
31, 2023. 1, 6
[10] Chihway Chang, Vinu Vikram, Bhuvnesh Jain, David Bacon,
A Amara, MR Becker, G Bernstein, C Bonnett, S Bridle, D
Brout, et al. Wide-field lensing mass maps from dark energy
survey science verification data.Physical review letters, 115
(5):051301, 2015. 8
[11] Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Michael T Mccann, Marc L
Klasky, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion posterior sam-
pling for general noisy inverse problems.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.14687, 2022. 3
[12] Asantha Cooray and Wayne Hu. Weak gravitational lensing
bispectrum.The Astrophysical Journal, 548(1):7, 2001. 8
[13] Franz Elsner and Benjamin D Wandelt. Efficient Wiener fil-
tering without preconditioning.Astronomy & Astrophysics,
549:A111, 2013. 5, 7
[14] Lawrence C Evans.Partial differential equations. American
mathematical society, 2022. 5
[15] Lehman H Garrison, Daniel J Eisenstein, Douglas Ferrer,
Nina A Maksimova, and Philip A Pinto. The abacus cos-

mological n-body code.Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society, 508(1):575–596, 2021. 2, 3, 5
[16] Boryana Hadzhiyska, Sihan Yuan, Chris Blake, Daniel J
Eisenstein, J Aguilar, Steven Ahlen, David Brooks, Todd
Claybaugh, Axel de la Macorra, Peter Doel, et al. Synthetic
light-cone catalogues of modern redshift and weak lensing
surveys with abacussummit.Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 525(3):4367–4387, 2023. 5, 6
[17] Nick Hand, Alexie Leauthaud, Sudeep Das, Blake D Sher-
win, Graeme E Addison, J Richard Bond, Erminia Calabrese,
Aldee Charbonnier, Mark J Devlin, Joanna Dunkley, et al.
First measurement of the cross-correlation of cmb lensing
and galaxy lensing.Physical Review D, 91(6):062001, 2015.
8
[18] Thomas Mejer Hansen, Andre G Journel, Albert Tarantola,
and Klaus Mosegaard. Linear inverse Gaussian theory and
geostatistics.Geophysics, 71(6):R101–R111, 2006. 5, 7
[19] Niall Jeffrey, Franc ¸ois Lanusse, Ofer Lahav, and Jean-Luc
Starck. Deep learning dark matter map reconstructions from
des sv weak lensing data.Monthly Notices of the Royal As-
tronomical Society, 492(4):5023–5029, 2020. 3
[20] Nick Kaiser and Gordon Squires. Mapping the dark matter
with weak gravitational lensing.Astrophysical Journal, Part
1 (ISSN 0004-637X), vol. 404, no. 2, p. 441-450., 404:441–
450, 1993. 2, 5
[21] Alexander Knebe, Steffen R Knollmann, Stuart I Muldrew,
Frazer R Pearce, Miguel Angel Aragon-Calvo, Yago Ascasi-
bar, Peter S Behroozi, Daniel Ceverino, Stephane Colombi,
Juerg Diemand, et al. Haloes gone mad: the halo-finder com-
parison project.Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 415(3):2293–2318, 2011. 8
[22] Jan M Kratochvil, Zolt ´an Haiman, and Morgan May. Prob-
ing cosmology with weak lensing peak counts.Physical Re-
view D—Particles, Fields, Gravitation, and Cosmology, 81
(4):043519, 2010. 8
[23] Jan M Kratochvil, Eugene A Lim, Sheng Wang, Zolt ´an
Haiman, Morgan May, and Kevin Huffenberger. Probing
cosmology with weak lensing minkowski functionals.Phys-
ical Review D—Particles, Fields, Gravitation, and Cosmol-
ogy, 85(10):103513, 2012. 8
[24] Richard G Lane, Andreas Glindemann, and John C Dainty.
Simulation of a Kolmogorov phase screen.Waves in Random
Media, 2(3):209–224, 1992. 5, 7
[25] Francois Lanusse, J-L Starck, Adrienne Leonard, and San-
drine Pires. High resolution weak lensing mass mapping
combining shear and flexion.Astronomy & Astrophysics,
591:A2, 2016. 3
[26] Adrienne Leonard, Franc ¸ois Lanusse, and Jean-Luc Starck.
Glimpse: accurate 3d weak lensing reconstructions using
sparsity.Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety, 440(2):1281–1294, 2014. 3, 5
[27] Nina A Maksimova, Lehman H Garrison, Daniel J Eisen-
stein, Boryana Hadzhiyska, Sownak Bose, and Thomas P
Satterthwaite. Abacussummit: a massive set of high-
accuracy, high-resolution n-body simulations.Monthly No-
tices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 508(3):4017–4037,
2021. 1, 2, 3, 5
[28] Richard Massey, Jason Rhodes, Richard Ellis, Nick Scoville,
Alexie Leauthaud, Alexis Finoguenov, Peter Capak, David
Bacon, Herv ´e Aussel, Jean-Paul Kneib, et al. Dark matter
maps reveal cosmic scaffolding.Nature, 445(7125):286–
290, 2007. 3
[29] Nayantara Mudur, Carolina Cuesta-Lazaro, and Douglas P
Finkbeiner. Cosmological field emulation and param-
eter inference with diffusion models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.07534, 2023. 3
[30] Nayantara Mudur, Carolina Cuesta-Lazaro, and Douglas P
Finkbeiner. Diffusion-hmc: Parameter inference with
diffusion-model-driven hamiltonian monte carlo.The Astro-
physical Journal, 978(1):64, 2025. 3
[31] Dylan Nelson, V olker Springel, Annalisa Pillepich, Vicente
Rodriguez-Gomez, Paul Torrey, Shy Genel, Mark V ogels-
berger, Ruediger Pakmor, Federico Marinacci, Rainer Wein-
berger, et al. The illustristng simulations: public data release.
Computational Astrophysics and Cosmology, 6(1):2, 2019. 1
[32] Victoria Ono, Core Francisco Park, Nayantara Mudur, Yuey-
ing Ni, Carolina Cuesta-Lazaro, and Francisco Villaescusa-
Navarro. Debiasing with diffusion: Probabilistic reconstruc-
tion of dark matter fields from galaxies with camels.The
Astrophysical Journal, 970(2):174, 2024. 3
[33] Nathana ¨el Perraudin, Ankit Srivastava, Aurelien Luc-
chi, Tomasz Kacprzak, Thomas Hofmann, and Alexandre
R´efr´egier. Cosmological n-body simulations: a challenge
for scalable generative models.Computational Astrophysics
and Cosmology, 6(1):5, 2019. 1
[34] Emily Petroff, JWT Hessels, and DR Lorimer. Fast radio
bursts.The Astronomy and Astrophysics Review, 27(1):4,
2019. 4
[35] Natalia Porqueres, Alan Heavens, Daniel Mortlock, and
Guilhem Lavaux. Bayesian forward modelling of cosmic
shear data.Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety, 502(2):3035–3044, 2021. 3
[36] Natalia Porqueres, Alan Heavens, Daniel Mortlock, and
Guilhem Lavaux. Lifting weak lensing degeneracies with
a field-based likelihood.Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society, 509(3):3194–3202, 2022. 3
[37] Benjamin Remy, Francois Lanusse, Niall Jeffrey, Jia Liu, J-L
Starck, Ken Osato, and Tim Schrabback. Probabilistic mass-
mapping with neural score estimation.Astronomy & Astro-
physics, 672:A51, 2023. 3
[38] Peter Schneider. Weak gravitational lensing. InGravi-
tational lensing: strong, weak and micro, pages 269–451.
Springer, 2006. 4, 5, 3
[39] Diana Scognamiglio et al. The highest resolution map of
(dark) matter.accepted for Nature Astronomy, 2025. 6, 5
[40] Uro ˇs Seljak. Weak lensing reconstruction and power spec-
trum estimation: minimum variance methods.The Astro-
physical Journal, 506(1):64, 1998. 3
[41] Marko Shuntov, Hollis B Akins, Louise Paquereau,
Caitlin M Casey, Olivier Ilbert, Rafael C Arango-Toro,
Henry Joy McCracken, Maximilien Franco, Santosh Harish,
Jeyhan S Kartaltepe, et al. Cosmos2025: The cosmos-web
galaxy catalog of photometry, morphology, redshifts, and
physical parameters from jwst, hst, and ground-based imag-
ing.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03243, 2025. 5

[42] Patrick Simon, AN Taylor, and Jan Hartlap. Unfolding
the matter distribution using three-dimensional weak grav-
itational lensing.Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 399(1):48–68, 2009. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8
[43] Thierry Sousbie. The persistent cosmic web and its filamen-
tary structure–i. theory and implementation.Monthly notices
of the royal astronomical society, 414(1):350–383, 2011. 8
[44] JT VanderPlas, AJ Connolly, Bhuvnesh Jain, and Mike
Jarvis. Three-dimensional reconstruction of the density field:
An svd approach to weak-lensing tomography.The Astro-
physical Journal, 727(2):118, 2011. 3
[45] Singanallur V Venkatakrishnan, Charles A Bouman, and
Brendt Wohlberg. Plug-and-play priors for model based re-
construction. In2013 IEEE global conference on signal and
information processing, pages 945–948. IEEE, 2013. 3
[46] Vinu Vikram, Chihway Chang, Bhuvnesh Jain, D Bacon,
Adam Amara, Matthew R Becker, G Bernstein, Christopher
Bonnett, Sarah Bridle, Dillon Brout, et al. Wide-field lens-
ing mass maps from dark energy survey science verification
data: Methodology and detailed analysis.Physical Review
D, 92(2):022006, 2015. 8
[47] Francisco Villaescusa-Navarro, ChangHoon Hahn, Elena
Massara, Arka Banerjee, Ana Maria Delgado, Doogesh Kodi
Ramanah, Tom Charnock, Elena Giusarma, Yin Li, Erwan
Allys, et al. The quijote simulations.The Astrophysical Jour-
nal Supplement Series, 250(1):2, 2020. 1
[48] Bingliang Zhang, Wenda Chu, Julius Berner, Chenlin Meng,
Anima Anandkumar, and Yang Song. Improving diffusion
inverse problem solving with decoupled noise annealing. In
Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference, pages 20895–20905, 2025. 5, 7
[49] Brandon Zhao, Aviad Levis, Liam Connor, Pratul P Srini-
vasan, and Katherine Bouman. Revealing the 3d cosmic
web through gravitationally constrained neural fields. InThe
Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9
[50] Brandon Zhao, Aviad Levis, Liam Connor, Pratul P Srini-
vasan, and Katherine L Bouman. Single view refractive
index tomography with neural fields. InProceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 25358–25367, 2024. 3
[51] Hongkai Zheng, Wenda Chu, Bingliang Zhang, Zihui Wu,
Austin Wang, Berthy T Feng, Caifeng Zou, Yu Sun, Nikola
Kovachki, Zachary E Ross, et al. Inversebench: Benchmark-
ing plug-and-play diffusion priors for inverse problems in
physical sciences.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11043, 2025.
1, 3

Generative Diffusion Priors for 3D Mapping of the Dark Universe
Supplementary Material
9. Visualization of Sample Quality
A central goal of our diffusion-based posterior sampler is
not only to produce a high-fidelityposterior meanas a point
estimate of the mass distribution, but also to generatereal-
istic posterior samplesthat reflect the variability and statis-
tical structure of the underlying dark matter field. In this
section, we provide qualitative visualizations of 2D and 3D
samples (Figs. 7 and 8) that complement the quantitative
sample-quality diagnostics in the main text.
In the two-dimensional case, both our method and the
neural ensemble produce posterior means that broadly re-
cover the ground-truth convergence fieldκ. However, the
individual samples reveal clear differences in sample qual-
ity. Samples from the neural ensemble contain spurious
small-scale artifacts that are not present in the trueκmaps
and that only disappear after averaging over many sam-
ples. In contrast, samples drawn from our diffusion-based
posterior are relatively stable from realization to realiza-
tion, without significant sample-wise artifacts. This indi-
cates that our learned prior and sampling procedure pre-
serve physically plausible structure at the level of individual
convergence maps, not just in the mean.
The three-dimensional visualizations highlight an addi-
tional limitation of neural-ensemble-based uncertainty es-
timates. Neural ensemble samples exhibit spurious cor-
relations along the line of sight: overdense regions are
stretched into radially elongated features that persist across
neighboring redshift slices, inconsistent with the statistics
of the ground-truth overdensity fieldδand with the radial
power-spectrum behavior discussed in the main text. Our
diffusion-based posterior samples, by contrast, maintain re-
alistic slice-to-slice variability and remain relatively decor-
related across lens planes. The posterior mean naturally ex-
hibits modest radial blurring, reflecting the intrinsic limits
of 3D weak-lensing reconstruction, but individual samples
themselves do not suffer from spurious line-of-sight coher-
ence. These properties are crucial for downstream non-
Gaussian analyses that operate directly on posterior sam-
ples, ensuring that ensemble-based statistics remain physi-
cally meaningful and well calibrated.
10. Additional Recovery Results
To further validate the robustness of our method, we present
recovery results for three additional simulated lightcones
(V olumes 4, 5 and 6), expanding upon the qualitative and
quantitative comparisons shown in the main paper. Simi-
lar to the reconstruction results in the main text, volumes
4 and 5 correspond to the in-distribution cosmology of
V ol. Methodρ 3D
blur(↑)ρ 3D(↑)ρ 2D(↑)
Ours 0.88 0.25 0.93
4 Neur. [49] 0.85 0.24 0.92
Wien. [42] 0.84 0.24 0.90
Ours 0.85 0.25 0.91
5 Neur. [49] 0.81 0.18 0.87
Wien. [42] 0.80 0.22 0.86
Ours 0.95 0.24 0.88
6 Neur. [49] 0.91 0.15 0.82
Wien. [42] 0.86 0.23 0.77
Table 2. Additional quantitative comparison of recovery per-
formance. We report 3D and 2D reconstruction quality for
three additional simulated JWST-scale lightcone volumes: two in-
distribution (V olumes 4 and 5) and one out-of-distribution with
massless neutrinos (V olume 6). As in the main paper, we compute
(1) the blurred 3D correlationρ 3D
blur after applying a Gaussian filter
of widthσ= 4lensplanes along the line of sight, (2) the full-
resolution 3D correlationρ 3D, and (3) the 2D convergence corre-
lationρ 2D. Across all metrics and volumes, our diffusion-based
posterior sampler achieves the highest agreement with the ground
truth, outperforming the Neural Ensemble and Wiener filter base-
lines.
the training set, while volume 6 corresponds to an out-
of-distribution cosmology with massless neutrinos. Fig-
ure 9 and Figure 10 illustrate the 2D convergenceκre-
construction and the full 3D overdensityδrecovery, re-
spectively. Consistent with the three volumes shown in
the main text, our diffusion-based posterior sampler recon-
structs high-contrast cluster peaks and filamentary struc-
ture that closely match the ground truth, while the Neural
Ensemble baseline tends to smooth overdensities and the
Wiener filter over-regularizes fine features. These qualita-
tive trends persist across all test volumes—including those
with complex multi-scale structure—and indicate that our
sampler reliably maintains small-scale power and accurate
radial localization.
Table 2 provides quantitative cross-correlation metrics
for these additional volumes. As before, we report (1) the
blurred 3D correlation usingσ= 4 lensplanes, (2) the full-
resolution 3D correlation, and (3) the projected 2D con-
vergence correlation. Across all metrics, our method again
achieves the highest agreement with the ground truth.

Figure 7. 2D ConvergenceκPosterior Samples. Left: Ground-truth convergence field for a representative lightcone. Top row: Posterior
mean and individual posterior samples from our diffusion-based method. Bottom row: Posterior mean and samples from the neural
ensemble baseline. While both methods produce reasonable posterior means, the neural ensemble samples contain spurious small-scale
artifacts that are washed out only when averaging. In contrast, our diffusion-based posterior produces visually coherent, artifact-free
samples consistent with the statistics of the trueκfield.
Figure 8. 3D OverdensityδPosterior Samples. Left: Ground-truth 3D overdensity for a representative volume. Top row: Posterior mean
and individual samples from our diffusion-based sampler. Bottom row: Corresponding mean and samples from the neural ensemble.
Neural-ensemble samples display artificial correlations along the line of sight, producing radially elongated structures not present in the
true simulation. Our samples maintain realistic slice-to-slice variability and avoid spurious line-of-sight correlations; only the posterior
mean exhibits expected radial blurring. These properties underscore the validity of our method’s 3D posterior samples for downstream
non-Gaussian cosmological analyses.

Figure 9. Additional 2D Recovery Results. For three additional simulated lightcones (V olumes 4, 5 and 6), we compare the reconstructed
convergenceκmaps from our method, the Neural Ensemble baseline, and the Wiener filter against the ground truth. Consistent with
the results in the main text, our method preserves high-contrast peaks and sharp filamentary features, whereas the baselines exhibit over-
smoothing and reduced small-scale power. These trends persist across diverse structures and demonstrate the robustness of our 2D recovery
performance.
11. Detailed Resolution Analysis
In the main paper, we evaluated 3D reconstruction fidelity
using a single Gaussian blur scale (σ= 4lensplanes) as
a summary metric for radial resolution. Figure 11 shows
the blurred 3D cross-correlationρ blur
3D (σ)between each re-
construction and the ground-truth volume as a function of
σ, where both volumes are convolved with the same Gaus-
sian kernel and largerσcorresponds to more aggressive
smoothing along the line of sight. For all five test volumes,
our method outperforms the baselines at every blur scale,
demonstrating that the improvements provided by our dif-
fusion prior are not tied to any particular choice of radial
smoothing.
12. Weak Gravitational Lensing Formalism
12.1. Deflection and Shape Distortion
A more explicit derivation of Eq. (3)–Eq. (5) is presented
below. Further details can be found in [3, 38].
Consider a background galaxy (“source”) whose image
is being weakly lensed by an extended 3D mass distribution
(“lens”). The source is observed at angular positionθon the
sky, whereas in the absence of lensing it would appear atβ.
We therefore define the scaled deflection angleαthrough
the lens equation:
β=θ−α. (8)
For an extended 3D mass distribution, the deflection an-
gle depends on the gravitational potentialΦencountered by

Figure 10. Additional 3D Recovery Results. We show full 3D overdensityδreconstructions for V olumes 4, 5 and 6, comparing our
diffusion-based posterior sampler with the Neural Ensemble and Wiener filter baselines. Our method more accurately localizes structures
to the correct redshift slices and recovers finer-scale morphology along the line of sight. The baselines tend to smear overdense regions
or miss small-scale features entirely. Together with Fig. 9, these results confirm that the improvements observed in the main paper hold
across all evaluated lightcones.
the light ray along its path from source to observer. Under
the Born approximation [3], this becomes the line-of-sight
integral:
α(θ, w) = 2
c2
Z w
0
dw′ w−w ′
w ∇⊥Φ(w′θ, w′). (9)
This expression is closely analogous to the Eikonal ray
equation from optics, which describes the deflection of a ray
by a refractive-index field [2, 4]. For convenience, we pull
the transverse gradient∇ ⊥ outside the integral and define
theeffective lensing potentialψ(θ, w), which represents the
weighted integral ofΦalong the line of sight:
ψ(θ, w) = 2
c2
Z w
0
dw′ w−w ′
w·w ′ Φ(w′θ, w′),(10)
α=∇ θψ (11)
While gravitational lensing deflects the apparent position
of light rays, our primary interest lies in how it distorts the
ellipticityeof a galaxy image (Eq. (1)). In the weak-lensing
regime, a first-order expansion shows that the shear compo-
nentsγ(Eq. (2)) are given by the partial derivatives of the
scaled deflection angle [3]:
γ1 ≈ 1
2(α11 −α 22)(12)
γ2 ≈α 12 =α 21 (13)
Here, we adopt the notationαij =∂α i/∂θ j, andα 12 =
α21 follows from the fact thatαis a gradient field. Con-
sequently, the shear can also be expressed in terms of the
effective lensing potential:
γ1 = 1
2( ∂2ψ
∂θ2
1
− ∂2ψ
∂θ2
2
)(14)
γ2 = ∂2ψ
∂θ1∂θ2
(15)
Intuitively, instead of a point-like ray, one may picture
a small ellipse representing a galaxy image. The gradient
(first-order derivatives) ofΦdetermines the deflectionαof
the ellipse’s center, while the second-order derivatives ofΦ
describe the shearγthat distorts its shape. To connect this
potential to the underlying matter field, quantified by the
density overdensityδ, we now introduce the convergence

κ:
κ= 1
2∆θψ(16)
= 1
c2 ∆θ
Z w
0
dw′ w−w ′
w·w ′ Φ(w′θ, w′)(17)
= 1
c2
Z w
0
dw′ w′(w−w ′)
w ∆Φ(w′θ, w′) (18)
In Eq. (18) we assume that theΦhas negligible deriva-
tive in the radial direction. Next, applying the Poisson equa-
tion for gravitational potential in comoving coordinates,
∆Φ = 3H2
0Ωmδ
2a (19)
which leads directly to the weighted projection of the
matter overdensity given in Eq. (3). To relate the conver-
genceκto the shearγ, we first invert the Poisson equa-
tion given in Eq. (16) using the method of Green’s functions
[14, 20]:
˜ψ(θ) = 1
π
Z
R2
d2θ′ ln|θ−θ ′|κ(θ′) (20)
Finally, plugging ˜ψinto Eq. (14) and Eq. (15) yields
Eq. (4).
12.2. Photometric Redshift Errors
When a survey relies on photometric redshifts, the projec-
tion defined in equation Eq. (3) must be marginalized over
the uncertainty in the source’s true redshift. For a galaxy
with a redshift probability distributionp(z), the expected
convergence is therefore obtained by averagingκ(θ, w)
over this distribution
κ(θ) =E z∼p(z),z=z(w) [κ(θ, w)] (21)
Conceptually, this replaces the upper limit in the line-of-
sight projection with an expectation over all comoving dis-
tances consistent with the photometric redshift estimate.
This leads to the standard expression in which the conver-
gence is written as an integral over comoving distance
κ(θ) = 3H2
0Ωm
2c2
Z w
0
dw δ(wθ, w)
a(w) g(w)w (22)
Here,g(w)denotes the lensing efficiency, which incor-
porates the probability that the galaxy lies behind a given
lens plane. It is defined by
g(w) =
Z wk
w
dw′ w′ −w
w′

p(z) dz
dw

z=z(w ′)
. (23)
Herew k is some reasonable upper limit on the source co-
moving distance. In practice, the efficiency functiong(w)
can be precomputed for each galaxy at any set of lens-
plane positions. To evaluate the required derivatives, such
asdz/dwand the mapping between redshift and comov-
ing distance, we use the cosmology packagejax-cosmo,
which provides differentiable cosmological functions.
Throughout this work, we model the photometric-
redshift distributionp(z)as a Gaussian centered on the mea-
sured redshift,
p(z)∼ N(z, σ z), σz = 0.11(1 +z) (24)
with the scatterσ z estimated from the JWST COSMOS-
Web shear catalog [39, 41]. This Gaussian approximation
is standard and has been adopted in several previous weak-
lensing studies [26, 42].
13.Conicus3D- Dataset Construction
Conicus3Dis a dataset of 3D lightcones, binned
into lensplanes, derived from theAbacusSummit
simulations [15, 27]. We use the 25base
boxes with the AbacusSummit fiducial cosmology
(AbacusSummit base c000 ph{000-024}),
as well as onebasebox from the cos-
mology corresponding to massless neutrinos
(AbacusSummit base c009 ph000). Each box
contains two lightcones spanning approximately28×28
deg2, from which we crop smaller patches to train the
diffusion model on a chosen survey footprint.
To construct the overdensity lensplanes, we follow the
methodology in [16] to compute the overdensity maps on
spherical shells. Given a particle shell map with particle
countN ij at pixel indexij, we compute the overdensity as:
δ(ij) = ρ(ij)
¯ρ −1 (25)
where
¯ρ= (Npart/L3
box)∆Ωχ2
j dχj (26)
is the mean density. HereN part = 69123 is the number
of particles in a simulation box,L box = 2Gpc/his the sim-
ulation box length,∆Ωis the solid-angle pixel area, andχ j
anddχ j are the shell center and width, respectively. The
density per pixel is therefore
ρ(ij) = Nij
dVj
= Nij
∆Ωχ2
j dχj
. (27)
After computing an overdensity map on each shell, we
combine the shells into 20 lensplanes using a weighted av-
erage. These planes span comoving distances from approx-
imately290to3580(z≈2) Mpc/h. Each lensplane is
assigned an effective scale factor and comoving distance;
values for a subset of these planes are provided in Table 3.

Figure 11. Resolution Analysis across radial blur scales. We evaluate the blurred 3D cross-correlationρblur
3D (σ)between each reconstruction
and the ground truth as a function of the Gaussian blur widthσ(in lensplanes). Largerσcorresponds to more aggressive smoothing
along the line of sight. Across all five simulated volumes, our method achieves higher correlation than both baselines for every blur scale,
demonstrating improved depth resolution at both fine and coarse radial smoothing regimes. The consistently superior performance indicates
that our diffusion-based prior enhances radial structure recovery independently of the chosen blur width.
Plane Index RedshiftzScale FactoraCenter (Mpc/h) Width (Mpc/h)
0 0.13 0.88 372.25 164.5
2 0.25 0.80 701.25 164.5
6 0.52 0.66 1359.25 164.5
12 1.04 0.49 2346.25 164.5
19 1.92 0.34 3497.75 164.5
Table 3. Geometry of selectedConicus3Dlensplanes. For reference, we list the redshift, scale factor, comoving distance, and physical
width for several representative lensplanes used in theConicus3Ddataset. These planes are derived from overdensity shells computed
following the methodology of [16] and subsequently binned into 20 evenly spaced lensplanes in comoving distance. The planes span the full
radial range of the lightcone (approximately 290–3580 Mpc/h, corresponding toz≈2), and their geometry is used both in constructing the
dataset and in defining the line-of-sight distances relevant for weak-lensing projections. This subset illustrates the non-uniform evolution
of redshift and scale factor across the lightcone and provides context for the depth-dependent analysis presented in the supplement.

Algorithm 1Modified Decoupled Annealing Posterior Sampling
Require:Observationγ, diffusion priorp(δ), weak-lensing forward model, annealing schedule{σ T , . . . , σ0}, power spec-
trumP(k)
1:Initializeδ T ∼ N(0, σ 2
TI)
2:fort=T, T−1, . . . ,0do
3:Prior projection via diffusion model:
4: ˆδ0 ←REVERSEDIFFUSION(δ t, σt)
5:Likelihood-guided refinement (Langevin dynamics):
6:Define prior covarianceΣusing Fourier diagonalP(k)
7:Sampleδ 0|γ with Langevin updates targetinglogp(γ|δ) + logN(δ; ˆδ0,Σ)
8:ift >0then
9:Drawϵ∼ N(0,I)
10:δ t−1 ←δ 0|γ +σ t−1 ϵ
11:end if
12:end for
13:returnsamples{δ 0}approximatingp(δ|γ)
14. Decoupled Annealing Posterior Sampling
To draw samples from the posterior distributionp(δ|γ),
we use a modified version of Decoupled Annealing Poste-
rior Sampling (DAPS) [48]. DAPS constructs a sequence of
noise-annealed posteriorsp(δ t |γ)indexed by a decreasing
noise scaleσ t. Sampling proceeds from a high-noise initial
distribution toward the target posterior, alternating between
(1) projecting the current sample toward the learned prior
using the diffusion model, and (2) refining it using likeli-
hood guidance from the weak-lensing forward model.
At each stage, the diffusion model provides a clean esti-
mate ˆδ0 consistent with the data-driven prior. This estimate
is then refined using Langevin dynamics that incorporates
both the WL likelihood and a Gaussian prior term. Unlike
the standard DAPS formulation, we replace the diagonal
covariance of this Gaussian prior with a Fourier-space co-
variance derived from the estimated matter power spectrum.
This modification enforces statistical isotropy and transla-
tion invariance and helps ensure that radial and angular cor-
relations of the overdensity field are preserved throughout
sampling.
After refinement, the sample is re-noised according to
the next noise levelσ t−1, enabling a coherent annealing
schedule. Iterating this process yields approximate samples
fromp(δ|γ), which accurately capture both small-scale
structure and the full posterior variability needed for down-
stream cosmological analyses.
15. Broader Applicability of the Spectral Co-
variance Formulation
The prior covariance in our formulation (Eq. 7) is diago-
nalized in Fourier space by the power spectrum, a struc-
ture that arises naturally whenever the field of interest is ap-
proximately translation-invariant. This property is common
across scientific inverse problems.
In adaptive optics, the Kolmogorov power spectrum
characterizes atmospheric wavefront phase covariance, and
phase screens are standardly generated by spectral filter-
ing in Fourier space [24]. In geophysical inversion, sub-
surface properties such as seismic velocity and porosity are
modeled as stationary fields with spectrally defined covari-
ance for posterior sampling in tomography and reservoir
characterization [18]. In CMB analysis, the angular power
spectrumC ℓ defines a harmonic-diagonal signal covariance
for Wiener filtering and constrained realizations of the mi-
crowave sky [13].
In each case, translation invariance permits efficient
spectral representation of the prior. We believe our spectral
sampling strategy could be adapted to improve diffusion-
based posterior sampling in these and similar inverse prob-
lems, as properly modeling the covariance structure allows
the sampler to more faithfully represent the learned prior
distribution during inference.