Title: Solar vortex detection methods in MHD simulations: impact of magnetic field and spatial resolution
Authors: M. Koll Pistarini, E. Khomenko, T. Felipe, M. Modestov
Published: 2026-06-01
Categories: astro-ph.SR

Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. aa59850-26©ESO 2026
June 2, 2026
Solar vortex detection methods in MHD simulations: impact of
magnetic field and spatial resolution
M. Koll Pistarini1,2 , E. Khomenko1,2 , T. Felipe1,2 , and M. Modestov1,2,3
1 Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias, 38205 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
2 Departamento de Astrofísica, Universidad de La Laguna, 38205 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
3 Institute of Chemical Kinetics and Combustion SB RAS, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia
June 2, 2026
ABSTRACT
Context.Small-scale vortices are ubiquitous structures that exist over a wide range of spatial extents in the solar atmosphere. They
are considered to play an important role in the energy transport and local heating. However, numerical simulations frequently assess
the effect of vortices without simultaneously considering the effects of spatial resolution and differences in magnetic configuration.
Aims.We investigate the influence of different magnetic field configurations and spatial resolutions on vortex structures. We evaluate
two detection methods to determine their impact on the morphology, statistical properties, and temperature profiles of vortices.
Methods.We analyzed a set of six three-dimensional realistic simulations of the solar atmosphere under three different magnetic field
configurations: a small-scale dynamo and two initially vertical implanted magnetic fields of 50 G and 200 G. Three different spatial
resolutions have been employed: 20×20×14, 10×10×7 and 5×5×3.5 km 3. We applied two vortex detection methods based
on the velocity gradient tensor to all of the models: swirling strength and the SWIRL code. We performed a comparison of vortex
locations obtained with both methods, and a statistical analyses of the vortex generation mechanisms, the area covered by vortices,
their number and characteristic sizes, and temperature profiles as a function of height.
Results.We have confirmed that different magnetic field configurations and spatial resolutions impact the area coverage, number,
and sizes of vortices. Likewise, the detection methods impact the statistics obtained. Swirling strength detects vortices with any
orientation but a height-dependent threshold is needed. SWIRL only detects vertically-oriented vortices but shows a better agreement
with the rotating horizontal velocity field. Simulations with a vertical magnetic field of 50 G support the formation of chromospheric
vortices without a photospheric counterpart, while most of the vortices in the 200 G model directly connect the photosphere with
the chromosphere. Small-scale dynamo simulations are characterized by a large number of horizontal vortices, with vertical vortices
being nearly absent at chromospheric layers. Temperature profiles of vortices confirm that they are hotter than their surroundings,
regardless the simulation setup.
Conclusions.V ortices are ubiquitous throughout the solar atmosphere. Their detection is affected by the methodology employed, with
SWIRL being a more robust method. The strength of the magnetic field and the numerical resolution considerably affect the number
and size of the structures detected. Despite this, they all show temperatures higher than those of their surroundings.
Key words.Sun: atmosphere – Sun: photosphere – Sun: chromosphere – Sun: magnetic fields
1. Introduction
Over the last decade, vortical structures have been proposed
as important mechanisms for transporting energy through-
out the solar atmosphere. In the photosphere, vortical mo-
tions have been identified in intergranular lanes by track-
ing the motion of magnetic bright points (Brandt et al.
1988; Bonet et al. 2008) or by inferring the horizontal ve-
locity field with Local Correlation Tracking (LCT) meth-
ods (Bonet et al. 2010; Vargas Domínguez et al. 2011). Sub-
sequently, several detections have been reported at chromo-
spheric layers, where swirling motions are primarily identified
by following morphological signatures across high-resolution
time series (Wedemeyer-Böhm & Rouppe Van Der V oort 2009;
Park et al. 2016; Tziotziou et al. 2018; Dakanalis et al. 2022).
Wedemeyer-Böhm et al. (2012) performed a multi-wavelength
study combing data from SST/CRISP and SDO/AIA. For the
first time, the authors found signatures of a vortical structure that
connects the photosphere with the solar corona, suggesting that
they could act as channeling conduits that transport energy along
them.
Current vortex observations in quiet Sun regions
show a wide range of spatial scales. Large-scale struc-
tures with diameters of approximately 2−5 Mm have
been identified in the photosphere (Brandt et al. 1988;
Balmaceda et al. 2010; Requerey et al. 2018) and the chro-
mosphere (Wedemeyer-Böhm & Rouppe Van Der V oort 2009;
Morton et al. 2013; Dakanalis et al. 2022). Reported small-
scale vortices are often limited by the spatial resolution of
the current instrumentation. However, features of only about
0.5 Mm in diameters have been observed in both layers
(e.g., Vargas Domínguez et al. 2011; Requerey et al. 2017;
Giagkiozis et al. 2018; Park et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2019).
Realistic MHD numerical simulations allow us to study
vortical structures at a level of detail and spatial resolu-
tion that is not possible to achieve with current obser-
vations. In addition, the complete information of the ve-
locity and magnetic vector fields is available at any time
instants. Several works have focused on the analysis of
vortices at photospheric and chromospheric heights (e.g.,
Moll et al. 2011, 2012; Kitiashvili et al. 2011; Yadav et al.
2020, 2021; Silva et al. 2020, 2021; Khomenko et al. 2021).
Article number, page 1
arXiv:2606.02330v1  [astro-ph.SR]  1 Jun 2026

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59850-26
The analysis of vortices have been performed using differ-
ent numerical codes such as Bifrost(Gudiksen et al. 2011),
CO5BOLD (Freytag et al. 2012), Mancha3D (Modestov et al.
2024) or MURaM (Vögler et al. 2005; Rempel 2014, 2017).
However, small differences in the internal implementation of
the numerical schemes can affect the comparison of simulations
computed with different codes (Fleck et al. 2021).
Most vortex studies analyze a single magnetic field config-
uration, with simulations that include vertically implanted mag-
netic fields between 10 to 200 G, as well as dynamo models (for
a detailed summary see Tziotziou et al. 2023). Battaglia et al.
(2021) and Kannan & Yadav (2024) included a comparison be-
tween three magnetic field configurations, finding differences in
vortex generation among magnetizations. They suggest that in-
termediate magnetic fields of about 50 G can favor the genera-
tion of chromospheric vortices due to a balance between mag-
netic and gas pressure.
Previous works have analyzed the equation of vorticity
(Stein & Nordlund 1998; Shelyag et al. 2011; Silva et al. 2024a)
to study the main drivers of vortex generation in a single
magnetic field configuration. But as Canivete Cuissa & Steiner
(2020) showed, this equation is not the best choice as it includes
shear flows. They proposed a new equation of evolution of the
swirling strength which is not affected by them. A detailed anal-
ysis of the main vortex generation mechanisms using this new
approach is needed to assess the impact of different magnetic
field configurations without being contaminated by shear flows.
In addition, a variety of spatial resolutions have been used,
typically ranging from 10 to 20 km in all spatial dimensions.
While the study by Moll et al. (2011) included three models at
different spatial resolutions, the authors did not analyze the im-
pact of spatial resolution on the identified vortex. To our knowl-
edge, no previous studies have directly analyzed this effect.
Typical small-scale vortex sizes in magneto-convection sim-
ulations have diameters of around 50−100 km in the photo-
sphere, reaching values of 100−200 km in the chromosphere
(Silva et al. 2020; Yadav et al. 2021; Cuissa & Steiner 2023).
There are few detections in numerical simulations of larger vor-
tices with diameters between 1−2 Mm (Yadav et al. 2020;
Silva et al. 2024b), but their rate of occurrence appears to be
lower compared to the smallest vortices (Tziotziou et al. 2023).
Simulations of coronal loops have also revealed a few detec-
tions of larger vortices (Breu et al. 2023; Kuniyoshi et al. 2025).
Yadav et al. (2020) observed that most of the energy is trans-
ported by small-scale vortices, significantly contributing to the
upward Poynting flux due to horizontal motions. Therefore, fur-
ther investigation of small-scale vortices is required, given their
abundance and energetic contribution to the solar atmosphere.
A key aspect in vortex analysis is the detection method
employed. Despite it is easy to understand the appearance
of vortices in a vector field, a mathematical definition of
this phenomenon is rather complex. Identifying these struc-
tures in turbulent and compressible flows further increases
the complexity, being one of the long-standing problems
in fluid dynamics (Jeong & Hussain 1995; Günther & Theisel
2018). In the last years, many efforts have been dedicated
to the development of new techniques for vortex detection.
In solar physics, several detection methods have been ap-
plied: vorticity (Stein & Nordlund 1998; Shelyag et al. 2011),
Γ-Functions methods (Graftieaux et al. 2001; Giagkiozis et al.
2018), Lagrangian-Averaged (LA VD) and Instantaneous (IVD)
V orticity Deviations (Haller et al. 2016; Silva et al. 2020,
2021) or velocity gradient tensor criteria such as Q-criterion
(Khomenko et al. 2021; Silva et al. 2021), swirling strength
Table 1: Total duration of the simulation runs analyzed.
∆x×∆y×∆zkm 3 SSD Bz50 Bz200
20×20×14 20 min 26.3 min 17.3 min
10×10×7 20 min 14.5 min -
5×5×3.5 4 min - -
(Moll et al. 2011, 2012; Yadav et al. 2020, 2021) or Rortex
methods (Cuissa & Steiner 2022). Each method allows to iso-
late vortical motions to some extent, although they have specific
advantages and limitations depending on the research objectives.
In this paper, we aim to perform a complete statistical analy-
sis of vortical structures in numerical simulations. In particular,
we investigate how vortical structures are affected across differ-
ent magnetic field configurations and spatial resolutions by an-
alyzing source terms of generation of vorticity, morphological
properties and temperature profiles. For this purpose, we ana-
lyzed Mancha3D simulations comparing two vortex detection
methods: the swirling strength criterion (Zhou et al. 1999) and
the recently developed SWIRL code (Cuissa & Steiner 2022).
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the
numerical setup, while Section 3 provides a description of the
two detection methods used. Our main results are shown and
discussed in Section 4. Conclusions are presented in Section 5.
2. Numerical datasets
We used of a set of realistic three-dimensional radia-
tive MHD simulations computed with the Mancha3D code
(Modestov et al. 2024). The code solves the single-fluid, non-
linear MHD equations and can account for non-ideal processes
such as ambipolar diffusion, Hall term, and Biermann battery ef-
fect. The set of MHD equations is closed with a realistic equation
of state based on solar abundances (Anders & Grevesse 1989).
Radiative losses are computed under Local Thermodynamic
Equilibrium (LTE) using the gray approximation. The computa-
tional domain of all simulations spans 5.76×5.76×2.3 Mm3, cov-
ering from about 0.9 Mm below the photosphere up to 1.4 Mm
into the low chromosphere. Periodic lateral boundaries are ap-
plied. The bottom boundary is open with controlled conditions
for mass and energy fluxes to reproduce the solar radiative flux.
The upper boundary is closed for mass flows and symmetric con-
ditions (zero gradient) are applied for density and internal en-
ergy. Further details about the calculation of the simulations can
be found in Khomenko et al. (2025).
Three different magnetic configurations are available: a
small-scale dynamo (SSD), where the magnetic field is seeded
by the Biermann battery term (Khomenko et al. 2018); and two
initially implanted uniform vertical magnetic field of 50 G
(Bz50) and 200 G (Bz200), which are representative of a
medium magnetized quiet-Sun region and a plage area, respec-
tively. Simulations with three different spatial resolutions have
been computed: 20×20×14 km3 (low), 10×10×7 km3 (medium),
and 5×5×3.5 km 3 (high), covering the same computational
domain. SSD simulations are available at all three spatial reso-
lutions, whereas the Bz50 model was computed at medium and
low resolutions, and the Bz200 simulation only at the lower res-
olution. The temporal evolution of all simulations is about 20
minutes of solar time, with snapshots saved every 10 seconds.
The SSD model at high spatial resolution is only available for 4
minutes due to computational constraints. Table 1 shows a sum-
Article number, page 2

M. Koll Pistarini et al.: Solar vortex detection methods in MHD simulations: impact of magnetic field and spatial resolution
mary of the six simulation setups. The models analyzed in this
study do not include non-ideal effects, with the exception of the
Biermann battery term in the SSD models (they correspond to
thecleanmodels described in Khomenko et al. (2025)).
3. Vortex detection methods
In this study, we applied two vortex detection methods to
evaluate their performance on our set of numerical simula-
tions: the swirling strength criterion (Zhou et al. 1999) and
the SWIRL code (Cuissa & Steiner 2022). Swirling strength
has been widely used in the literature to detect and ana-
lyze solar vortices in numerical simulations (e.g. Moll et al.
2011, 2012; Kato & Wedemeyer 2017; Yadav et al. 2020, 2021;
Battaglia et al. 2021; Kannan & Yadav 2024). In contrast,
SWIRL is a novel method with an advanced detection process,
which has only been used by Cuissa & Steiner (2023). Applying
these methods allowed us to systematically compare their results
across different models, as both are based on the velocity gradi-
ent tensor.
3.1. Swirling strength
This method is based on the decomposition of the velocity gradi-
ent tensorU i j :=∂ jvi into eigenvectors and eigenvalues. V ortex
structures are located in regions where the velocity gradient ten-
sor has a complex conjugated pair of eigenvalues (Chong et al.
1990). Then,Ucan be decomposed as follows,
U=[u r,u +,u −]
|       {z       }
P

λr 0 0
0λ c+ 0
0 0λ c−

|             {z             }
Λ
[ur,u +,u −]−1
|          {z          }
P−1
,(1)
whereλ r,λ c+ andλ c− are the eigenvalues associated with the
eigenvectorsu r,u +,u −, respectively. The direction of the rota-
tion axis is given by the real eigenvectoru r, whileu + andu − are
the eigenvectors that characterize the swirling motion in the ro-
tation plane (Zhou et al. 1999).Prefers to the matrix composed
by the eigenvectors, withP −1 its inverse, andΛrepresents the
matrix containing the eigenvalues. The complex conjugated pair
of eigenvalues (λc±) can be expressed asλ c± =λ cr ±iλ ci, where
λcr andλ ci are the real and imaginary parts, respectively. The
strength of the vortex rotation (swirling strength) can be charac-
terized by the unsigned imaginary partλ ci (Zhou et al. 1999). In
addition, it is possible to define a swirling strength period (τ ci),
which characterizes the period of rotation of swirling structures
by the relationτ ci =2π/λ ci.
Swirling strength enables the detection of rotational motions
from the three-dimensional velocity field, which allows to trace
vortex regions oriented in any spatial direction. However, it re-
quires to select a threshold to remove weak vortices or noisy
regions not associated with vortices. In a turbulent plasma, the
choice of the threshold should be done by visual inspection to
ensure reliable results. A comparison between the spatial distri-
bution of swirling strength with the horizontal velocity field al-
lows to establish the optimal threshold that better isolates vortex
structures.
A common approach consists in applying a fixed thresh-
old to the whole computational domain (see e.g. Moll et al.
2012; Battaglia et al. 2021; Yadav et al. 2021). However, since
the threshold depends on the amplitude of the flow, it might not
remain accurate in simulations spanning a wide range of heights
in a gravitationally stratified atmosphere. Another approach is to
apply a height-dependent threshold based on the velocity field at
each height. In this way, it is not necessary to rely on a visual
comparison to determine an adequate threshold. We applied the
following definition:λth =µ+0.5σ, whereµandσare the mean
value and standard deviation of the logarithmicλ ci distribution
at each height, respectively (similarly to Kannan & Yadav 2024;
Kuniyoshi et al. 2025). We only consider vortex regions those
that satisfyλ ci > λth at each height.
Grid points associated with vortex structures are indepen-
dently computed at each time instant. The detections are ex-
pected to present some degree of temporal coherence and, ide-
ally, this information should be included in the analysis. How-
ever, addressing this issue in small-scale vortices is a challenging
task. The method does not provide isolated individual vortices,
which hinders our ability to track the same vortex structure in
time. Thus, in this method we do not take into account the tem-
poral coherence of the detections to filter out transient structures.
3.2. SWIRL code
The SWIRL code is a newly developed open-access tool for au-
tomatic detection of vortices (Cuissa & Steiner 2022). It is based
on the mathematical quantity Rortex (Tian et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2018), which is also related to the velocity gradient tensor. Ror-
tex is derived by expressing the velocity gradient tensor in a ref-
erence frame aligned with the rotational axis of the fluid given by
ur (see Sec. 3.1). The magnitude of Rortex is directly linked to
the pure rotational component, making it a more robust method
compared to swirling strength, as it fully decouples contribu-
tions from shear motions. However, a key limitation of Rortex
lies in its computational complexity because it requires the cal-
culation and decomposition of several matrices. To address this
issue, Wang et al. (2019) and Xu et al. (2019) derived a new ex-
pression for Rortex computation, significantly reducing the as-
sociated computational costs:
R=ω·u r −
q
(ω·u r)2 −(2λ ci)2 ,(2)
whereω=∇ ×vis the vorticity. SWIRL combines the Rortex
quantity with a clustering algorithm (Rodriguez & Laio 2014) to
automatically identify vortex locations. It estimates and groups
local centers of curvature from the velocity field. Regions with
high density concentration of points are indicative of potential
vortex locations. The clustering approach enhances the detection
of regions with a closed velocity field.
The SWIRL code takes a 2D velocity field as input. We pro-
vided the horizontal components of the velocity field (v x,v y).
This approach allows for a better comparison with observations,
which are mostly restricted to the horizontal plane. However, the
code can be applied to any other pair of components of the ve-
locity field. Additionally, SWIRL requires a parameter file which
must be tuned to the specific simulation setup (see Appendix A).
We applied the same parameter file across all heights for a given
model. Simulations with different magnetic field configurations
and spatial resolutions require small adjustments of the param-
eters to optimize the performance of the code. The most impor-
tant parameter to adjust is the set of stencils used for the com-
putations (see Appendix A for details). These stencils control
the scales at which curvatures in the velocity field are detected
through the calculation of the velocity gradient tensor deriva-
tives. This represents a significant advantage over the swirling
strength criterion, which relies on a single scale.
Article number, page 3

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59850-26
The output consists of grid cell locations where vortices are
detected, with the information for each vortex being individu-
ally separated. We removed vortices with less than 5 grid points
as we consider that there is not enough information to assure
that they are rotating structures. We refined the area associated
to each vortex by imposing that all grid points belonging to a
single structure form a closed contour. To that end, we applied
a convex hull algorithm (Barber et al. 1996) to each vortex de-
tection. This improves the quality of the results by providing
more circular shaped contours that better fit the rotating veloc-
ity field. The process only adds a few grid points to the area of
each vortex, without affecting the locations and centers of the
detections. Since we have each structure isolated, temporal in-
formation can be included across consecutive snapshots, unlike
the swirling strength method (Sec. 3.1). We applied the condition
that detections must persist at a close distance for at least 10 sec-
onds before and after the snapshot under consideration. This is
done by checking if at least one grid point of the vortex is shared
by the vortex detections in the previous and posterior snapshots.
Thus, we ensure that the analyzed structures have a minimum
lifetime of 20 seconds (meaning three consecutive snapshots).
The applied selection helps to filter out possible false detections
and transient structures identified by the code. To perform the
three-dimensional analysis of vortices, the code was applied to
all heights of the simulation domain, allowing the reconstruction
of the complete vortex structures. We consider a vortex to belong
to the same three-dimensional structure as long as the separation
between the detected centers in the vertical and horizontal direc-
tions is less than 3 grid cells in each direction for the low resolu-
tion models. This value is scaled by the resolution improvement
factor to maintain consistent physical structures across different
resolutions.
The results include a wide variety of rotating regions with
different sizes and rotation speeds. Thus, the code can identify
vortices with weak rotation speeds in comparison with the aver-
age velocities at the same height. We are interested in vortices
rotating fast enough to meaningfully contribute to the energy
transport. Thus, vortices with very low rotation speeds compared
to the average velocity flows have been removed. Indeed, this
selection is analogous to the application of a threshold in the
swirling strength method (see Sec. 3.1), which excludes weaker
vortex motions. To address this issue, we used the Rortex quan-
tity computed by the SWIRL code with the smallest stencil (see
Appendix A). We restrict the study to vortices that present Ror-
tex values above the mean value at the corresponding height in
at least 10% of the detected vortex area. This criterion has been
determined by visual inspection through a trial and error process
in all of the simulations (see Appendix B for a visual example).
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Swirling strength threshold
Left panel of Fig. 1 shows the spatio-temporal averages of the
height-dependent threshold as a function of height (see Sec. 3.1).
This quantity is related to the average rotation speeds in vor-
tex regions. We observe a similar behavior between models but
with differences in magnitude. In the convection zone (below
Z=0 Mm), results are essentially grouped by spatial resolu-
tion. Higher resolution simulations improve the accuracy of the
velocity gradient tensor and enable the detection of small vor-
tex structures that would remain unresolved at lower resolutions.
This leads to an increase in swirling strength magnitude. At the
solar surface,λ th quantity decreases and converges for all the
0.5
 0.0 0.5 1.0
Z [Mm]
0
1
2
3
4
5
th  [×10 2 Hz]
0.5
 0.0 0.5 1.0
Z [Mm]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Vrms  [Km/s]
SSD 20km
SSD 10km
SSD 5km
Bz50 20km
Bz50 10km
Bz200 20km
Fig. 1: Horizontal and temporal average of the height-dependent
swirling strength thresholdλ th (left) and the rms velocity (right).
The meaning of the curves is indicated in the figure. Vertical gray
dashed lines are references atZ=0 Mm andZ=1 Mm.
models. Differences are amplified again in the chromosphere. At
the same spatial resolution, Bz50 simulations yield vortices that
exhibit faster rotation speeds, followed by Bz200 and SSD mod-
els.
We compute the rms velocity profiles of each model (right
panel of Fig. 1) to evaluate its relationship with the height-
dependent thresholdλ th. The velocity profiles show the dynam-
ics of the simulations across the domain. In the convection zone,
the velocities increase with height up to the solar surface, where
convection stops and plasma motions are slowed down. There,
low amplitude waves are excited, which slowly increase their
amplitude with height due to the drop in density. Thus, veloc-
ity perturbations grow up to the top of the domain. This behav-
ior in the velocity profiles has been previously reported in the
literature (Fleck et al. 2021). All models show a similar behav-
ior. Bz200 simulation exhibits a lower velocity profile compared
with the other models, as strong magnetic fields suppress plasma
motions. We do not find significant differences between spatial
resolutions.
Comparing both panels of Fig. 1 reveals that the height-
dependent threshold is intrinsically linked to the rms velocity
profiles. This is expected as swirling strength is derived from
the velocity field. Both quantities exhibit a strong dependence
on atmospheric height, highlighting the importance of applying
a height-dependent threshold. Each model requires a specific se-
lection of values. Bz50 simulations allow for vortices with faster
average rotation speed, despite having velocity profiles compara-
ble to the SSD models. Stronger magnetic fields suppress plasma
motions, leading to a decrease in vortex rotation speeds. V ortices
in weaker magnetic fields configurations are found in slower
plasma flows compared with unipolar models. Therefore, these
results suggest that intermediate magnetic fields are optimal for
generating vortices with enhanced rotation (as also observed by
Battaglia et al. (2021) and Kannan & Yadav (2024)). Increasing
Article number, page 4

M. Koll Pistarini et al.: Solar vortex detection methods in MHD simulations: impact of magnetic field and spatial resolution
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
|T i
z | [s−2]
SSD 20 Km T 1
T 2
T 3
T 4
ΣiT i
SSD 10 Km SSD 5 Km
0.5
 0.0 0.5 1.0
Z [Mm]
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
|T i
z | [s−2]
Bz50 20 Km
0.5
 0.0 0.5 1.0
Z [Mm]
Bz50 10 Km
0.5
 0.0 0.5 1.0
Z [Mm]
Bz200 20 Km
Fig. 2: Horizontal and temporal averages of the absolute val-
ues of the vertical component of the swirling strength generation
terms given by Eq. 3 as a function of height, corresponding to the
hydrodynamic stretching (T 1, blue lines) and baroclinic (T 2, or-
ange lines) terms, and the magnetic baroclinic (T 3, green lines)
and tension (T 4, red lines) terms. The black dashed line repre-
sents the total production of swirling strength given by P
i T i.
Each panel corresponds to the model indicated in the top left
corner. Vertical gray dashed lines are visual references at Z=0
Mm and Z=1 Mm.
the spatial resolution also leads to higher swirling strength val-
ues, mainly in the convection zone and the chromosphere.
4.2. Swirling strength generation terms
Analyzing the equation of evolution of vorticity allows to un-
derstand the main mechanisms of vortex generation. Several
previous studies apply the equation of evolution of vortic-
ityω(Stein & Nordlund 1998; Shelyag et al. 2011; Silva et al.
2024a). But this equation is not entirely suitable for studying
the mechanisms that generates vorticity, as it also includes shear
flows. Following the derivation of Canivete Cuissa & Steiner
(2020), it is possible to compute the time evolution of swirling
strength as:
d
dt λci =−2λ ciλcr T 1
−Im
(
P−1
"
∇ ⊗
 1
ρ ∇pg
!#
P
)
22
T 2
−Im
(
P−1
"
∇ ⊗
 1
ρ ∇pm
!
−
 
∇1
ρ
!
⊗(B· ∇)B
#
P
)
22
T 3
+Im
(
P−1
"1
ρ ∇ ⊗ ((B· ∇)B )
#
P
)
22
T 4
−Im
n
P−1 [∇ ⊗(∇Φ) ] P
o
22 .T 5
(3)
whereρ,p g,p m,B, andΦare the plasma density, the gas and
magnetic pressure, the magnetic field vector, and the potential
of conservative forces (gravity in our case), respectively. The
symbol⊗represents the tensor product, meaning that the re-
sult is a 3×3 matrix, from which we are only interested in the
imaginary part of the (2,2) component (for further details see
Canivete Cuissa & Steiner 2020).
Each term of Eq. 3 has a physical interpretation analogous
to that of the terms in the vorticity equation.T 1 andT 2 are re-
lated to hydrodynamical processes, and they are interpreted as
the stretching and baroclinic terms, respectively.T 3 andT 4 ac-
count for the magnetic contributions to the swirling strength gen-
eration. The former is related to the magnetic baroclinicity while
the latter represents the magnetic tension.T 5 accounts for the
generation of swirling strength due to the effect of conservative
forces. As we employ a constant gravitational field across the
domain,T 5 will not be considered further.
To analyze the generation of swirling strength only in the
vertical direction, we multiply each term in the swirling strength
equation by the vertical component of the axis of rotation vector:
T i
z =T i(ur)z (Canivete Cuissa & Steiner 2020). The same proce-
dure can be applied to compute the horizontal components of the
terms in the swirling strength generation equation.
Figure 2 shows the spatio-temporal absolute averages of each
of the vertical terms given by Eq. 3. We observe that in all of
the models, the dominant mechanism for generating swirling
strength in the convection zone is the hydrodynamic baroclinic
term. At this point, the behavior depends on the magnetic field
configuration of the models. In SSD simulations, the magnetic
baroclinic term becomes comparable with the hydrodynamic
baroclinic term across the solar atmosphere. In contrast, unipo-
lar models show a transition in the photosphere where magnetic
baroclinic and magnetic tension become the dominant drivers
of swirling strength generation. This transition takes place at a
lower atmospheric height in Bz200 due to the stronger magnetic
field of the simulation. The contribution of the stretching term is
negligible compared with the other terms in all models.
The SSD simulations are characterized by a large plasma
beta across the entire domain. However, even in this case, the
magnetic pressure plays an important role in generating swirling
strength across the solar atmosphere. This indicates that the pres-
ence of weak fields can enhance the generation of vortical mo-
tions. We observe that the addition of a vertical magnetic field
in the simulations modifies the main mechanisms of swirling
strength generation. There, magnetic terms are the dominant
drivers of vortex generation. We also note that the contribution of
the hydrodynamic baroclinic term is stronger in the Bz200 model
than in the Bz50 and SSD simulations at the same resolution.
Stronger fields can increase the density and pressure gradients in
magnetic field concentrations. This effect favors the generation
of vortex regions through the hydrodynamic baroclinic term.
We find that a higher spatial resolution increases the magni-
tude of the production of swirling strength. A finer spatial grid
allows for better resolution of small structures and turbulence,
leading to a systematic increase of these quantities. We also note
that the relative importance of the magnetic pressure term in-
creases in relation to the hydrodynamic baroclinic term from the
bottom boundary to the solar surface with spatial resolution. This
effect is especially visible in the SSD and Bz50 simulations from
20 km to 10 km models. Khomenko et al. (2025) show that there
is a scaling in magnetic field strength in SSD and Bz50 simula-
tions at sub-surfaces layers, which can explain these results.
Article number, page 5

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59850-26
The dashed black line of Fig. 2 shows the total gener-
ation of swirling strength ( P
i T i). As previously noted by
Canivete Cuissa & Steiner (2020), the generation of swirling
strength due to both baroclinic terms is higher than the total pro-
duction of swirling strength. This happens because both terms
compensate each other as they have opposite effects. For ex-
ample, regions with a positive magnetic pressure gradient lead
to regions with a negative gas pressure gradient. We have sim-
ilar results to those of Canivete Cuissa & Steiner (2020) for the
Bz50 model at 10 km resolution (which is the model most sim-
ilar to the one used by these authors). This behavior indicates
that the effect of the sum of both baroclinic terms drops in the
photosphere and becomes comparable with the magnetic tension
term. We found a similar effect in all of the simulations. In ad-
dition, the Bz200 model shows a different picture in the upper
layers. There, both magnetic terms are above the total swirling
strength. This means that these two terms appear to compensate
each other. We suggest that the balance of forces between the
magnetic tension and the magnetic pressure is more critical in
the Bz200 model than in the Bz50 simulation, as gas pressure
has a lower contribution due to the stronger fields. We believe
that this line of work deserves further study, which is beyond the
scope of the present paper.
4.3.2D spatial distribution
Figure 3 shows a comparison of vortex detections produced
by swirling strength (green patches) and the SWIRL code (or-
ange and blue contours) at two different heights. From left to
right, each column corresponds to the SSD, Bz50, and Bz200
models at 20 km horizontal spatial resolution. As discussed in
Sec. 3.1, the swirling strength method requires a threshold to
discard weak vortices and noisy regions, which depends on the
model and the spatial resolution of the simulation. Thus, Fig. 3
only shows swirling strength regions which are above the height-
dependent criterion (given by Fig. 1). The orange contours from
SWIRL represent the raw detections after only applying the con-
vex hull algorithm, while blue contours from SWIRL represent
those vortices that additionally satisfy our complete filter selec-
tion (Sec. 3.2).
AtZ=0 Mm (first and second row), the regions detected
by swirling strength are mainly distributed in elongated struc-
tures in all three models. Comparing these regions with the back-
ground vertical velocity map, we observe that swirling strength
detections are located along intergranular lanes. This is a con-
sequence of granulation. Upward and downward motions at the
edges of granules and intergranules lead to a rotation along a hor-
izontal axis (also reported by Moll et al. 2011, 2012). Appendix
C shows some examples of vertical slices where the horizontal
rotation is illustrated. These results are independent of the mag-
netic field configuration. All three models exhibit a similar spa-
tial distribution of swirling strength as the underlying physics is
hydrodynamic in nature. These large horizontal structures have
also been reported in observations as bright and dark edges along
intergranular lanes (Steiner et al. 2010).
The second row of Fig. 3 shows a close-up view of the
black dotted square areas for each model together with the hor-
izontal velocity field (black arrows). A visual examination re-
veals numerous locations where rotation around the vertical
axis is found. The detected structures cover a range of sizes
and exhibit irregular shapes. For instance, in the Bz50 model
(middle column) a small vortex can be observed at (x,y)∼
(3.1 Mm,4.7 Mm) and a larger one at (x,y)∼(2.7 Mm,4.6 Mm).
We notice that parts of the large vortices remain undetected by
swirling strength as they often exhibit smoother velocity gradi-
ents in certain regions. Consequently, the swirling strength mag-
nitude decreases and may fall below the detection threshold, re-
sulting in a partial loss of the vortex structure. Smaller vortices
are not affected by this phenomenon.
We also note small regions detected by swirling strength
composed of only a few grid points. Visually, they are not as-
sociated with a rotation of the horizontal velocity field. These
features can be considered as noise of the method. They exceed
the threshold but are not associated with vortex flows.
V ortices detected by the SWIRL code exhibit a different
morphology compared to the results of swirling strength. These
structures are also located in intergranular lanes but are signifi-
cantly more compact, having an almost circular shape. The de-
tections have visibly better correspondence to the horizontal ve-
locity field, as SWIRL relies exclusively on these components
(Sec. 3.2). Therefore, this method enhances the identification of
vertically oriented vortices, being not able to detect horizontal
vortex structures.
SWIRL attempts to detect regions with a closed rotating ve-
locity field through its clustering algorithm. Thus, it can account
for whether the surroundings of a given grid point are also ro-
tating. This results in compact and isolated structures. Now, the
large vortex at (x,y)∼(2.7 Mm,4.6 Mm) in the Bz50 model,
is perfectly matched to the rotating velocity field. Most of the
SWIRL vortices in the photosphere are accurately represented.
The filtered-out vortices (orange contours) are generally the
smallest structures or those with lower rotation speeds. Some-
times, properly detected vortices are filtered out of our selection.
This arises mainly from the temporal filtering process, meaning
that these structures are short-lived. An example of such scenario
is the vortex in the SSD model around (x,y)∼(1.0 Mm,2.4 Mm)
atZ=0 Mm (second row, first column), although it is an uncom-
mon situation.
Unipolar models yield a significantly higher number of de-
tections when analyzed with the SWIRL code compared to
the SSD simulations. This indicates that the magnetic field
favors the generation of vertically oriented vortices. As we
noted in Sec. 4.2, stronger fields enhance the generation of
swirling strength through the hydrodynamic and magnetic baro-
clinic terms. As a consequence, a larger number of vortices
are found. Previous studies have analyzed the vorticity equa-
tion in strong magnetic field simulations (Shelyag et al. 2011;
Silva et al. 2024a) and concluded that the primary mechanism
for vortex generation is the magnetic baroclinic term. How-
ever, these results should be taken with caution, as the vortic-
ity equation may not be the most suitable tool for this purpose
(Canivete Cuissa & Steiner 2020). In addition, the sizes of the
detections are also affected by the magnetic field. We notice a
slight increase in the vortex area in unipolar models with respect
to SSD simulations.
The third and fourth rows of Fig. 3 show the results atZ=
1 Mm at the same time instant. As we move into higher layers of
the solar atmosphere, the turbulence of the plasma increases, as
can be seen in the fourth row. Therefore, the performance of the
methods may be affected due to the complexity of the flows.
In SSD simulations, regions detected by swirling strength
also exhibit an elongated shape, as atZ=0 Mm, but now lo-
cated along shock fronts. Moll et al. (2012) and Battaglia et al.
(2021) reported similar results in a non-magnetic simulation.
These detections are believed to be a consequence of the tran-
sit of shock fronts, which can generate horizontal vortices due
to the strong pressure gradients through the baroclinic term (see
Article number, page 6

M. Koll Pistarini et al.: Solar vortex detection methods in MHD simulations: impact of magnetic field and spatial resolution
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0Y [Mm]
Z = 0 Mm
6
 4
 2
 0 2 4 6
Vz [Km/s]
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Z = 0 Mm
6
 4
 2
 0 2 4 6
Vz [Km/s]
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Z = 0 Mm
6
 4
 2
 0 2 4 6
Vz [Km/s]
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
1.0
1.2
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.5
2.8
3.0Y [Mm]
2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.5
4.8
5.0
5.2
5.5
4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5
2.2
2.5
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.5
3.8
4.0
4.2
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0Y [Mm]
Z = 1 Mm
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Z = 1 Mm
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Z = 1 Mm
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
X [Mm]
1.0
1.2
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.5
2.8
3.0Y [Mm]
2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
X [Mm]
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.5
4.8
5.0
5.2
5.5
4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5
X [Mm]
2.2
2.5
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.5
3.8
4.0
4.2
Fig. 3: Spatial distribution of vortex detections in the photosphere (first and second rows) and in the chromosphere (third and
fourth rows) obtained with swirling strength (green patches) and the SWIRL code (orange and blue contours). From left to right,
columns show results of SSD, Bz50 and Bz200 simulations at 20 km resolution. First and third rows shows the global domain at the
photosphere and chromosphere, respectively. Second and fourth rows show a close-up view given by the black dotted square in the
first and third rows, respectively. Black arrows in the zoom plots represent the horizontal velocity field (vx,v y). The arrows scale is
the same in all the panels.
Article number, page 7

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59850-26
Appendix C). We also identify a few vertically oriented vortices
at these heights, but their number is scarce.
The picture in simulations with a unipolar vertical field
changes significantly with respect to SSD models. Plasma dy-
namics is no longer dominated by the interference pattern of
shock waves. Instead, a more structured atmosphere develops
due to the presence of the magnetic field. Thus, swirling strength
detections are more compact and localized. From the horizon-
tal velocity field, it can be clearly observed an increase in the
number of vertically oriented vortices. This is a consequence
of the vertical magnetic field of the simulations, since plasma
tends to organize around it. Swirling strength can properly cap-
ture those regions, as e.g. vortices at (x,y)∼(3.2 Mm,5.4 Mm)
or at (x,y)∼(3.5 Mm,4.5 Mm) in the Bz50 simulation. Vertical
magnetic field suppresses the formation of tilted or horizontal
vortices. Here, we note larger sizes than in the solar photosphere.
The performance of SWIRL in the chromosphere produces
accurate results. Detections in SSD and unipolar models exhibit
a good agreement with the horizontal velocity field (fourth row
of Fig. 3). The number of detections in SSD simulations is rel-
atively low. This is because the number of vertical vortices is
small, being most of vortices horizontally oriented as observed
with the swirling strength. In unipolar models we observe an in-
creased number of SWIRL detections. The Bz200 model shows
a larger number of vortices compared with the Bz50 simulation
at the same height. This suggests that stronger vertical magnetic
fields at the same spatial resolution enhance the formation of
vertical vortices.
A wide variety of vortex sizes can be identified. As mag-
netic field lines open with height, plasma rotating around them
will also increase their size. Consequently, larger vortices can be
developed in simulations with vertical magnetic fields. We note
that detections in the Bz50 model have slightly larger sizes than
those of the Bz200 simulation, despite having a stronger field.
Due to the turbulent plasma conditions, we note that some vor-
tices could be underestimated in size. In the chromosphere, we
found more filtered-out vortices than in the photosphere mainly
due to their low temporal coherence, such as the vortices at
(x,y)∼(2.2 Mm,3.9 Mm) or at (x,y)∼(2.5 Mm,4.1 Mm) in the
Bz50 model (fourth row, second column from Fig. 3). In addi-
tion, some structures were not detected by SWIRL as the vortices
at (x,y)∼(3.2 Mm,5.4 Mm) and (x,y)∼(3.1 Mm,4.5 Mm).
This effect arises in regions with a high density of vortices,
which prevents SWIRL from distinguishing adjacent structures,
resulting in missed detections. By adjusting the parameters of
SWIRL (see Appendix A), we determined the best compro-
mise between maximizing the number of detected structures and
maintaining the accuracy of the results. Nevertheless, we ob-
serve that SWIRL detections are satisfactory when compared to
the velocity field.
4.4. 3D vortex structures
Fig. 4 displays three-dimensional renders of the swirling strength
(green areas) and the SWIRL detections (blue areas) for the three
magnetic field configurations at 20 km spatial resolution. The re-
sults of SWIRL were obtained by sequentially applying the code
at all the heights of the simulation. The simulations are at the
same time instants as those of Fig. 3. V ortices in SSD simula-
tions (upper row of Fig. 4) identified with swirling strength show
elongated filaments that expand in all directions throughout the
domain (similar to the results of the non-magnetic simulation
of Moll et al. (2012) and Battaglia et al. (2021)). They can be
related to shock fronts as previously noted in Sec. 4.3. In the
photosphere, we also observe small loops associated with vortex
structures, which are mainly found around magnetic field loops.
Conversely, SWIRL yields detections of small structures spread
throughout the domain. They do not have large vertical exten-
sions, and their horizontal sizes vary at different heights. They
are mostly generated by hydrodynamic and magnetic baroclinic
terms (Fig. 2). In the photosphere, some structures are the result
of vortices generated around small magnetic field loops, as also
seen with swirling strength. SWIRL is able to detect some of
them until they are curved with height. When the rotation leaves
the horizontal plane, SWIRL no longer detects them.
Middle and lower panels of Fig. 4 show the results of unipo-
lar models. We find a different behavior compared to the SSD
model. From the swirling strength renders, we observe numerous
vertical filaments extending from the photosphere to the chromo-
sphere. These structures can be associated with vertical magnetic
flux tubes that expand upward. In the Bz50 model, some vortices
are only found in the chromosphere, without showing connec-
tivity with the photosphere. This indicates that vortices can be
generated or sustained over time inside the chromosphere with-
out the need for a photospheric counterpart. Moreover, some of
them could be related with Alfvénic pulses propagating upwards
(Battaglia et al. 2021). This effect is absent in the Bz200 sim-
ulation. Most of the vortices detected connect the photosphere
with the top of the domain, exhibiting a vertical and rigid struc-
ture. Swirling strength shows small loops in the photosphere of
the Bz50 model, similar to those of the SSD simulation. They
are also related to small magnetic field loops, which leads to
the formation of vortices that rotate around them. In the Bz200
model, this phenomenon is barely observed. Increasing the mag-
netic field strength inhibits the formation of photospheric mag-
netic loops and consequently their associated vortex structures.
The results from SWIRL clearly show the distribution of ver-
tically oriented vortices. We find several structures extending
from the photosphere to the chromosphere, connecting different
heights of the solar atmosphere. Visually, the number of vertical
vortices in the Bz200 simulation is higher than in the Bz50 simu-
lation. The stronger the magnetic field, the higher the number of
vortices that are observed at the same spatial resolution. The size
of these structures in both unipolar models increases with height
as they are mainly located around magnetic flux concentrations.
The magnetic field opens up to compensate for the pressure drop
as we ascend to the chromosphere.
Additionally, we note that vortices can bend with height.
Hence, single detections of vortices in both photosphere and
chromosphere should take into account this behavior, as it can
give the impression of being two different structures. This is
the case of the vortex located at (x,y)∼(5.6 Mm,3.6 Mm) at
Z=0 Mm in the Bz200 model (see Fig. 3). From the 3D ren-
ders, we see that this structure is vertically connected with the
chromospheric vortex at (x,y)∼(5.2 Mm,3.6 Mm) atZ=1
Mm (colored in light yellow in Fig. 4). Despite being part of the
same structure, their horizontal displacement of 300 km between
both layers makes them appear unrelated in the two-dimensional
plots.
We notice that some vortices do not originate exactly at
Z=0 Mm, but instead are localized slightly above the surface.
Since the upper layers of unipolar simulations are characterized
by low beta plasma, the dynamics of vortices with height are de-
termined by the behavior of the magnetic field. Thus, even if the
vortex is lost in the photosphere due to granulation motions, vor-
tices can remain stable in the upper layers. In some cases, the
disconnection in the lower layers can be the result of missing
detections by SWIRL in the photosphere.
Article number, page 8

M. Koll Pistarini et al.: Solar vortex detection methods in MHD simulations: impact of magnetic field and spatial resolution
Fig. 4: Three-dimensional renders of vortex detections computed with swirling strength (left column) and SWIRL (right column).
Top, middle and bottom panels contain data from SSD, Bz50 and Bz200 simulations, respectively, at the 20 km spatial resolution.
The red cubes indicate the location of the zoomed-in regions in Fig. 3. The vertical velocity field is plotted from the bottom of the
domain up toZ=0 Mm. The color scale is the same as in Fig. 3.
4.5. Morphological properties
We computed statistical properties of vortices obtained with both
detection methods to quantify their characteristic distributions.
Swirling strength only enables the measurement of the area cov-
ered by vortices, as it is not suitable for isolating individual struc-
tures. In contrast, SWIRL allows to determine individual proper-
ties of vortices, such as the vortex number density or their typical
sizes as a function of height.
Figure 5 shows the percentage of area covered by vor-
tices. The left panel displays the results computed with swirling
strength after applying the height-dependent threshold (given by
Fig. 1). We observe that the area of vortices has a similar dis-
tribution in all models, regardless of the magnetic field and spa-
tial resolution. In the photosphere, the area covered is around
10%, while as we ascend to the chromosphere, this quantity
becomes constant close to 20%. Similar results have been re-
ported in previous studies with swirling strength (Yadav et al.
2021; Kannan & Yadav 2024).
The results from SWIRL show a very different picture (right
panel of Fig. 5). They correspond to the area covered by the vor-
tices that fulfill our filter selection (described in Sec. 3.2). Due
to the low number of vertical vortices detected in the SSD mod-
els, the percentage of area is significantly smaller compared to
the results from swirling strength. Here, the detected vortices
cover less than 1% of the computational domain at each height.
In Bz50 models, the area covered in the photosphere is com-
parable to that of SSD models, and it is slightly higher in the
Article number, page 9

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59850-26
0.5 1.0
Z [Mm]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35% Area covered
Swirling Strength
SSD 20 km
SSD 10 km
SSD 5 km
Bz50 20 km
Bz50 10 km
Bz200 20 km
0.5 1.0
Z [Mm]
0
2
4
6
8
10 SWIRL
Fig. 5: Percentage of area covered by vortices detected with
swirling strength (left) and SWIRL (right) as a function of
height. The meaning of the curves is indicated in the figure. Note
the difference in scale of the vertical axes.
Bz200 simulation. However, the coverage increases linearly with
height. The Bz50 model reaches values of about 5% for the 20
km simulations and exceeds the 8% in the 10 km model. In the
Bz200 simulation, this quantity increases up to a 7%. After 0.6
Mm in height, the area covered by vortices in the Bz200 model
follows a flat profile, suggesting a saturation regime. We note
that spatial resolution increases the percentage of area covered
by vortices.
The difference in percentage area between the detection
methods highlights their relevance and illustrates how vortex
analyses can be heavily impacted by the selected detection cri-
terion. Swirling strength returns a larger number of regions as-
sociated with vortices as compared to SWIRL, as we have al-
ready noted in the two and three-dimensional plots (Fig. 3 and
Fig. 4, respectively). SWIRL shows more localized regions that
generally better fit the horizontal rotating velocity field. Besides,
detections made by swirling strength also include horizontal vor-
tices, while SWIRL is limited to vertical vortices. Thus, the per-
centage of area is reduced by a factor of about two in unipolar
models, and more than ten times in SSD models. The large dif-
ference with SSD simulations is because most of the vortices are
horizontal, while in unipolar models, horizontal structures are
nearly absent since vertical magnetic fields suppress their gener-
ation.
Left panels of Fig. 6 show two-dimensional histograms of the
density number of vortices detected by SWIRL in each model
as a function of height. It includes the information throughout
the entire temporal evolution. The first row shows the results for
the SSD models at the three available spatial resolutions. We
observe a decreasing number of vortices with height. The high-
est number of vortices is found at the solar surface, with val-
ues around 0.4 Mm −2 and 1.6 Mm −2 in the 20 km and 5 km
spatial resolutions, respectively. At the top of the domain, we
can barely see vortical structures. The generation of vertical vor-
tices in SSD simulations is almost absent with height due to the
lack of stronger magnetic fields and their associated vertical flux
tubes (as already seen in Fig. 4). Interestingly, we note that there
is an increase in the number of detections around 0.4−0.5 Mm
in height, which is more evident at higher spatial resolutions. At
these layers, swirling strength generation terms start to increase
again after the local minimum located between 0.2−0.3 Mm
(Fig. 2). In addition, the slowdown in the velocity profiles of the
simulations (Fig. 1) occurs at the same heights, where the mech-
anism of energy transport changes from convection to waves.
Therefore, we speculate that both effects could be related.
The second row shows the results of unipolar models. In
the photosphere, the number density of vortices is higher in the
Bz200 model than in the Bz50 model (as seen in Fig. 3). We find
a different behavior with height compared to the SSD results. In
the Bz50 simulation, the number density grows linearly from the
minimum in the solar surface to the top of the domain. In the 20
km simulation, this value ranges from 0.4 Mm −2 to 1.4 Mm −2.
This continuous increase indicates that new vortices are being
generated at higher heights, which are not found at lower layers.
This is related to what was observed in the three-dimensional
renders of Fig. 4. Local vortices can be developed in the chro-
mosphere without the need of a photospheric counterpart. These
results are consistent with those reported by Cuissa & Steiner
(2023), who analyzed a 50 G model with a spatial resolution of
10 km. This behavior changes significantly in the Bz200 sim-
ulation. Here, the number density of vortices grows linearly up
to 0.6 Mm. Thereafter, the number of vortices remains constant
with number densities of about 2.5 Mm −2. This means that no
new vortices can be generated locally in the chromosphere. The
identified vortices in the upper layers originate from the same
vortex structures of the photosphere. Thus, chromospheric vor-
tices consist of long vortices connecting several layers of the so-
lar atmosphere.
We notice that increasing the spatial resolution is the main
cause of the increased number of vortices. The higher the spatial
resolution, the higher the number of structures we can resolve.
For a given magnetic field configuration, the dependence of the
number density on atmospheric height is similar across differ-
ent spatial resolutions, differing only in magnitude. Roughly, this
rise is proportional to the increase in spatial resolution. For ex-
ample, in the Bz50 simulation the increase in the number density
of vortices between the 20 km and 10 km resolutions is approxi-
mately a factor of two (the SWIRL parameter file has been mod-
ified for not being affected by the change in resolution, see Ap-
pendix A). Thus, spatial resolution is a crucial aspect when com-
paring vortex statistics between numerical simulations and ob-
servations or between different simulations or numerical codes.
Right panel of Fig. 6 shows the two-dimensional histograms
of the effective radius computed with SWIRL. This quantity is an
estimation of the size based on the area covered by each vortex
detection (Cuissa & Steiner 2023). By assuming that structures
have an almost circular shape, we computed their sizes as fol-
lows:
reff=
r
Np
π ∆x,(4)
whereN p is the number of grid points that belong to a given vor-
tex and∆xis the horizontal spatial resolution of the simulation.
The typical sizes observed in all SSD simulations (first row of
Fig. 6) vary from approximately 20 to 100 km in radius. Note
that for the 20 km model, the minimum radius detected is of
about 30 km. From Eq. 4, this implies that the structure actually
consists of 7 grid points, which is above of our selection crite-
rion (Sec. 3.2). The same applies for the rest of models at their
respective scales.
Article number, page 10

M. Koll Pistarini et al.: Solar vortex detection methods in MHD simulations: impact of magnetic field and spatial resolution
Fig. 6: Two-dimensional histograms showing the number density (left) and estimated radius (right) of vortex detections at a given
height made with SWIRL. Each data point represent the density number of vortices at a single time instant. The color scale indicates
the density of data points around a given value. Darker regions indicate larger concentrations of data points. The solid blue line
represents the median of the distributions and the dashed blue lines in the right panel indicate the 1σdeviation of the distributions.
The distribution of sizes with height is relatively constant in
SSD models, regardless of the spatial resolution. Their sizes are
independent of height and are instead determined by the local
hydrodynamic conditions at which they are generated. Thus, the
sizes of vortices in SSD simulations follow an almost flat profile
with height.
In unipolar models, the sizes of vortices cover similar val-
ues to those of the SSD models in the photosphere. Towards the
chromosphere, we note that vortex sizes increase, as they are lo-
cated around vertical magnetic flux tubes which can open with
height. Thus, typical sizes can reach up to 200 km or higher in
radius in the upper layers. The wider range of vortex scales in the
chromosphere highlights the challenge of detecting them as the
method must be able to identify velocity field curvatures at vari-
ous scales. SWIRL addresses this challenge by including multi-
ple scales (stencils) in the detection process (see Appendix A).
We also found that vortices in the Bz50 simulation at 20
km spatial resolution can reach larger sizes than in the Bz200
simulation at the same resolution (as also noted in Sec. 4.3).
Kannan & Yadav (2024) observed the same effect. It is related to
the pressure balance between the inside and outside of the mag-
netic flux tubes where vortices are located. From the swirling
strength evolution equation (Sec. 4.2), we noted that the Bz200
model present larger contributions from the magnetic terms
(baroclinic and tension) than the Bz50 model at 20 km spatial
resolution. Within the vortex structure there can be a balance
between magnetic pressure and magnetic tension. The former
would exert a force to expand the structure while the latter would
tend to compress it. In addition, gas pressure is similar in both
simulations and the magnetic pressure is larger outside vortex
structures in Bz200 simulations. Therefore, the size of vortices
could be more limited in stronger field simulations.
Spatial resolution also plays an important role in the hori-
zontal extension of vortices. At higher resolutions, vortices are
better resolved and new smaller structures can be detected. As a
consequence, typical sizes decrease when improving spatial res-
olution. The decrease in vortex size is about a 20−30% when
the resolution is increased by a factor of two. This effect can be
taken into account when comparing results with other numerical
simulations or observations that utilize different spatial resolu-
tions. By extrapolating these results, a spatial resolution of 100
km would result in an increase of vortex sizes of about 60−70%
compared to the size of the vortices that we have in the 20 km
simulations. Thus, for the Bz50 simulation at 20 km, we could
obtain sizes larger than 300 km in radius. Yadav et al. (2020) de-
grade the spatial resolution of a simulation and also found an
increase in vortex sizes.
Previous works of small-scale vortices in numerical sim-
ulations have shown a similar range of sizes. Studies using
swirling strength have made estimations based on visual in-
spection of the detections. At photospheric layers, Moll et al.
(2011) reported values of around 50−100 km in radius in dy-
namo simulations. Yadav et al. (2021) identified structures with
similar values in the photosphere and sizes of about 100−
200 km in the chromosphere in a 200 G model. No previous
works have analyzed vortices in dynamo simulations at chro-
mospheric heights. Silva et al. (2020) reported similar values us-
ing the Instantaneous V orticity Deviation (IVD) vortex detection
method in simulations up to the photosphere. Only the work by
Cuissa & Steiner (2023) has applied SWIRL to a simulation with
a vertical magnetic field of 50 G and a spatial resolution of 10
km. For this model, we obtained comparable results across the
photosphere and chromosphere. Despite the vortex size estima-
tions are comparable between both detection methods, SWIRL
allows to directly determine their extension without relying on
visual estimations.
Comparisons with observational studies are strongly affected
by spatial resolution. In observations, the best spatial resolu-
Article number, page 11

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59850-26
tion can reach around 100 km, while numerical simulations usu-
ally employ values between 10−20 km. The number density
of vortices reported in current observational studies in the pho-
tosphere is around 10−2 −10 −1 Mm−2 (Vargas Domínguez et al.
2011; Giagkiozis et al. 2018). In the chromosphere, number den-
sities are about 10 −2 Mm−2 (Liu et al. 2019; Dakanalis et al.
2022). We observe that our results are closer in the photosphere
for the 20 km spatial resolution models, while in the chromo-
sphere, observational detections are between one and two or-
ders of magnitude lower than the number of detections in any
of our models. In addition, the smallest sizes detected in obser-
vational studies are of about 0.5 Mm in diameter in the pho-
tosphere (Vargas Domínguez et al. 2011; Requerey et al. 2017;
Giagkiozis et al. 2018) and chromosphere (Park et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2019). These values represent our largest vortex sizes
detected. Thus, we expect that with future higher resolution ob-
servations, vortex sizes will decrease while the number of detec-
tions increase, particularly within the chromosphere.
The magnetic field strength also influences the number and
size of vortices, especially in the chromosphere (Fig. 6). Most
observations so far have been focused on quiet Sun regions.
Within the quiet Sun, regions with relatively stronger fields -
such as supergranular network - are commonly found, affect-
ing in some extent further vortex analyses. Our results predict
a larger number and size of vortices in stronger magnetized re-
gions.
SWIRL detections focus on vertical vortices, whereas
swirling strength includes both vertical and horizontal vortices
oriented in any direction. Therefore, in order to make fairer com-
parisons, methods that detect structures oriented in the same di-
rection should be used. Observational studies are typically lim-
ited to vertical vortices, since the velocity field is only available
at a single plane perpendicular to the line of sight. Our estima-
tions show that the area covered by vortices in the photosphere
detected with swirling strength reach values above 10%, while
SWIRL provides values below 2% (Fig. 5). Giagkiozis et al.
(2018) estimated from observations that around 2.8% of the pho-
tosphere is covered by vortices at any time. Area estimations
made with SWIRL are more consistent with observations, as it
only focuses on vertical vortices. However, it is important to note
that the structures detected in numerical simulations are smaller
and more numerous than those of observations. In the future, it
might be interesting to attempt observational vortex detections
at locations outside of the solar disc center, in order to provide
statistics for arbitrary oriented vortices.
4.6. T emperature distribution
Figure 7 shows the spatio-temporal averages of the temperature
profiles in the whole computational domain (black lines) and
in vortex regions computed with swirling strength (green and
purple lines) and SWIRL (blue lines) as a function of height.
Two independent measurements are illustrated for the swirling
strength. Green lines correspond to the averages computed us-
ing the height-dependent criterion, while purple lines contain
the averages using a fixed threshold for the entire computa-
tional box. For the fixed threshold, we selected locations with
swirling strength periods lower than 100 s (λci >0.0628 Hz) for
unipolar models. We chose this value solely to compare our re-
sults against previous studies that analyze unipolar models (e.g.,
Yadav et al. 2021). However, according to Fig. 1, this threshold
is very restrictive compared to typical average values for swirling
strength, leading to the isolation of the most intense vortex cores.
For SSD models we selected regions with swirling strength peri-
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
T [K]
SSD 20 km
0.5 1.00
500
1000
1500
Tv - T
SSD 10 km
0.5 1.00
500
1000
1500
Tv - T
SSD 5 km
0.5 1.00
500
1000
1500
Tv - T
Overall
SS var
SS fix
SWIRL
0.0 0.5 1.0
Z [Mm]
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
T [K]
Bz50 20 km
0.5 1.00
200
400
600
800
1000
Tv - T
0.0 0.5 1.0
Z [Mm]
Bz50 10 km
0.5 1.00
200
400
600
800
1000
Tv - T
0.0 0.5 1.0
Z [Mm]
Bz200 20 km
0.5 1.00
200
400
600
800
1000
Tv - T
Fig. 7: Horizontal and temporal average of temperature profiles
in the whole computational domain (black lines) and in vortices
computed with swirling strength using the height-dependent and
fixed thresholds (green and purple lines, respectively) and the
SWIRL code (blue lines) as a function of height. The inset plots
show the temperature difference between the vortex regions and
the average temperature of the simulation starting from 0.2 Mm.
Note the different vertical scale between both rows.
ods lower than 200 s (λci >0.0314 Hz). This value lies between
the photospheric values for the three available resolutions and
serves as an estimate for SSD models. We have not found previ-
ous studies that apply a fixed threshold to SSD simulations.
Temperatures computed with swirling strength using the
height-dependent threshold and the SWIRL code show qualita-
tively similar behavior, but with differences in magnitude. We
observe that, in the photosphere, the temperature of vortices is
below the average temperature profile of the simulation in all the
analyzed models. This is because vortices are mainly located in-
side intergranular lanes (as seen in the first row of Fig. 3), which
are cooler than their surroundings. This behavior extends up to a
height of 0.2 Mm, where the temperature distribution is reversed
and vortices become hotter than their surroundings. Then, vor-
tices remain hotter than the average temperature profile of the
simulations up to the top of the domain.
We find that the vortices from all the spatial resolutions ex-
hibit similar temperature profiles. Although the number and size
of the vortices change as the spatial resolution increases, tem-
perature profiles are unaffected. These findings support the idea
of Yadav et al. (2020), who indicated that large vortices at low
resolution actually consist of several small vortices within them.
Consequently, the temperature distribution between spatial reso-
lutions is similar.
Temperature profiles of vortices are also similar between dif-
ferent magnetic field configurations. We note that the main dif-
ferences are actually related with the increase of the average
temperature profile of each model (black lines). For example,
the average temperature of the Bz200 simulation is significantly
higher than the temperature of the Bz50 and SSD models (as
reported by Khomenko et al. 2025). Thus, vortices could share
Article number, page 12

M. Koll Pistarini et al.: Solar vortex detection methods in MHD simulations: impact of magnetic field and spatial resolution
the same mechanism responsible for the temperature increase,
independently of the magnetization of the model.
The inset plots of Fig. 7 show in detail the temperature differ-
ence between vortices (computed with both detection methods)
and the average temperature profiles starting from 0.2 Mm. From
the results of the height-dependent criterion and SWIRL, we ob-
serve that the temperature increase of vortices in SSD model is
about 100−200 K up to 0.6 Mm in height. Then, the temper-
ature of vortices significantly rises, reaching differences higher
than 1000 K compared to the mean temperature profiles.
Unipolar models show different temperature profiles. The
temperature increase in vortices remains roughly constant com-
pared to the average temperature in the atmosphere from about
0.2 Mm to 1 Mm above the surface. This increased temperature
is higher in the Bz50 simulations, reaching differences of about
200−400 K, while for Bz200 model is only 200 K above the av-
erage profile. Therefore, all models show temperature enhance-
ments of at least 200 K by using the height-dependent criterion
and the SWIRL code up to 1 Mm.
The results with a fixed threshold in swirling strength (pur-
ple dotted lines) exhibit larger temperature differences than the
height-dependent criterion and SWIRL. In SSD and Bz50 mod-
els, the difference in temperature reduces as the spatial resolution
is improved. This is a consequence of the changes in the typi-
cal values of swirling strength with spatial resolution (Sec. 4.1).
For the Bz200 simulation, we observe temperature difference
reaching 400−500 K, which is twice the values obtained with
the height-dependent criterion and SWIRL. Yadav et al. (2021)
computed the temperature profile of vortices in a 200 G simula-
tion at 10 km spatial resolution. They applied swirling strength
using the same fixed threshold that we employed for Bz200
model. They found a temperature increase of about 300−400 K
in vortices, which remains approximately constant up to 2.3 Mm
above the solar surface. Despite using different numerical codes,
we obtained similar results when applying the same method. The
small difference in temperature can be related to the different
spatial resolution of the models. The stratification of the vortex
temperature depends on the choice of detection method and how
it is applied. This highlights the importance of using methods
that do not rely on visual inspection, as the height-dependent
criterion of swirling strength or the SWIRL code.
In the upper part of the domain of unipolar models, we note
that the temperature of the vortices converge towards the average
temperature of the simulation. This may be the result of effects
produced by the top boundary condition or by processes involv-
ing plasma ionization inside vortices. To verify this, a more de-
tailed analysis of the effect of boundary conditions and the en-
ergy transport and dissipation has to be done. Note, however,
that SSD simulations do not show this effect in the top boundary
layer.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we present the first analysis of small-scale vor-
tices in a set of realistic MHD numerical simulations cover-
ing different magnetizations and spatial resolutions. We com-
pared two vortex detection methods: the swirling strength crite-
rion (Zhou et al. 1999) and the SWIRL code (Cuissa & Steiner
2022).
We found SWIRL to be a robust tool for the detection of
vertical vortices, enabling both comprehensive statistical stud-
ies and single-vortex analysis. In works employing swirling
strength, we suggest to apply a height-dependent threshold since
it is highly dependent on the local velocity field.
Our analysis confirms that magnetic fields significantly affect
vortical structures, promoting the formation of vertical vortices,
particularly at chromospheric heights. The generation of vor-
tices is mainly driven by magnetic contributions in stronger field
simulations, whereas hydrodynamic forces dominate the forma-
tion of vortices in weaker fields. Interestingly, magnetic pressure
could play an important role in weaker fields models. Interme-
diate magnetic fields suggest that new vortices can be formed
at higher layers without a photospheric counterpart, supporting
the idea of Alfvénic pulses propagating upwards (Battaglia et al.
2021). V ortices in stronger fields require a photospheric connec-
tion, indicating that these environments could favor the devel-
opment of extended structures that act as conduits for energy
and wave propagation. V ortex sizes increase with height due to
the expansion of magnetic field lines in unipolar models. Conse-
quently, we expect in observations a higher number of vortices in
regions with intermediate and strong magnetic fields, increasing
their sizes with height.
Higher spatial resolution allows to detect a higher number of
vortices with smaller sizes. However, we suggest that the gen-
eration of smaller vortices may be limited to the characteristic
scales of physical viscosity. Therefore, spatial resolution may
introduce differences when comparing results with other numer-
ical simulation or observational studies. Moreover, to ensure a
direct comparison with observational studies, vortex detection
methods should be focused exclusively on vertical structures, as
observations are typically limited to the analysis of horizontal
velocity fields in a single plane. We expect that new high-spatial
resolution observations show a close agreement with the mor-
phological vortex distributions reported in this study.
Temperature profiles show that vortices have higher temper-
atures than the average profiles of the atmosphere in all of our
models from approximately 0.2 Mm. The temperature enhance-
ment depends on the magnetic field configuration, while we do
not observe differences among spatial resolutions. All models
show an increase of at least 200 K. Nevertheless, a detailed anal-
ysis of the energy dissipation mechanism is necessary to fully
understand these temperature differences.
Acknowledgements.The authors acknowledge the support from Agencia Es-
tatal de Investigación del Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación and the
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF "A way of making Eu-
rope") through grants PID2021-127487NB-I00 and PID2024-156538NB-
I00; and from the OSCARS project No. 01-454 "Federation of Solar
Data (FSD)". MKP acknowledges the grant PRE2022-103940, funded by
MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by ESF+. TF acknowledges grant
CNS2023-145233 funded by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by “Eu-
ropean Union NextGeneration EU/PRTR” and grant RYC2020-030307-I funded
by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by “ESF Investing in your future”.
The authors thankfully acknowledge the technical expertise and assistance pro-
vided by the Spanish Supercomputing Network (Red Española de Supercom-
putación), as well as the computer resources used: LaPalma Supercomputer,
located at the Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias, and MareNostrum based in
Barcelona/Spain.
References
Anders, E. & Grevesse, N. 1989, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 53, 197
Balmaceda, L., Vargas Domínguez, S., Palacios, J., Cabello, I., & Domingo, V .
2010, A&A, 513, L6
Barber, C. B., Dobkin, D. P., & Huhdanpaa, H. 1996, ACM Trans. Math. Softw.,
22, 469
Battaglia, A. F., Canivete Cuissa, J. R., Calvo, F., Bossart, A. A., & Steiner, O.
2021, A&A, 649, A121
Bonet, J. A., Márquez, I., Almeida, J. S., et al. 2010, ApJ, 723, L139
Bonet, J. A., Márquez, I., Sánchez Almeida, J., Cabello, I., & Domingo, V . 2008,
ApJ, 687, L131
Brandt, P. N., Scharmert, G. B., Ferguson, S., et al. 1988, Nat, 335, 238
Article number, page 13

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59850-26
Breu, C., Peter, H., Cameron, R., & Solanki, S. K. 2023, A&A, 675, A94
Canivete Cuissa, J. R. & Steiner, O. 2020, A&A, 639, A118
Chong, M. S., Perry, A. E., & Cantwell, B. J. 1990, Phys. Fluids, 2, 765
Cuissa, J. R. C. & Steiner, O. 2022
Cuissa, J. R. C. & Steiner, O. 2023, Innovative and Automated Method for V or-
tex Identification. II. Application to Numerical Simulations of the Solar At-
mosphere
Dakanalis, I., Tsiropoula, G., Tziotziou, K., & Kontogiannis, I. 2022, A&A, 663,
A94
Fleck, B., Carlsson, M., Khomenko, E., et al. 2021, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London
Ser. A, 379, 20200170
Freytag, B., Steffen, M., Ludwig, H.-G., et al. 2012, J. Comp. Phys., 231, 919
Giagkiozis, I., Fedun, V ., Scullion, E., Jess, D. B., & Verth, G. 2018, ApJ, 869,
169
Graftieaux, L., Michard, M., & Grosjean, N. 2001, Sci, 12, 1422
Gudiksen, B. V ., Carlsson, M., Hansteen, V . H., et al. 2011, A&A, 531, A154
Günther, T. & Theisel, H. 2018, Computer Graphics Forum, 37, 149
Haller, G., Hadjighasem, A., Farazmand, M., & Huhn, F. 2016, J. FM, 795, 136
Jeong, J. & Hussain, F. 1995, J. FM, 285, 69
Kannan, A. & Yadav, N. 2024, MNRAS, 533, 3611
Kato, Y . & Wedemeyer, S. 2017, A&A, 601, A135
Khomenko, E., Collados, M., Vitas, N., & Gonzalez-Morales, P. A. 2021, Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. London Ser. A, 379, 20200176
Khomenko, E., Vitas, N., Collados, M., & De Vicente, A. 2018, A&A, 618, A87
Khomenko, E., Vitas, N., Collados, M., & Modestov, M. 2025, A&A, 697, A29
Kitiashvili, I. N., Kosovichev, A. G., Mansour, N. N., & Wray, A. A. 2011, ApJ,
727, L50
Kuniyoshi, H., Imada, S., & Yokoyama, T. 2025, ApJ, 990, L71
Liu, C., Gao, Y ., Tian, S., & Dong, X. 2018, Phys. Fluids, 30, 035103
Liu, J., Nelson, C. J., Snow, B., Wang, Y ., & Erdélyi, R. 2019, Nat, 10, 3504
Modestov, M., Khomenko, E., Vitas, N., et al. 2024, Solar Phys., 299, 23
Moll, R., Cameron, R. H., & Schüssler, M. 2011, A&A, 533, A126
Moll, R., Cameron, R. H., & Schüssler, M. 2012, A&A, 541, A68
Morton, R. J., Verth, G., Fedun, V ., Shelyag, S., & Erdélyi, R. 2013, ApJ, 768,
17
Park, S.-H., Tsiropoula, G., Kontogiannis, I., et al. 2016, A&A, 586, A25
Rempel, M. 2014, ApJ, 789, 132
Rempel, M. 2017, ApJ, 834, 10
Requerey, I. S., Cobo, B. R., Goši´c, M., & Bellot Rubio, L. R. 2018, A&A, 610,
A84
Requerey, I. S., Del Toro Iniesta, J. C., Rubio, L. R. B., et al. 2017, ApJ, 229, 14
Rodriguez, A. & Laio, A. 2014, Sci, 344, 1492
Shelyag, S., Keys, P., Mathioudakis, M., & Keenan, F. P. 2011, A&A, 526, A5
Silva, S. S. A., Fedun, V ., Verth, G., Rempel, E. L., & Shelyag, S. 2020, ApJ,
898, 137
Silva, S. S. A., Verth, G., Ballai, I., et al. 2024a, ApJ, 975, 118
Silva, S. S. A., Verth, G., Rempel, E. L., et al. 2024b, ApJ, 963, 10
Silva, S. S. A., Verth, G., Rempel, E. L., et al. 2021, ApJ, 915, 24
Stein, R. F. & Nordlund, A. 1998, ApJ, 499, 914
Steiner, O., Franz, M., Bello González, N., et al. 2010, ApJ, 723, L180
Tian, S., Gao, Y ., Dong, X., & Liu, C. 2018, J. FM, 849, 312
Tziotziou, K., Scullion, E., Shelyag, S., et al. 2023, Space Sci. Rev., 219, 1
Tziotziou, K., Tsiropoula, G., Kontogiannis, I., Scullion, E., & Doyle, J. G. 2018,
A&A, 618, A51
Vargas Domínguez, S., Palacios, J., Balmaceda, L., Cabello, I., & Domingo, V .
2011, MNRAS, 148
Vögler, A., Shelyag, S., Schüssler, M., et al. 2005, A&A, 429, 335
Wang, Y .-q., Gao., Y .-s., Liu, J.-m., & Liu, C. 2019, J. Hydrodyn., 31, 464
Wedemeyer-Böhm, S. & Rouppe Van Der V oort, L. 2009, A&A, 507, L9
Wedemeyer-Böhm, S., Scullion, E., Steiner, O., et al. 2012, Nat, 486, 505
Xu, W., Gao, Y ., Deng, Y ., Liu, J., & Liu, C. 2019, Phys. Fluids, 31, 095102
Yadav, N., Cameron, R. H., & Solanki, S. K. 2020, ApJ, 894, L17
Yadav, N., Cameron, R. H., & Solanki, S. K. 2021, A&A, 645, A3
Zhou, J., Adrian, R. J., Balachandar, S., & Kendall, T. M. 1999, J. FM, 387, 353
Article number, page 14

M. Koll Pistarini et al.: Solar vortex detection methods in MHD simulations: impact of magnetic field and spatial resolution
Appendix A: SWIRL parameters
Detecting vortices using SWIRL requires modifying a set of pa-
rameters to obtain accurate results. Table A.1 contains the main
parameters we have adjusted (stencil and noise) in all the mod-
els. We determined these parameters by comparing the results
with the horizontal velocity field. We first adjusted the param-
eters in the lower resolution simulations, and then we extended
the results to the higher resolution models. The primary parame-
ter to be modified is the stencil, as it modifies the scale at which
the velocity field curvature is detected. This means that a stencil10
of 1 performs the calculations in all grid cells, while a stencil of
5 is applied every 5 grid points. In this way, higher stencil values
allow for the detection of larger-scale rotations, whereas smaller
stencils focus on the detection of small-scale motions. In simu-
lations where we increase the resolution by a factor of two, we
increased the stencils used in the lower-resolution simulations by
the same factor to keep a comparable size of the detected struc-
tures, avoiding potential effects introduced by resolution in the
subsequent results. Table A.2 contains the rest of parameters that
are common for all the simulations analyzed. Table A.3 summa-20
rizes the meaning of all the parameters available, although fur-
ther details on the parameters can be found in Cuissa & Steiner
(2022).
Table A.1: List of specific parameters of SWIRL applied to each
simulation.
Simulation Stencil Noise parameter
SSD 20 km [1,2,3] 1.2
SSD 10 km [1,2,3,4,6] 1.2
SSD 5 km [1,2,3,4,6,8,12] 1.2
Bz50 20 km [2,3,4,6,7] 1.1
Bz50 10 km [2,3,4,6,8,12,14] 1.1
Bz200 20 km [2,3,4,6,7,10] 1.1
Table A.2: List of common parameters of SWIRL applied to all
simulations.
[ϵλ, κλ, δλ] [0.0,0.9,0.9]
dc 3
Adaptive dc False
Fast clustering True
Kernel Gaussian
Decision methodγ
[pρ, pδ, pγ] [0.9, 0.9, 1.01]
Kink parameter 0.5
Appendix B: SWIRL Rortex filter
In Section 3.2, we filtered the SWIRL results using the Rortex
quantity. The aim of this process is to remove vortices with very
low rotational speeds, since their contribution in terms of energy
is small compared to faster vortices. This process is similar to
what is done when selecting a threshold in the swirling strength
Table A.3: Brief description of SWIRL parameters.
Parameter Description
StencilsDefines the grid spacing used to compute
spatial derivatives. Multiple stencils help
to detect large and small scale vortices.
Noise parameterRemoves grid points located further from
the vortex center than this factor times the
estimated effective radius (re f f ).
(ϵλ, κλ, δλ)Thresholds used in the code to filter out
negligible swirling strength or Rortex val-
ues (ϵλ), and to discard regions where the
radial velocity of the flow dominates over
the rotational velocity (κλ, δλ).
dc Parameter used to compute the critical dis-
tance used in the clustering algorithm to
evaluate the local density of points.
Adaptive dc Automatically calculates the optimald c.
Fast clusteringActivates the grid-adapted version of
the fast clustering CFSFDP algorithm
(Rodriguez & Laio 2014), significantly re-
ducing the computational costs for large
datasets.
KernelMathematical function used to compute
local densities in the clustering algorithm.
It can use a strict cutoffboundary or a
Gaussian function that decays exponen-
tially.
Decision methodSelect the specific strategy applied to se-
lect true vortex centers (ρ−δorγ).
(pρ, pδ, pγ)List of parameters used in the clustering
algorithm to select the cluster centers.
Kink parameterFilters out false vortices caused by partial
rotations of the flow.
method to discard weak vortices. We used the Rortex value com-30
puted with the smallest stencil in each model to identify strong
rotations in both large and small vortices, as it focuses on smaller
scales. Using larger stencils would favor only the detection of
larger structures. In order to avoid excluding large vortices that
may have higher Rortex contributions in other stencils, we re-
quire that at least 10% of the area of each vortex has Rortex val-
ues above the mean value at each height when using the smallest
stencil.
Fig. B.1 shows a close-up view of a slice atZ=1 Mm for the
Bz200 model at the same time instant shown in Fig. 3. Here, the40
orange contours show examples of detections that have been fil-
tered out due to the Rortex criterion, while blue contours are vor-
tices that satisfy this criterion. The numbers inside each contour
indicate the percentage of area covered by the Rortex quantity
exceeding the average value at this height. Thus, we can see that
the orange contours contain no values above the average (0%).
Comparing these structures with the velocity field, we see that
their velocity field is slow compared to the other structures, and
it is not easy to determine whether the velocity field is actually
rotating. All the blue contours show a stronger rotating velocity50
field, with higher area percentage values.
Article number, page 15

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa59850-26
2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 4.00
X [Mm]
4.00
4.25
4.50
4.75
5.00
5.25
5.50
5.75Y [Mm]
89 %
0 %
72 %
66 %
71 %
44 %
39 %
0 %
94 %
71 %
33 %
0 %
77 %
67 %
0 %
Fig. B.1: V ortex detections obtained with SWIRL in a zoomed-in
region of the chromosphere (Z=1 Mm) for the Bz200 model at
a 20 km resolution. The snapshot corresponds to the same time
instant as in Fig. 3. Orange contours indicate detections removed
by the minimum Rortex area criterion, while blue contours show
the validated detections. The percentage values within each vor-
tex represent the fraction of grid points with Rortex values ex-
ceeding the average magnitude at this height. Black arrows rep-
resent the horizontal velocity field (vx,v y).
Appendix C: Horizontal vortices
In Fig. 3 we noted how the swirling strength method was able to
detect elongated regions where the horizontal velocity field does
not follow a rotational pattern. These regions were observed in
the intergranular lanes of all models, regardless the magnetiza-
tion, as well as in the chromosphere of the SSD simulations.
Figs. C.1 and C.2 show vertical slices of these regions for the
SSD simulation in the photosphere and chromosphere, respec-
tively, at the same location shown in the zoom-in regions of60
Fig. 3. Here, we see that these regions clearly exhibit a rotating
velocity field along the horizontal axis, confirming their horizon-
tal nature.
Article number, page 16

M. Koll Pistarini et al.: Solar vortex detection methods in MHD simulations: impact of magnetic field and spatial resolution
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
X [Mm]
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0Y [Mm]
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
X [Mm]
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Z [Mm]
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
Y [Mm]
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Fig. C.1: Horizontal vortices in the SSD model. The left panel shows the same close-up view as in Fig. 3 for the SSD model atZ=0
Mm, with two overplotted lines (red and magenta) crossing different regions of swirling strength values (green patches). The middle
and right panels show vertical slices taken along the positions of the lines in the left panel. Black arrows show the velocity field
projected onto each slice, i.e., (v x,v z) for the middle panel (red line) and (v y,v z) for the right panel (magenta line). The horizontal
black dashed line indicates the reference height (Z=0 Mm) of the horizontal slice shown in the left panel.
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
X [Mm]
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0Y [Mm]
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
X [Mm]
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2Z [Mm]
1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5
X [Mm]
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
Fig. C.2: Same as in Fig. C.1 but atZ=1 Mm.
Article number, page 17