Title: Prospects of resolving and localising individual supermassive black hole binaries with pulsar timing arrays: the host ranking challenge
Authors: Niccolò Veronesi, Maria Charisi, Polina Petrov, Stephen R. Taylor, Jessie Runnoe, Daniel J. D'Orazio, Jacob Pilawa, Chung-Pei Ma
Published: 2026-05-29
Categories: astro-ph.GA, astro-ph.HE

MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX) Preprint 2 June 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.0
Prospects of resolving and localising individual supermassive black hole
binaries with pulsar timing arrays: the host ranking challenge
Niccolò Veronesi 1, ★ Maria Charisi 1,2, Polina Petrov 3, Stephen R. Taylor3, Jessie Runnoe 3,4,
Daniel J. D’Orazio5,6,7, Jacob Pilawa 8,9, Chung-Pei Ma 8,9,
1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Washington State University, 1245 Webster Hall, Pullman, WA 99164, USA
2 Institute of Astrophysics, FORTH, GR-71110, Heraklion, Greece
3 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Vanderbilt University, 2301 Vanderbilt Place, Nashville, TN 37235, USA
4 Fisk University, Department of Life and Physical Sciences, 1000 17th Avenue N, Nashville, TN 37208, USA
5 Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Dr., Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
6 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA
7, Niels Bohr International Academy, Niels Bohr Institute, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark
8, Department of Astronomy, University of California, Berkeley, 501 Campbell Hall #3411, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
9Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
Pulsar Timing Arrays (PTAs) are soon expected to detect individually resolved supermassive black hole (SMBH) binaries,
opening the possibility for multi-messenger discoveries. The biggest challenge will be to pinpoint the host galaxy in a large
localisationarea.Wesimulaterealisticbinarypopulationsconsistentwiththegravitationalwave(GW)background,projectingthe
PTAsensitivityforthenext0-10years.Weinjecttheloudestbinaryontopofthebackgroundanduseoneofthestandarddetection
pipelines to constrain its properties. We cross-match the localisation areas with comprehensive all-sky galaxy catalogues and
estimatethenumberofcandidatehostsinthelocalisationareaassessing,forthefirsttime,thenumberofmissinggalaxiesdueto
incomplete coverage. We develop a ranking system that excludes galaxies with properties inconsistent with the GW posteriors,
andprioritizestheremaininggalaxiesforfollow-upobservations.Wefinda≈21,≈38and≈51percentprobabilityofresolvinga
binary in the next 0, 5 and 10 years, respectively, reduced to 0.3, 3.8 and 14.1 percent if we require potentially well-constrained
localisation areas. The localisation areas span hundreds of square degrees, but shrink significantly with the addition of more
data.Theycontainonaverage≈190,000earlytypegalaxiesand≈40,000activegalacticnuclei,with≈25,000missingcandidate
hosts. Our ranking method can exclude about half of the potential hosts and efficiently rank those remaining when the galaxy
catalogue provides SMBH masses and redshifts, but becomes more inefficient when we rely on apparent magnitudes.
Key words:gravitational waves - transients: black hole mergers - galaxies: active - methods: statistical
1 INTRODUCTION
Pulsar timing arrays (PTAs) have recently found evidence for a
stochastic background of gravitational waves (GWs) at nanohertz
frequencies (Agazie et al. 2023a; EPTA Collaboration et al. 2023;
Reardonetal.2023;Xuetal.2023;Milesetal.2025),theproperties
ofwhicharecompatibleamongdifferentPTAdatasets(Agazieetal.
2024). This signal is likely emitted by an unresolved population of
supermassive black hole (SMBH) binaries, which are expected to
form following the merger of their parent galaxies. Even though the
mainstepsofbinaryevolutionhavebeenknownfordecades(Begel-
man et al. 1980), the timescales over which binaries form and the
processes that drive them to their final coalescence are still uncon-
strained (Sesana 2015; Goicovic et al. 2017).
Thanks to the addition of new monitored pulsars and increasing
timing baselines, the sensitivity of PTAs is steadily improving. This
★ E-mail: niccolo.veronesi@wsu.edu
not only enables a more precise characterization of the stochastic
background(whichwillimproveourunderstandingofbinaryforma-
tion and evolution), but may also eventually lead to the resolution
of the loudest binaries (Rosado et al. 2015; Mingarelli et al. 2017;
Kelley et al. 2018; Bécsy et al. 2022b; Gardiner et al. 2024). The
isolation of GW signals on top of the background and their localisa-
tion on the sky will trigger searches for their electromagnetic (EM)
counterpart and the identification of the host galaxy. This, in turn,
will enable multi-messenger analyses providing the most complete
information on the physics of the system (Kelley et al. 2019; Charisi
etal.2026).ThecomplementarityoftheinformationcarriedbyGWs
and EM radiation will provide unprecedented insights onto topics
such as the evolution of SMBH binaries in post-merger galaxies,
and their dynamical interactions with their environment (Laal et al.
2025).
The main challenge in identifying the host galaxy arises from the
limited localisation capability of PTAs. The size of the 90 percent
credibility level localisation area (A90) of the first individually re-
solved SMBH binary is expected to be several hundreds of square
©XXXX The Authors
arXiv:2606.00218v1  [astro-ph.GA]  29 May 2026

2N. Veronesi et al.
degrees(Sesana&Vecchio2010;Goldsteinetal.2018,2019;Petrov
etal.2024;Truantetal.2025).Itwillthuscontainalargenumberof
potentialhosts.However,thefirstresolvablesourcewilllikelyhavea
large total mass (𝑀tot ≳10 9 𝑀⊙) and will reside in a luminous mas-
sivegalaxyatrelativelylowredshift(𝑧≤0.5),atleastifitisdetected
in the near-future (5-10 years). This significantly limits the number
of candidate hosts (Goldstein et al. 2019; Petrov et al. 2024), miti-
gating the probability of a false-positive association and enhancing
our chances of finding the galaxy in which the PTA source resides.
Another encouraging finding from previous studies is that the
host of the first PTA detectable binary should be bright enough to
be included in current all-sky EM surveys (Goldstein et al. 2019;
Veronesi et al. 2025b; Truant et al. 2026). Therefore, the host is
likely already present in an existing EM catalogue, as long as it is
not situated in regions typically avoided due to high contamination
from stars or dust, like the Galactic plane or the Magellanic Clouds.
HerewequantifytheimpactofincompleteEMcoverageonthehost
galaxy search.
Finally,whenitcomestoEMobservables,Veronesietal.(2025b)
demonstrated that one can use empirical scaling relations (e.g., Fer-
rarese & Merritt 2000; McConnell & Ma 2013) to convert the pos-
terior distribution of GW parameters (such as the chirp mass of
the binary) into distributions of the apparent magnitudes of the host
galaxyinseveralEMbands.Herewedevelopamethodthatleverages
the above distributions to rank the candidates based on their likeli-
hood of containing the GW-detected source. As we demonstrate in
this work, the resulting ranked list of potential hosts can be used
in subsequent searches for promising binary signatures (see, e.g.,
D’Orazio & Charisi 2023 for a review) to prioritize specific targets
in follow-up studies likely employing both archival data and new
observations.
In this work, we simulate the projected sensitivity of future PTA
datasetsalongwithbinarypopulationsconsistentwiththeGWback-
groundtopredictthepropertiesofthefirstresolvedsource.Weselect
binariesthatcouldbelocalisedinthenext5-10years,butwouldhave
not show any evidence for their presence in the 15-year Data Set of
theNorthAmericanNanohertzObservatoryforGravitationalWaves
(NANOGrav). We then estimate the size of A90 of the injected bi-
naries using a standard PTA pipeline.
Next, we cross-match the GW maps with two all-sky galaxy cata-
logues containing: (1) quiescent early-type galaxies (ETGs), and (2)
active galactic nuclei (AGN). These state-of-the-art catalogues are
expected to be complete within the projected sensitivity volume of
PTAs, especially for the expected massive hosts of the first resolved
binaries. This allows us to obtain a realistic estimate of the number
ofcandidatehostswithinthelocalisationarea,and,forthefirsttime,
quantify the limitations that come from the incomplete coverage of
galaxy catalogues in sky regions with high contamination. Similarly
to what has been first done in Goldstein et al. (2019), we construct a
ranking system which sorts the candidate hosts, taking into account
how well their positions and photometric properties match the pos-
teriordistributionsconstrainedstartingfromstandardPTAdetection
pipelines. We demonstrate that this method is capable of excluding
galaxies that are found to be inconsistent with the PTA signal, using
solely their photometric and astrometric properties.
In Section 2, we describe our methodology. In particular, we
present the PTA datasets we simulate and analyze, the EM cata-
logues we use in cross-matches with the localisation areas, and the
host ranking system. In Section 3, we present our results, and in
Section 4 we discuss their implications for multi-messenger investi-
gations, caveats of our method, and plans on how to address those
in future works. Finally, in Section 5, we present our summary and
conclusions.
Whenever necessary, we convert redshift to luminosity distance
from Earth assuming the cosmological parameters of the ob-
servations by Planck (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020):𝐻 0 =
67.32 km s −1Mpc−1,Ω 𝑚ℎ2 =0.14314, and𝑛 𝑠 =0.96605.
2 METHODOLOGY
In this section, we describe the simulations of GW signals from
binaries that can be resolved on top of the GW background and
the data analysis pipeline that allows us to localise these sources.
We describe the main properties of two all-sky EM catalogues (one
containing only quiescent ETGs and one with only AGN) which we
use to cross-match with the GW localisation areas. These have a
high level of completeness up to𝑧≈0.5, and likely include all the
potential hosts of the PTA sources, with the exception of areas not
covered due to stellar or dust contamination. We explicitly calculate
thelimitationsthatcomefromtheincompleteskycoverage.Wealso
present a ranking method that combines the galaxy sky location and
photometricpropertiesandsortsthecandidatehostsbasedonwhich
bestmatchesourexpectationswithrespecttotheposteriorsobtained
from the PTA detection pipeline.
2.1 Future PTA configurations
TosimulatethedetectionofSMBHbinaries,wefirstconstructPTAs
thatresembleourexpectationsforupcomingdatasetsfromtheInter-
nationalPulsarTimingArray(IPTA).Similarlytoourpreviouswork
in Veronesi et al. (2025b), we construct a first array calledIPTA_20,
denotingatotalbaselineof20years.Thisincludesatotalof116pul-
sars, 68 of which are from the NANOGrav 15-year Data Set (NG15;
Agazieetal.2023b) 1,31fromthefirstdatareleaseoftheMeerKAT
Pulsar Timing Array (MPTA; Miles et al. 2023), 14 from the first
data release of the Parkes Pulsar Timing Array (PPTA; Zic et al.
2023),and3fromtheDRnew2+datareleaseoftheEuropeanPulsar
Timing Array (EPTA) and the Indian Pulsar Timing Array (InPTA;
EPTACollaborationetal.2023).Thisconfigurationissimilartothe
upcoming third data release of the IPTA.
We also construct a PTA, with a total baseline of 25 years and 42
newpulsarsaddedwithrespecttoIPTA_20,whichwewillrefertoas
IPTA_25. The new pulsars are added at a rate of 7 pulsars per year,
andareincludedinthedatasetoncetheirmonitoringbaselinereaches
at least 3 years. The sky positions of the added pulsars are drawn
from a kernel density estimation obtained from the positions of the
116observedpulsarsusedinIPTA_20.IPTA_25isourfiducialPTA
configuration,whichweuseinmostanalyses.Finally,weexplorehow
our results evolve in an extended PTA dataset, labeled asIPTA_30.
This is constructed by adding 42 more pulsars (reaching a total of
200), with timing baselines extended by 5 more years, and a total
baseline of 30 years. The positions of the new pulsars are extracted
from the same kernel density estimation as inIPTA_25.
We refer the reader to Section 2.1 of Veronesi et al. (2025b) for a
more detailed description of the simulated PTAs for all the configu-
rations presented above.
1 Only 67 pulsars were included in the search for the GW background, since
the monitoring baseline of one pulsar was not consistent with the minimum
requirement of at least 3 years of data.
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources3
2.2 Simulations of SMBH binary populations
Wesimulaterealisticbinarypopulationstopredicttheexpectedprop-
erties of the first resolved PTA source that could be detected in the
near future (i.e. inIPTA_20,IPTA_25 orIPTA_30). We generate
1,000 realizations of SMBH binary populations, which are consis-
tent with the stochastic GW background measured in NG15. These
populations are built analogously to Agazie et al. (2023c), using
semi-analytic models from the publicly available software package
holodeck 2. Below we briefly summarize the main components of
these models, but we refer the reader to Agazie et al. (2023c) for a
complete explanation of the adopted analytical expressions, relevant
parameters and their fixed values.
We first model the galaxy stellar mass function using a Schechter
profile, which provides the number density of galaxies as a function
of their stellar mass and redshift. Next, we model the galaxy pair
fractionandthegalaxymergertimeasfunctionsofthegalaxystellar
mass,redshift,andstellarmassratioofthepair.Thesethreefunctions
combined provide the number density of galaxy mergers.
WethenproceedtopopulatethesemergingsystemswithSMBHs,
the masses of which are correlated with different properties of the
parent galaxies (Sato-Polito & Zaldarriaga 2025). For this, we use
thescalingrelationbetweentheSMBHmass,𝑀 SMBH,andthebulge
mass of its host,𝑀b:
log10
 𝑀SMBH
𝑀⊙

=𝜇+𝛼 𝜇 log10
 𝑀b
1011 𝑀⊙

+ N (0, 𝜖𝜇),(1)
where𝜇and𝛼 𝜇 are the intercept and slope of this relation, and
N (0, 𝜖𝜇)indicates an intrinsic scatter given by a Gaussian with null
meanandastandarddeviationof𝜖 𝜇.Followingtheassumptionmade
inAgazieetal.(2023c),wesetthebulgestellarmassto61.5percent
of the total stellar mass of the galaxy, based on empirical bulge
mass measurements presented in Bluck et al. (2014) and in Lang
et al. (2014). This value takes into account that, in the entire galaxy
population, there are both elliptical galaxies entirely composed of
theirbulge,andspiralgalaxies,inwhichonlyafractionofthestellar
mass is contained in the bulge.
TheabovestepsallowustocalculatethenumberdensityofSMBH
pairsasafunctionoftheirtotalmass,massratio,andinitialredshift.
In practice,holodeckestimates the number density of pairs in a
grid of these parameters. More specifically, the actual number of
binaries in each cell of this three-dimensional (3D) parameter space
isdrawnfromaPoissoniandistributionaroundtheexpectationvalue
calculatedbyintegratingthedifferentialnumberdensityoverthecell
volume.Inthiswork,weconsidera3Dgridwiththefollowingranges
and resolution:
•Total mass,𝑀 tot [𝑀 ⊙]:

104 −10 12
, 720 bins;
•Mass ratio, q:

10−3 −1

, 160 bins;
•Initial redshift,𝑧 𝑖𝑛:

10−3 −10

, 100 bins.
While we use the ranges set as default inholodeckand used in the
analysis of Agazie et al. (2023c), we increase the number of bins in
total mass by a factor of 8 and in redshift by a factor of 2. This leads
to a finer overall resolution of the sampled parameter space, while
remaining computationally manageable (thanks to the significantly
smallernumberofbinarypopulationsrequiredinthisworkcompared
to Agazie et al. 2023c).
Finally,weevolvetheSMBHbinariesfromverylargeseparations
tothePTAregime,usinganempiricalfunctiontocalculatehowfast
their separation𝑎decreases as a function of time. This hardening
2 https://github.com/nanograv/holodeck
rateismodeledusingthefollowingphenomenologicaldoublepower
law:
𝑑𝑎
𝑑𝑡 =𝐻 𝑎 ·
 𝑎
𝑎𝑐
 1−𝜈 inner
·

1+ 𝑎
𝑎𝑐
 𝜈inner −𝜈 outer
,(2)
where the normalization𝐻𝑎 is calculated from the total binary life-
time, and the critical separation𝑎𝑐 denotes the boundary between
the two orbital decay regimes of the model. At large separations,
the shrinking is governed by the exponent𝜈outer and encapsulates
the evolution of the pair due the physical interactions with the sur-
rounding environment, such as dynamical friction and three-body
interactions with the stars. The exponent𝜈inner governs the regime
of small separations, where the binary evolves primarily due to the
emissionofGWsandinteractionswiththesurroundinggaseousenvi-
ronment.EachbinaryisthenevolveduntilitreachesthePTAregime
at a certain final redshift𝑧, which we use to calculate the luminos-
ity distance from Earth in the observer’s reference frame. From this
pointon,whenwerefertoredshiftwemeanthisquantity,regardless
of the initial redshift at which the galaxy merger happened.
The above models have six free parameters: the normalization of
thegalaxystellar-massfunctionanditscharacteristicmass,theinter-
cept𝜇of the scaling relation between bulge mass and SMBH mass
and its intrinsic scatter𝜖𝜇, the total binary lifetime, and the harden-
ing power-law index that governs the evolution at small separations
𝜈inner. Each population is created by fixing the other parameters to
the fiducial values assumed in Agazie et al. (2023c), and by draw-
ing one sample from the 6-dimensional posterior distribution of the
same paper, using the models with priors informed by observational
measurements(i.e.thePhenom+Astromodel,seethecolumncorre-
sponding to the Astrophysical Priors in Table B1 and the respective
posteriors in Figure 9 of Agazie et al. 2023c). The simulated SMBH
binarypopulationsarethereforeconsistentwiththeGWbackground,
as measured in NG15.
Similarly to Agazie et al. (2023c), in our simulations we use 14
frequencybins(between0.99nHzand28.71nHz,eachwithawidth
of 1.98 nHz). The frequency grid is determined by the total baseline
of NG15 (𝑇data =16.03yr, which corresponds to the time between
the first and the last measured TOA of all monitored pulsars), with
the upper limit of the𝑖-th bin defined as𝑖/𝑇 data. Each generated
binary population is evolved to emit GWs in this frequency range.
We note that to have full compatibility with previous works, such as
Agazie et al. (2023c), we adopt the same frequency range of NG15,
even if real searches with the baselines we employ will be able to
detect binaries below it. For this reason, the numbers of detectable
and localisable binaries presented in this work are to be considered
lower limits.
2.3 Selection of first resolvable PTA binaries
Havinggenerated1,000binarypopulations,wethenselecttheloudest
source of each population, i.e. the one that is more likely to be
resolved first. For this, we first select the binary with the largest
strain in each frequency bin. We examine each of these 14 binaries
individually to determine which one has the highest signal to noise
ratio(S/N)overallinthePTAconfigurationunderconsiderationand
will be injected as a resolved source in our simulations (see below).
After removing the loudest source from each frequency bin, we
calculatethetotalstrainoftherestofthepopulationasthesquareroot
of the sum of the square of the strains of the remaining binaries. We
do this to establish the level of the background that we will inject in
our simulations. In this step, we calculate the strain of the stochastic
GW background,ℎbg, in the first five frequency bins. This is similar
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

4N. Veronesi et al.
to Agazie et al. (2023c), in which the population synthesis models
were derived using 14 frequency bins, but the fit to the PTA data
was done focusing only on the first five. This is because the GW
background is fairly unconstrained at higher frequencies in NG15.
Weestimatethebest-fitbackgroundamplitude,𝐴 GWB,andspectral
index,𝛼 GWB, for each realization by performing a least-squares fit
using a single power law (ℎbg =𝐴 GWB ·𝑓 𝛼GWB). We emphasize that
the distribution of the background parameters we obtain from these
fits(𝐴 GWB =−14.75±0.19,and𝛾 GWB =3−2·𝛼 GWB =4.66±0.24) 3
are compatible both with those derived in the phenomenological
models that we also employ here and with those constrained by the
PTA data using the Hellings-Downs model (see Figure 7 of Agazie
et al. 2023c). Therefore, the removal of the binary with the highest
strain in each frequency bin does not introduce a significant bias
in the simulated GW background. This likely means that the GW
background is not dominated by the loudest sources in each bin
(Agazie et al. 2025). The values obtained in this step are used in the
rest of the analysis to generate the TOAs for the GW background
and estimate the S/N of the resolved binarieswe inject on top of this
stochastic signal.
Next, we calculate the S/N of the binaries with the highest strain
for each frequency bin to select the one with the overall highest S/N
in the population. For this, we generate the TOAs of pulsar signals
for a realization of the GW background with the parameters from
the fit above and then inject a continuous wave source with parame-
ters of the respective binary, as obtained fromholodeck. For each
individual binary, we have the total mass, mass ratio, redshift, and
GW frequency, but for the TOAs generation, we also need the sky
location,inclinationoftheangularmomentumvectorwithrespectto
our line of sight, GW initial phase, and GW polarization angle. We
assume that the binaries are located in the most sensitive location
of theIPTA_25 configuration (since this is our fiducial PTA). We
note that the specific sky location is not important for the selection
of the loudest binary, since at this stage we are interested in find-
ing the highest S/N among the ones of the 14 binaries we examine
for each population. The most sensitive sky location is obtained by
following the process described in Veronesi et al. (2025b), practi-
cally injecting a test binary with fixed parameters in the centres of
all the pixels of a Hierarchical Equal Area isoLatitude Pixelisation
(Healpix) projection with NSide = 4 and determining their S/N.
Oncetheloudestbinaryforeachpopulationisselected,weinjectit
at a random sky location and re-calculate its S/N. To each binary we
assign a random value of phase, polarization angle, and inclination.
WeconsiderabinarytobedetectableifitreachesS/N=4 4.However,
inthisworkwearemainlyinterestedinsourcesthathaveaS/Nhigh
enough not only to be confidently detected above the background,
but also to be localised in the sky with enough precision to allow
EMsearchesforthehostgalaxy.Forthispurpose,weselectbinaries
with S/N≥8, since this is roughly the threshold that typically leads
to well defined posteriors on the binary sky location (Sesana &
Vecchio 2010; Taylor et al. 2016; Petrov et al. 2024). We also take
into account that, in the realization of the Universe we live in, we
have not found any evidence for an individual SMBH binary in the
existing PTA datasets. Therefore, we require that these binaries also
have an𝑆/𝑁 <4in NG15.
3 We report the value of𝛾GWB to allow a direct comparison with the results
of Agazie et al. 2023c.
4 The choice of this S/N threshold is slightly arbitrary, since, in reality,
detection statistics do not rely on a simple S/N measurement, but thresholds
intherangeof3≤S/N≤5aretypicalinsimilarstudies(e.g.,Truantetal.2025).
Assuming a different threshold would not significantly alter our conclusions.
The sky positions and the S/N of the selected sources are shown
in Figure 1. The marker color represents the S/N of the binary in
IPTA_25, while its size is proportional to the total mass of the sys-
tem. The gray area delineates the Galactic plane, i.e. regions with
a Galactic latitude|𝑏| ≤10 ◦. We show the positions of the sources
detectablebyIPTA_25butnotbyNG15withbluesquares.Theposi-
tionsoftheloudestbinariesoftheremainingpopulationsaremarked
by gray squares. The pink stars mark the positions of the pulsars
we use in our fiducial configuration. The ones with black outline
indicate the 42 pulsars not present inIPTA_20. The main properties
(total mass, luminosity distance from Earth, frequency of their GW
signal, and mass ratio) of the selected binaries are shown by the
roundmarkersinFigure2,whicharecolor-codedasinFigure1.We
discuss the distribution and the properties of the selected binaries in
further detail in Section 3.
Forthesub-setofbinariesthatcanbelocalisedinIPTA_25(high-
lightedwiththecoloredroundmarkersinthefiguresabove),wealso
explore how their properties and localisation area are constrained in
IPTA_30.
2.4 Estimation of binary parameters and host properties
Foreachpopulationinwhichtheloudestsourceisconsistentwiththe
criteria described above (i.e.𝑆/𝑁≥8inIPTA_25 and𝑆/𝑁 <4in
NG15) we use theenterprisesoftware package (Ellis et al. 2020)
toinjectarealizationofcommonuncorrelatedrednoisewhichrepre-
sentstheGWbackground,followingtheprocessdescribedinSection
2.3, and a continuous wave source with the properties of the loudest
binary of the respective population. To estimate the detectability of
the sources, the times of arrival (TOAs) are simulated for all 3 PTA
configurations we describe in Section 2.1. For the subset of bina-
ries with𝑆/𝑁≥8inIPTA_25, we perform an all-sky search for a
continuous wave, using theQuickCWpackage (Bécsy et al. 2022a).
The same analysis is then repeated for the same subset of binaries
inIPTA_30. The pipeline estimates posterior distributions for the
binaryparameters,includingitsskycoordinates,thusallowingusto
constrain the size and shape of A90. In particular, we run parallel
temperedMonteCarloMarkovChains(MCMCs)with10individual
chains, a maximum temperature parameter of 5, a total of 1 billion
steps, and store one step every 1,000. We use log-uniform priors for
the frequency𝑓:[0.5,100]nHz, the chirp massM:[10 7,10 11]𝑀 ⊙,
the strainℎ 0:[10 −18,10 −11], and the amplitude of the GW back-
ground𝐴 GWB:[10 −20,10 −11]. We use uniform priors for the GW
background spectral index𝛾GWB:[0,7], the phase of the binary’s
orbit:[0,2𝜋], the polarization angle:[0, 𝜋], and the cosine of the
inclination between the orbital angular momentum and the line of
sight:[−1,1]. For the two angular coordinates on the sky, we use
uniform priors for the cosine of the polar angle:cos(𝜃) ∈ [−1,1]
and the azimuthal angle:𝜙∈ [0,2𝜋]. These angular coordinates are
thenconvertedtoequatorialcoordinates,rightascensionRA=𝜙and
declination Dec =𝜋/2−𝜃. The posterior distribution of each source
parameter is then represented by the samples of the chain with the
lowesttemperature,withthefirst25percentofthesamplesdiscarded
asburn-in.
Inordertoproduceawell-definedmapoftheskylocalisation,we
associate each posterior sample of the sky coordinates to a pixel of
an Healpix map with NSide = 32. This mapping divides the sky in a
totalof12,288pixelsofequalarea(≈3.36 deg 2).Wesortthepixels
in descending order based on the number of posterior samples they
contain. The localisation area, A90, is then defined as the ensemble
of pixels that contain 90 percent of the total number of samples. We
calculate the size of the localisation area, A90, by multiplying the
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources5
0∘90∘180∘270∘
30∘
60∘
−60∘
−30∘
45∘135∘225∘315∘
Figure 1.Mollweide projection of the positions of binaries (round markers) that, while not detectable by NG15 (𝑆/𝑁 <4), are potentially localisable by
IPTA_25 (𝑆/𝑁≥8), color-coded according to their S/N inIPTA_25. The size of the markers is proportional to the total binary mass. The squares mark the
position of the loudest binary in each of the 1,000 populations we have created, with the blue ones indicating the sources among them that, while not detectable
in NG15, would be detectable, but not potentially localisable (4≤S/N<8), inIPTA_25. The gray shaded area marks the Galactic plane, i.e. the region with
Galacticlatitude|𝑏| ≤10 ◦.ThepinkstarswithnooutlineshowthepulsarsinIPTA_20,whiletheoneswithblackoutlinesindicatethe42pulsarsthatareadded
inIPTA_25.
Figure 2.Properties of the binaries that are not detectable in NG15, but are potentially localisable inIPTA_25 (round markers), color-coded by their S/N. The
shapeandthecolor-codeofallmarkersarethesameasinFigure1.TheupperleftpanelshowstheluminositydistancefromEarth(andredshift)ofthesourceas
afunctionofitstotalmass,theupperrightpanelshowsthetotalmassasafunctionoftheGWfrequency,andthelowerpanelshowsthetotalmassasafunction
of the mass ratio.
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

6N. Veronesi et al.
number of pixels by the pixel area. We then identify potential hosts
by cross-matching this localisation area with two all-sky catalogues
containing ETGs and AGN (see below for details).
To incorporate the EM information of the galaxy catalogues in
our host search, we convert the posterior distributions obtained with
QuickCWintodistributionsofEMobservables.ThechosenEMquan-
tities depend on the information that is available in each galaxy
catalogue. In particular, the ETG catalogue provides values of the
redshift, which can be converted into luminosity distance𝑑lum, and
of the stellar mass of the galaxy, which we convert into the mass of
the central SMBH and associate to the binary total mass,𝑀tot. On
the other hand, the AGN catalogue lists the apparent magnitudes in
the W1 band,𝑚W1,AGN, for each source.
QuickCWprovides posterior distributions forM,𝑓, andℎ 0 of
the source (in addition to sky coordinates, inclination, GW phase,
and polarization angle). We use the above 3 quantities to create a
2-dimensionalposteriordistributionofthetotalmassandluminosity
distance𝑝 (𝑀tot, 𝑑lum),whichcanbelinkedtothequantitiesavailable
in the EM catalogues. For this, we employ a rejection sampling
method, like in Petrov et al. (2024) and Veronesi et al. (2025b).
First, we calculate the distribution of luminosity distance,𝑑lum
from the posterior samples ofQuickCW:
𝑑lum = 2 (GM)5/3 (𝜋 𝑓 )2/3
𝑐4ℎ0
,(3)
where G is the gravitational constant and𝑐is the speed of light in
vacuum. Then we linearly interpolate the resulting 2D probability
density distribution𝑝 (M, 𝑑 lum), without marginalizing over𝑓and
ℎ0.
WethenrandomlysampleavaluefortheparametersM,𝑓,andℎ 0,
drawing from the same priors as in the MCMC analysis to calculate
a random draw in luminosity distance,𝑑lum,rand, from Equation 3.
We then calculate a value of the chirp mass,Mrand, drawing from
a uniform distribution of the mass ratio𝑞,𝑞:[0.1, 1], and a uniform
distribution for the total mass𝑀tot. For the latter, the boundaries
are set by combining the prior boundaries for𝑞andM, using the
definition of the chirp mass:
𝑀tot =M 𝑞−3/5
(1+𝑞 ) −6/5 .(4)
This ensures that the random values𝑀tot,rand are extracted from a
distribution that covers the entire range derived from the ranges of
the two mass-related parameters used in the MCMC analysis.
We then draw a random number,𝑁rand, between 0 and the max-
imum value of the interpolated𝑝(M, 𝑑 lum), and reject the random
sample  Mrand, 𝑑lum,rand
, if𝑁 rand > 𝑝  Mrand, 𝑑lum,rand
. We re-
peat this until the number of non-rejected samples is equal to the
number of posterior samples fromQuickCW. The result is a joint
𝑝 (𝑀tot, 𝑑lum) posterior composed of all the non-rejected𝑑lum,rand
and𝑀 tot,rand samples. As mentioned above, we can directly link
these to quantities in the ETG catalogue, and thus we can use the
abovejointdistributiontoranktheETGswithinthelocalisationarea.
However, in order to perform a similar ranking for the AGN cat-
alogue we present in Section 2.5.2, we convert𝑝(𝑀tot, 𝑑lum) into a
distribution of apparent magnitude in the W1 band,𝑝 𝑚W1,AGN
,
taking into account the uncertainties and the scatter of the relations
weuseintheconversion.WedosobyfirstestimatingtheEddington
luminosity𝐿 Edd of an AGN with a mass of𝑀tot:
𝐿Edd ∼1.26·10 38 Mtot
M⊙
erg s−1 .(5)
For each sample of total mass, we also draw a value for the Edding-
tonfraction𝜆 Edd fromdistributionsderivedfromWu&Shen(2022).
ThiscatalogueusesquasarspectrafromtheSloanDigitalSkySurvey
Data Release 16 (Lyke et al. 2020) and provides estimates for prop-
erties, such as𝜆Edd, and the SMBH mass, which here we associate
tothetotalmassofthebinary,𝑀 tot.Foreachvalueof𝑀 tot,weselect
the quasars from Wu & Shen (2022) with an estimated SMBH total
masslog 10 𝑀tot ±0.05and randomly draw the value for𝜆Edd of one
of these objects to calculate the bolometric luminosity:
𝐿bol =𝜆 Edd ·𝐿 Edd.(6)
Following Veronesi et al. (2025b), we combine the spectral en-
ergy distributions from Shang et al. (2011) with information regard-
ing quasar bolometric luminosities and redshifts from Runnoe et al.
(2012) to obtain a distribution of bolometric corrections in the W1
band. We then draw one sample from this distribution and multiply
the bolometric luminosity𝐿 bol by it to obtain the W1 luminosity
𝜈W1 𝐿 𝜈W1 of the potential AGN host. From this luminosity, we then
calculate the absolute magnitude𝑀W1 using the same standard pro-
cessasinSection3.2ofVeronesietal.(2025b).Finally,wecalculate
theapparentmagnitudeusingthevalueof𝑑 lum whichcorrespondsto
the same posterior sample of the𝑀tot value used to calculate𝑀W1:
𝑚W1 =𝑀 W1 +5 log
 𝑑lum
Mpc

+25+0.171·𝐴 𝑉 ,(7)
where𝐴 𝑉 isthedustextinctioninthevisibleband,whichwemultiply
by 0.171 to convert it to that in the W1 band (Cardelli et al. 1989).
Analogously to Veronesi et al. (2025b), we use𝐴𝑉 ≈0.19as the
fiducial value, corresponding to the median value of the extinction
across the sky obtained from the map presented in Chiang (2023).
2.5 Galaxy catalogues
We cross match the GW localisation areas with two all-sky galaxy
catalogues, one containing only ETGs and the other containing only
AGN. These catalogues are used in parallel in our analysis. Below
we briefly describe their construction and essential EM properties,
that we take into account in the host ranking system.
We emphasize that the simulated binaries have a luminosity dis-
tance from Earth dictated by the population synthesis models de-
scribed in Section 2.2 and they are placed in a random sky location
duringthebinaryselectionprocessinSection2.3.Therefore,thebi-
naryisnotassociatedwithanyrealgalaxyinanyofthetwoEMcat-
alogues. However, our goal here is to assess the number of potential
hosts in future multi-messenger searches in a realistic scenario, i.e.,
examining a binary from a realistic binary population, detected and
localised with one of the standard PTA pipelines and cross-matched
with all-sky catalogues of high completeness, while incorporating
uncertainties both from the GW analysis and the EM catalogues.
This also allows us to estimate what fraction of the GW sky maps
lies within the footprint of such EM surveys, and assess our ability
to rank the candidate hosts based on their EM properties. In future
studies, we will repeat this analysis injecting the selected binaries in
truegalaxies,andwewillcheckhowhighthetruehostisrankedwith
respect to the sorted list of all potential hosts, therefore estimating
the accuracy of the ranking method. In this work we estimate its
precision.
2.5.1 The ETG catalogue
The ETG catalogue is composed of the Two Micron All Sky Sur-
veyPhotometricRedshiftcatalogue(2MPZ,Bilickietal.2014),and
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources7
of the WISExSuperCOSMOS Photometric Redshift catalogue (WI-
SExSCOS, Bilicki et al. 2016). It contains 19,586,966 photometri-
cally selected galaxies, each with an estimated value of photometric
redshiftandstellarmass.EveryobjectwasdetectedbothbytheWide-
fieldInfraredSurveyExplorer(WISE,Wrightetal.2010)andbythe
SuperCOSMOS Sky Survey (Hambly et al. 2001), but the brightest
objects(i.e.theoneswithaninfraredmagnitude𝑚 W1 ≤13.8),which
werealsodetectedbytheTwoMicronAllSkySurvey(2MASS,Cutri
et al. 2003), are contained in 2MPZ and not in WISExSCOS.
The combination process and the estimation of the stellar mass of
each galaxy is described in detail Pilawa et al. (tion). In brief, the
stellarmassiscalculatedfromitsintrinsicluminosityintheW1band,
usingthecorrelationbetweenthemass-to-lightratioandtheW1-W2
color from Cluver et al. (2014). We use the stellar mass estimates
to calculate the mass of the SMBHs (which we associate with the
total mass of the binary), assuming that all the stars are contained
in the bulge. For this, we use the scaling relation of Equation 1,
adoptinginthiscasethebest-fitparameterscalculatedinMcConnell
& Ma (2013):𝜇=8.46±0.08,𝛼 𝜇 =1.05±0.11, and intrinsic
scatter𝜖 𝜇 =0.34. We note that the estimates on the galaxy stellar
massobtainedfromtheW1magnitudearefoundtobesystematically
lower(≈0.3dex)thantheonesobtainedfromthemagnitudeintheK
bandfortheobjectsthathaveadetectionbothinWISEandin2MASS
(Pilawaetal.tion).FutureversionsoftheETGcatalogueweuse,not
available at the time of writing, will contain stellar mass estimates
for all the galaxies corrected taking into account this discrepancy,
since the K magnitude is considered to be the one that best relates
to such galaxy property. Higher estimates of stellar masses will lead
to higher estimates of total binary masses. This will not change the
number of potential host candidates, but will moderately decrease
the rejection rate of ranking methods such as the one presented in
this work, since fewer galaxies will be found incompatible with the
typically large values of𝑀tot estimated from the GW pipelines.
The ranking system presented in Section 2.6 requires an estimate
of the uncertainty for each employed quantity, i.e. the redshift and
the mass of the central SMBHs for this catalogue. To estimate the
uncertainty𝜎 𝑧 on the photometric redshift, we use the prescriptions
fromTurskietal.(2023).Specifically,weuse𝜎 𝑧 =0.052·𝑧+0.008,if
theparentcatalogueoftheobjectis2MPZ,and𝜎 𝑧 =0.085·𝑧+0.019,
ifitisinWISExSCOS.FortheuncertaintyontheSMBHmass,𝜎 𝑀tot,
we use standard rules of error propagation:
𝜎2
𝑀tot =𝜇 2𝜎2
𝑀b +𝜎 2
𝜇 (𝑀b −11 )2
+𝜎 2
𝛼𝜇 +𝜖 2
𝜇,
(8)
where𝜎 𝜇 and𝜎 𝛼𝜇 are the uncertainties of the best fit parameters
in the scaling relation of McConnell & Ma (2013), and𝜎𝑀b is the
intrinsic scatter of the correlation used to calculate the bulge mass,
which here we set to𝜎𝑀b =0.1based on Fig. 6b of Cluver et al.
(2014) 5.
Wenotethat2MPZcoverssomeareasthatareavoidedinWISExS-
COS, especially in regions with low Galactic latitude. To guarantee
uniformitywhencross-matchingwithGWskymaps,weexcludethe
regionscoveredby2MPZbutnotbyWISExSCOS,whicharehighly
incomplete. In practice, this corresponds to rejecting sky regions
where the pixels of the Healpix map with NSide = 32 have fewer
than415objects.Afterexcludingtheseareas,weareleftwithatotal
5 The value of𝜎 𝑀b is not explicitly stated in Cluver et al. (2014), and
therefore we obtain an estimate of 0.1 based on visual inspection of the
aforementioned Figure 6b. Small deviations from this value are not expected
to significantly affect our results.
0∘90∘180∘270∘
30∘
60∘
−60∘
−30∘
45∘135∘225∘315∘
0∘90∘180∘270∘
30∘
60∘
−60∘
−30∘
45∘135∘225∘315∘
Figure 3.Mollweide projection of the all-sky catalogues of ETGs (upper
panel) and AGN (lower panel ) used in this work. The colour of each pixel
denotes the number of objects it contains in an Healpix projection with
NSide=32.
of 19,364,973 ETGs, the sky distribution of which is shown in the
upper panel of Figure 3.
2.5.2 The AGN catalogue
FromtheETGgalaxycataloguecandidateAGNhavebeendiscarded
(through color-based selection), so we use a complementary cata-
logue to include potential AGN hosts. In this work, we remain ag-
nosticaboutthea prioriprobabilityofaPTAsourcebeingassociated
withaspecifictypeofhost(e.g.,seeTruantetal.2026),andperform
our analysis for the ETG and AGN catalogues in parallel.
WeuseanAGNcataloguefromAssefetal.(2018),whichcontains
a total of 4,543,530 objects detected by WISE, present in the All-
WISE Data Release. For each entry the catalogue contains the mea-
sured apparent magnitudes the infrared bands of WISE, and their
photometric uncertainties. They are identified as AGN candidates
with 90 percent reliability (comprising the so-called R90 catalogue)
using a cut based on the𝑊1and𝑊2magnitudes:
W1−W2>0.662·𝑒 0.232 (W2−13.97 )2
.(9)
The R90 catalogue has a high level of uniformity and reliability.
Typically, such catalogues have to compromise on completeness to
achieve high reliability, but since we are interested in massive bi-
naries, which live in luminous hosts, completeness is likely not a
significant limitation. In the lower panel of Figure 3, we show the
sky distribution of the AGN in this catalogue.
The over-dense regions in the southern hemisphere are caused by
the survey strategy which was adopted to correct for the decreased
sensitivity in the south Atlantic anomaly (see Section 3.3.2 of Assef
et al. 2018 for details). These over-densities are present only for
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

8N. Veronesi et al.
faint sources (with a𝑆/𝑁 <10in the W2 band) and their inclusion
has therefore minimal impact on our results, but a future study may
consider a more careful selection.
We note that when comparing the total number of objects in the
AGN and ETG catalogues, we find the former to be≈23.5percent
of the latter. This number is higher than the typical AGN fraction
(Kauffmann et al. 2003), because R90 is deeper than the ETG cat-
alogue, with the former containing objects with𝑚W1 >19, and the
latter imposing a limiting W1 magnitude of 17 to achieve higher
uniformity (Bilicki et al. 2016).
2.6 Host ranking system
Inthissection,wepresentthesystemwedeveloptorankthepotential
host galaxies. To each galaxy (ETG or AGN, separately) within the
localisation area, we associate a host scoreH, which we define as
follows:
H=𝑝 sky ·𝑝 cat,(10)
where𝑝 sky and𝑝 cat are probability density values that estimate how
wellthecandidatehostpropertiesmatchtheposteriorsofthedetected
PTAsource.Thefactor𝑝 sky measureshowwellthehostskyposition
matches the GW sky map, and𝑝cat = Î
𝑥 𝑝 𝑥 is its equivalent for
the other host properties𝑥we consider. In particular, for ETGs the
additional information we use is the estimated total mass of their
SMBH and their luminosity distance calculated from the redshift,
(𝑝 cat,ETG =𝑝 𝑀tot ·𝑝 𝑑lum), while for AGN we rely on their apparent
W1magnitude(𝑝 cat,AGN =𝑝 𝑚W1,AGN),sinceinstate-of-the-artAGN
all-sky catalogues with homogeneous completeness (necessary for
this type of analyses), the total mass of the central SMBH and the
redshift are not separately listed. The value of𝑝𝑥 is proportional to
the probability of measuring the two distributions of the property𝑥
(onefromtheGWanalysisandonefromtheEMcatalogue)assuming
that the underlying true value of𝑥is the same for both of them.
We calculate𝑝 sky for each candidate host by first identifying the
pixel within A90 in which the galaxy is located (keeping the reso-
lution of NSide=32 throughout the analysis). Then we calculate the
probability density of the PTA source being associated with that
pixel,𝑝 sky,dividingthenumberofposteriorsamplesofthatpixelby
the total number of samples.
While the derivation of𝑝sky is straightforward, since the uncer-
tainty in the sky coordinates of the galaxies is negligible, the un-
certainty on the redshift and on the EM observables needs to be ac-
countedforincalculating𝑝 𝑥,andthusrequiresadifferentapproach.
For each property𝑥, we calculate𝑝𝑥 for each potential host by first
creatingadifferencedistributioncomposedof10,000samplesofthe
quantityΔ 𝑥.Eachsampleisthedifferencebetweenonerandomvalue
drawn from the GW-posterior-derived distribution of the observable
𝑥and one drawn from a Gaussian with mean and standard deviation
taken from the EM catalogue for the specific candidate host under
consideration.
We approximate the above probability density function,𝑝(Δ𝑥),
with a kernel density estimation and then draw 1,000 samples to
calculate the probability to exceed,PTE𝑥, as:
PTE𝑥 =
1000∑︁
𝑖=1
Θ  𝑝 (Δ𝑥 =0 ) −𝑝  Δ𝑥,𝑖
 ,(11)
whereΘindicates the Heaviside step function (which returns 0 for
negative values, and 1 for positive ones), andΔ𝑥,𝑖 is the𝑖-th random
draw from𝑝 (Δ𝑥). The value ofPTE𝑥 therefore denotes the proba-
bility of extracting from𝑝(Δ𝑥) a value ofΔ𝑥 that has an associated
probability density higher than the one associated toΔ𝑥 =0. If the
underlying value of𝑥was the same for the two distributions,𝑝(Δ𝑥)
wouldpeakatzero,andforthisreasonPTE 𝑥 wouldbenull.However,
fordifferentstartingdistributions,PTE 𝑥 willbepositive.Thehigher
the value ofPTE𝑥, the more the two starting distributions differ.
WethenusethevalueofPTE 𝑥 todefineasigmaequivalent𝜎 eq, 𝑥.
An intuitive definition of this quantity is the following: if the galaxy
under consideration is the true host, the observed difference in the
two distributions of the observable𝑥(i.e. the one derived from the
GW posteriors and the Gaussian parametrized by the mean and the
standard deviation from the catalogue or calculated as in Section
2.5.1) is as likely to obtain as a random draw from a Gaussian dis-
tribution with distance from the mean equal to a number𝜎eq, 𝑥 of
standard deviations. This quantity is calculated by inverting the fol-
lowing relation:
PTE𝑥 =𝑝  |𝑍| ≥𝜎 eq, 𝑥
 ,(12)
where𝑍isarandomdrawfromaGaussiandistributionofnullmean
and a standard deviation of 1. The value of𝜎eq, 𝑥 is therefore the
one that has a probability ofPTE𝑥 to be smaller (in absolute value)
thanarandomdrawofthefunction𝑍isextractedfrom.Invertingthe
equation therefore leads to:
𝜎eq, 𝑥 =
√
2·erf −1 (1−PTE 𝑥),(13)
where erf denotes the error function.
We can use𝜎eq, 𝑥 to calculate the probability density𝑝𝑥, as the
probability density associated to it assuming a normal Gaussian dis-
tribution:
𝑝 𝑥 =
√︂
2
𝜋 𝑒−
𝜎2eq, 𝑥
2 .(14)
Putting everything together, for every ETG within the localisation
area A90, we calculate the ETG host score as:
HETG =𝑝 sky ·𝑒 −
𝜎2
eq, 𝑀tot
2 ·𝑒 −
𝜎2
eq,𝑑lum
2 ,(15)
andsimilarlyforeveryAGNwithinthesameskyregion,wecalculate
the AGN host score as:
HAGN =𝑝 sky ·𝑒 −
𝜎2eq,𝑚W1,AGN
2 ,(16)
Wedropthe
√︃
2
𝜋 factor,becauseitiscommontoallETGsandAGN.
Weemphasizethatweareconstructingarankingsystemthatassigns
ascoretoeverypotentialhostwithinA90torankthem.However,the
values of these scores do not correspond to an absolute probability
density of an object being the true host. Moreover, the ranking is
relative within each catalogue, because the two scores have been
calculated separately and have different normalizations. This means
thatifanETGhasahigherscorewithrespecttoanAGN,itdoesnot
necessarilyimplythattheformerismorelikelytohostthebinarywith
respect to the latter. The only factor that allows a direct comparison
between the two host types is𝑝sky.
Finally, to quantify the efficiency of the ranking system, for each
localised binary, we calculate the ratio between the 95-th percentile
of the host score distribution and its median. We further refer to this
efficiency parameter asE95−50, and its value expresses how much
more likely the top performing candidates are to be the true host,
compared to the typical candidate within A90. A higher value of
E95−50 thereforeindicatesabetterabilitytoselectthebestcandidates,
andahigherefficiencyoftherankingsystem.Thisvalueiscalculated
for ETGs and AGN, separately, for the well-localised binaries both
inIPTA_25 andIPTA_30.
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources9
3 RESULTS
3.1 Selection of detectable and localisable binaries
We create 1,000 realizations of binary populations and select the
loudest binary for each population. We place these binaries in ran-
dom sky positions and examine their detectability inIPTA_20 and
IPTA_25. We select binaries that have𝑆/𝑁≥4, while not being
detectableinNG15.Wefindthatatotalof212and378binariespass
this detectability selection forIPTA_20 andIPTA_25, respectively.
Therefore, given our simulations of upcoming PTA sensitivities and
our models for the binary population, we estimate the probability of
resolving a binary in an upcoming IPTA dataset with a baseline of
20 and 25 years to be 21.2 and 37.8 percent, respectively. However,
weemphasizethattheS/Nthresholdisonlyaproxyforthedetection
statistics employed in PTA searches, and these probabilities should
be interpreted only as rough estimates.
The binaries that pass the detection threshold inIPTA_25 are
highlighted with blue squares in Figures 1 and 2, while the re-
maining population of loudest binaries is shown with gray squares.
We see that the detectable sources are isotropically distributed
on the sky and have properties (distance and total mass) statisti-
cally indistinguishable from the overall population. Specifically, the
25−𝑡ℎ, 50−𝑡ℎ, and 75−𝑡ℎpercentiles for the luminosity distance are
log10 (𝑑lum/Mpc) =2.65 2.96
2.28, where the main reported value indi-
cates the median, while the subscript and the superscript the two
other quartiles. The same percentiles for the total binary mass are
log10 (𝑀tot/𝑀 ⊙) =9.72 9.95
9.50.Thesesourcestendtohavelowfrequen-
cies, with≈64percent of the detectable binaries distributed in the
first5ofthe14frequencybins.AsimilarresultisfoundforIPTA_20,
where≈69percentofdetectablebinariesareinthatfrequencyrange.
The above values for the detectable binaries are broadly in agree-
ment with findings in previous studies (Rosado et al. 2015; Bécsy
etal.2022b;Gardineretal.2025).Thisistrueevenifthepopulation
synthesis models and the employed selection criteria are different
among studies. We acknowledge that we find a non-negligible frac-
tion of detectable binaries with masses comparable with (or higher
than)10 10 𝑀⊙.SMBHswithsuchhighmassesarepresentinthelocal
Universe, albeit relatively rare. For example, the MASSIVE survey
(Ma et al. 2014) has identified 116 ETGs with stellar masses bigger
than4·10 11 𝑀⊙ within 108 Mpc from Earth (Veale et al. 2018).
For this reason, we choose not to discard these most massive sys-
tems from our analysis, since they were produced by self-consistent
population synthesis models, in agreement with the measured GW
stochastic background.
Next, we explore how many of these binaries reach a𝑆/𝑁≥8,
which is the threshold we set for potentially being able to constrain
their sky position and trigger a multi-messenger search (see Section
2.3). We find that of the 1,000 binary populations we generated,
3 and 38 would produce a binary that passes this cut inIPTA_20
andIPTA_25,respectively.Thesmallnumberofbinarieslocalisable
inIPTA_20 is not surprising given the S/N thresholds we set; the
difference in sensitivity between NG15 andIPTA_20 is limited and
thus detecting a source with a well-constrained A90 in the third
data release of IPTA is unlikely. Moreover, since the probability of
resolving a binary inIPTA_20 is very small (less than one percent),
we focus onIPTA_25 for the remaining analyses and consider it our
fiducial PTA.
InFigure1,weshowtheskypositionsofthepotentiallylocalisable
binaries. As mentioned in Section 2.3, the size of each marker is
proportional to the total mass of the system, while its color denotes
theS/NintheIPTA_25dataset.Unlikethedetectablebinariesabove
(withS/N≥4),thedistributionofthesesourcesishighlyanisotropic
with about half of the binaries (20 out of 38) falling in a well-
constrainedregionofthesky,witharightascensionbetweenRA=90 ◦
and RA=225◦, and a declination between Dec=−45◦ and Dec=0◦.
This region has an area of approximately 5470deg2, corresponding
toonly≈13percentofthesky.Thisspecificregioniswheretheboost
insensitivitybetweenNG15andIPTA_25ishighest,mostlikelydue
to the addition of several pulsars in the southern hemisphere, e.g.,
from MPTA and PPTA. We further discuss this in Section 4.1.
The main properties of the 38 binaries that could be spatially
resolved inIPTA_25 are shown by the colored markers in Fig-
ure 2, which are color-coded according to the S/N of their de-
tection in our fiducial PTA configuration. The 25−𝑡ℎ, 50−𝑡ℎ, and
75−𝑡ℎpercentiles of the distribution of their luminosity distance
arelog 10 (𝑑lum/Mpc) =2.42 2.67
2.07. The same percentiles for the dis-
tribution of the total mass of these sources arelog10 (𝑀tot/𝑀 ⊙) =
9.7910.01
9.61 . This means that the selected sources are marginally closer
to Earth and more massive than the rest of the population. We con-
clude that the first localisable binary will likely be relatively nearby
(most binaries are roughly within 1Gpc, with the sole exclusion of 2
sources) and very massive (half of the sources have a mass equal or
greater than10 9.8 𝑀⊙). In addition, all of the potentially localisable
sources are in the first six frequency bins, as is evident from the
upper right panel of Figure 2. The resolvable binaries tend to have
relatively high mass ratios, typically𝑞 >0.4, as shown in the lower
panel.
3.2 Binary parameters, localisation areas, and galaxy
cross-matches
For the 38 binaries which are potentially localisable withIPTA_25,
we follow a more careful analysis. We simulate TOAs with the
GW background from the respective population and inject one
continuous-wave source, with properties as described above. Then
we run the detection pipelineQuickCWto constrain the posterior
distributions of their parameters. This allows us to constrain the lo-
calisationarea,whichwethenusetocross-matchwiththetwogalaxy
catalogues. Of those, 30 have a size of A90 smaller than 2,000deg2
(≈5 percent of the total sky area), while the remaining 8 are poorly
localised and therefore excluded from the rest of our analysis. This
highlights that, even though we set a threshold of𝑆/𝑁=8to select
sourceswithwell-constrainedskypositions,notallinjectionsreturn
a 90 percent localisation area small enough to allow for an efficient
host search. This is in line with findings from Petrov et al. (2024),
where only 5 of the 9 binaries with𝑆/𝑁=8have a constrained
localisation area. Factors beyond the S/N, like the chirp mass of the
binary and its position relative to the pulsars of the array (e.g., prox-
imitytothebest-timedpulsarsortothosewithwell-knowndistances
from Earth) play an important role in constraining the binary sky
location (Petrov et al. 2024; Taylor 2026). The three quartiles of the
distribution of the size of A90 for the well-localised binaries are
A90=408 509
250deg2.
We then calculate the overlap between the GW sky maps and
the EM catalogues and quantify the coverage fraction𝑓cover. We
find that A90 is entirely within the footprint of both EM catalogues
(𝑓 cover =1) for 8 of the 30 well-localised sources, while in one case
weget𝑓 cover =1fortheAGNcataloguebutnotforETGs.Therefore,
in approximately two thirds of the cases, the GW localisation area is
not fully covered by the EM surveys. This can significantly limit our
ability to find the true host of PTA sources. On the other hand, there
arenocasesinwhichA90iscompletelycontainedinaregionofthe
sky with no support from the catalogues (𝑓cover =0), likely because
thetypicalsizeofA90constrainedbyourfiducialPTAconfiguration
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

10N. Veronesi et al.
is more extended than the gaps of the catalogues, e.g., the Galactic
plane (see Section 3.3 for a discussion on the difference in A90
constrainedbyIPTA_25andIPTA_30).Thenumberofpotentialhosts
reportedbelowarenotnormalizedbasedon𝑓 cover,butweseparately
use the coverage factor to estimate the number of missing hosts in
Section 3.4. This work focuses on providing realistic expectations
regarding how many observed galaxies will have the possibility of
beingpromptlyfollowed-upinrealistichostsearches,andonranking
them.IftheGWlocalisationareaextendstoskyregionsnotcovered
byexistingsurveys,thiswillmotivatenewobservationalcampaigns,
and the newly detected galaxies will be subsequently added to the
list of potential hosts and ranked.
Cross-matchingtheGWmapswiththeETGandAGNcatalogues
we calculate the number of potential hosts. The three quartiles of
the distribution of the number of ETGs within A90 for the 30 well-
localised binaries are𝑁 ETG =189,286 312,231
95,290 , while for the AGN
hoststheyare𝑁 AGN =39,655 76,931
11,786.Thefactthatthesenumbersare
much larger than the ones obtained in Petrov et al. (2024), where
thenumberofpotentialhostswithinA90arebetween285and1,238
for the 5 localised binary detections with𝑆/𝑁=8, is explained by
the much deeper catalogues used in this work, since the sizes of the
localisation areas are not significantly different. The catalogue used
in Petrov et al. (2024) contains a total of 43,532 entries.
The number of potential hosts is directly linked to size of the
localisation area. However, the other main binary parameters (𝑓,ℎ0,
andM)alsodetermineourexpectationsaboutthebinaryhosts,since
theyareusedtocalculatethedistancesofthebinariesusingEquation
3, and the expected distributions of their EM properties, which in
turn affect the ranking, the results of which are presented in Section
3.5. For this reason, we also quantify how well these properties are
constrained byQuickCW. We find that the frequency and the strain
of the 30 well-localised binaries are correctly constrained around
the true value. In particular, we find that the percent error of the
median of the posterior compared to the true injected value of the
frequency and strain in log space is on average 0.1 and 0.7 percent,
respectively. The interquartile range (between the first and the third
quartile) of the posterior distribution in log space is on average 0.02
for the frequency and 0.20 for the strain.
Ontheotherhand,wefindthatthechirpmassisingeneralpoorly
constrained. The interquartile range of its posterior distribution in
log space is on average 1.27. The fact that the PTA data cannot pro-
videtightconstraintsonthechirpmasshasimportantimplicationsin
thesearchforthehostgalaxy.Thiswell-knownlimitation(Sesana&
Vecchio 2010; Charisi et al. 2024) is mainly caused by the fact that
PTAsdetectbinariesearlyintheirinspiralstage,wherethefrequency
evolution is slow, and not during the chirping that happens right be-
fore the merger, which is the most critical stage for constraining the
mass of the binary and its luminosity distance. This poorly con-
strainedmassparameterisinturn,translatedintopoorlyconstrained
distributionsfor𝑑 lum,𝑀 tot,and𝑚 W1,AGN.InVeronesietal.(2025b),
wedemonstratedthattheuncertaintyinthechirpmasscontributesto
≈98percent of the uncertainty on the photometric properties of the
host.Onlytheremaining≈2percentcomesfromuncertaintiesinthe
EM observables (e.g., the intrinsic scatter in the scaling relationship
between the binary mass and the bulge mass of an ETG host, or the
distribution of Eddington ratios for a given source mass in the case
of an AGN).
3.3 Constraints improvement withIPTA_30
Nextweexplorehowourresultsevolvewiththeadditionof42mon-
itored pulsars and 5 years of baseline with respect to our fiducial
PTA configuration. WithIPTA_30 we find a total of 507 binaries
to be detectable and 141 to be localisable, while not being de-
tectable by NG15. This finding suggests that in the next ten years
we have a≈50percent probability of resolving the first binary, and
a≈15percentchanceofbeingabletopotentiallylocaliseitwithina
sky region small enough to allow for host searches. These numbers
likely represent lower limits for our expectations, since upcoming
observatoriesliketheSquareKilometreArray(SKA,Dewdneyetal.
2009) or the Deep Synoptic Array (DSA, Hallinan et al. 2019) will
increase the number of monitored pulsars faster than what we as-
sume in this work. The quartiles of the total mass distribution in
logarithmic space for the 141 potentially localisable binaries are
log10 (𝑀tot/𝑀 ⊙) =9.76 9.95
9.46.Thesamevaluesfortheluminositydis-
tance arelog 10 (𝑑lum/Mpc) =2.57 2.92
2.18, and 101 of them are in the
first 5 frequency bins. These sources follow more closely the distri-
butionsofthefullpopulationcomparedtothepotentiallylocalisable
binariesinIPTA_25,whicharemarginallymoremassiveandnearby.
Even though we still find some evidence for spatial clustering of
the localisable binaries in the same region as in our fiducial con-
figuration, the observed concentration in the southern hemisphere is
weakerandthe141selectedsourcesaregenerallydistributedallover
the sky. This is to be expected, since with the increase in sensitiv-
ity with respect toIPTA_25, the requirement of non-detectability in
NG15 is less stringent.
However, the main goal of theIPTA_30 simulations is to ex-
plore how the posteriors evolve with the addition of new pulsars and
the extension of the baselines for the 30 binaries that are already
well-localised with our fiducial configuration. Therefore, we do not
simulate the detection of all 141 potentially localisable binaries.
Before presenting the results for the entire population, we show
the evolution of the size of A90 and the number of potential hosts
for one source. The binary we choose has a total mass of𝑀tot =
109.05 𝑀⊙,amassratioof𝑞=0.61,aluminositydistancefromEarth
of𝑑 lum =37Mpc, a frequency of𝑓=12nHz, and a S/N of 8.46 and
12.25inIPTA_25andIPTA_30,respectively.Thisbinarywaschosen
for its large value of𝑓cover, which is greater than 0.9 for both EM
catalogues. The size of A90 is above average, resulting in a number
of potential hosts on the higher end of the distribution, allowing us
to demonstrate our method in a conservative scenario.
InFigure4,weshowtheskypositionandlocalisationareasforthe
selectedbinary.Inparticular,wemarkwithablackcrosstheposition
of this binary, while the blue and orange dots are the positions of
all the AGN within A90 as constrained byIPTA_25 andIPTA_30,
respectively, which practically delineate the respective A90s. As in
Figure 1, the gray area marks the region of the sky with a Galactic
latitude of|𝑏| ≤10 ◦. The size of its localisation area decreases
from≈645 deg 2 inIPTA_25 to≈349 deg 2 inIPTA_30, while
the coverage factor with respect to the ETG and AGN catalogues
increases from≈91percent and≈96percent, respectively, to full
coverage𝑓 cover =1in both catalogues. The number of potential
ETG and AGN hosts decreases from a total of 424,830 and 97,562
to 263,477 and 62,203, respectively. The number of potential hosts
decreasesby≈40percentforbothETGsandAGN.Thispercentage
is slightly smaller than the 46 percent decrease in localisation area.
Thisiscausedbythefactthat𝑓 coverishigherinIPTA_30.Wediscuss
the issue of missing potential hosts in more detail in Section 3.4.
Figure 4 demonstrates the reduction in the size of A90, but also
highlightsthatingeneralthelocalisationareaobtainedwithIPTA_30
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources11
−33.47∘
179.86∘
IPTA_25
IPTA_30
Figure 4.localisation area at the 90 percent credibility level for the example
binary (the true position is marked by the black cross), as constrained with
IPTA_25 (blue) andIPTA_30 (orange). The localisation areas are delineated
bythepositionsofthecandidateAGNhostsfromtheR90catalogue,sincethis
binaryhasahighcoveragefactor(𝑓 cover ≈1)forbothPTAconfigurations.The
gray area denotes the region of the sky with a Galactic latitude of|𝑏| ≤10◦.
is not necessarily contained within the one obtained withIPTA_25,
but can slightly shift with respect to it. This means that the value of
𝑓cover forIPTA_30 cannot be predicted from the respective value in
IPTA_25. This effect can also be seen in the second and third panels
of Figure 5, where we examine the entire sample.
More specifically, Figure 5 summarizes separately for each of the
30 well-localised binaries the evolution of the main results (locali-
sation area, coverage fraction𝑓cover, and number of potential hosts
both for ETGs and AGN) between the two IPTA configurations.
We show the results obtained with theIPTA_25 configuration with
round markers, and the ones obtained withIPTA_30 with squares.
The colour of each marker denotes the S/N obtained withIPTA_25,
and the sources are sorted horizontally as a function of their total
mass, in ascending order.
Amongthe30well-localisedbinaries,theaverageincreaseinS/N
betweenIPTA_25 andIPTA_30 is approximately 32 percent. In the
upper-left panel of Figure 6, we show the distributions of S/N for
both configurations. In every panel of the figure we show both the
countsperbinforthecorrespondentquantity,anditsnon-normalized
cumulativedistributionfunction(thevaluesofwhicharereportedon
the right-hand side of the vertical axis). The solid blue lines show
the results obtained withIPTA_25, while the dashed orange lines
correspond toIPTA_30.
The size of A90 constrained byIPTA_30 is on average≈38
percent smaller than the one constrained byIPTA_25. This is in line
withtheincreaseinS/N,sincethelocalisationareaisexpectedtobe
approximately inversely proportional to the square of S/N, i.e. A90
∝S/N −2 (Sesana & Vecchio 2010). Therefore, an increase in S/N
of≈30percent is expected to cause a decrease of≈40percent in
thesizeofA90.ThequartilesofthedistributionsofA90constrained
withIPTA_30 for the 30 well-localised binaries areA90=212 325
140
deg2. The distribution of the size of A90 is shown both forIPTA_30
and for our fiducial configuration in the upper right panel in Figure
6.All30binariesthatarewell-localisedinourfiducialconfiguration
haveasizeofA90smallerthan1,000deg 2 inIPTA_30.Wenotethat
thisisalsotrueforthe8binariesthat,whilehavinga𝑆/𝑁≥8,hada
sizeofA90largerthan2,000deg 2inIPTA_25.Itisalsoworthnoting
that for three binaries the constraints on the localisation area remain
almostunchanged(seetheupperpanelofFigure5),whenaddingthe
extra 42 pulsars and 5 years of monitoring, while for one case, they
get worse. While it is not trivial to identify the exact cause of this,
we hypothesize that this is likely due to the stochasticity involved
in the generation of the TOAs (where we create random realizations
of the pulsar noises, of the measurement white noise, and of the
GW stochastic background), and more importantly in the MCMC
sampling of the posterior distributions of the binary parameters.
Regarding the coverage factor, we find that in 13 and 11 cases,
A90 is entirely within the footprint of the ETG and AGN catalogue,
respectively. These include all 9 that had this property inIPTA_25.
However,thereare5and4unfortunatecases,wherethenewlocalisa-
tionareaendsupbeingcompletelywithintheskyregionnotcovered
by the ETG and AGN catalogues, respectively.
We cross-match the sky maps constrained byIPTA_30 with the
ETG and AGN catalogues. The three quartiles of the distribution of
thenumberofETGswithinA90are𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴_30
ETG =85,622 200,018
26,228 .The
same values for the AGN scenario are𝑁𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴_30
AGN =14,793 50,302
1,660 .
These numbers also include the cases with𝑓 cover =0. We show
the distributions of the number of potential hosts both forIPTA_25
andIPTA_30 in the lower left panel of Figure 6 (for ETGs) and
in the lower right panel (for AGN). The presence of cases for which
𝑓cover =0(andthustherearezerocross-matchedgalaxiesinA90)are
markedbythefactthatthecumulativedistributionsonthenumberof
potentialhostsforIPTA_30startwithanon-nullvalueonthevertical
axis.
Next, we focus on the subset of PTA sources the localisation
area of which is fully covered by EM surveys (i.e.𝑓cover =1) in
bothIPTA_25 andIPTA_30 to see how the number of potential
hosts evolves. This selection based on𝑓covereliminates biases due to
incompletecoverage.ThenumberofhostswithinA90isdecreasedby
37.7percentforETGsandby37.1forAGN.Thisexactlyfollowsthe
fractionaldecreaseinthesizeofA90forthesamebinaries(≈37.8).
Finally, with respect to the constraints of the remaining binary
parameters inIPTA_30, we obtain an average interquartile range
in logarithmic space for the frequency distribution of 0.01, for the
strain distribution of 0.17, and for the chirp mass distribution of
1.10. As expected, the posterior distributions on these parameters
get in general narrower when we add the extra 42 pulsars and 5
more years of observations, but the uncertainty on the chirp mass
decreases on average only by a factor of≈9percent. Therefore,
eveninIPTA_30,thechirpmassuncertaintyremainssignificant,and
drives the uncertainty on the derived properties of the hosts.
3.4 Missing galaxies
TheEMcataloguesweusetocross-matchtheGWlocalisationareas
are incomplete in sky regions with high contamination of stellar
content and/or dust, e.g., close to the Galactic plane. For each well-
localised binary, we estimate the number of potential hosts that are
not present in our EM catalogues. We do so by first calculating the
numberofpixelsinA90thatarenotcoveredbyEMsurveys.Thenwe
multiply this by the average number of galaxies per pixel, calculated
by dividing the total number of entries in each catalogue by the
number of pixels in the respective catalogue footprint.
The distributions of the number of missing galaxies are shown in
Figure 7. As before, the blue solid lines show the results obtained
with our fiducial PTA configuration, while the orange dashed lines
represent results obtained withIPTA_30. The quartiles of the distri-
butions of missing ETG hosts, calculated including both cases with
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

12N. Veronesi et al.
0
250
500
750
1000A90[deg2]
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00fcover, ETG
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00fcover, AGN
0
200
400
600
NETG, A90
1000
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Binary index
0
50
100
150
NAGN, A90
1000
IPTA_25
IPTA_30
9 10 11 12 13 14
S/N
Figure 5.Evolution of the main results betweenIPTA_25 (circles) andIPTA_30 (squares). The first panel shows the size of A90. The second and the third
panels show the fraction of A90 that is in the footprint of the ETGs and the AGN catalogues, respectively. The last two panels show the number of potential
hosts (ETGs and AGN) contained in A90. Each pair represents a separate well-localised simulated binary. In all the panels the simulated binaries are sorted on
the horizontal axis in order of increasing total mass, color-coded by their S/N inIPTA_25 .
𝑓cover =1andwith𝑓 cover =0,are𝑁 ETG =20,196 103,506
0 forIPTA_25
and𝑁 ETG =19,355 55,118
0 forIPTA_30. The same estimates for the
AGN case are𝑁AGN =6,421 22,475
0 and𝑁 AGN =5,946 15,102
0 . The
nullvaluesofthe25−𝑡ℎpercentilesarecausedbythesourceswhose
GW maps are fully covered by the EM catalogues (𝑓cover =1), and
thus are associated to zero missing galaxies based on our definition
6. As can be seen in Figure 7, the variance of these values is large,
as it depends both on the size of A90 and on the value of𝑓cover for
each binary.
The gaps in EM coverage highlighted by the large number of
6 Some potential hosts might still be not present in the catalogues we use
due to high level of obscuration or flux limits of the surveys the catalogues
we use are obtained from.
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources13
8 10 12 14 16 18
S/N
0
5
10
15Counts
0 200 400 600 800 1000
A90 [deg2]
0
2
4
6
8
10Counts
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
NETG, A90/1000
0
2
4
6
8
10Counts
0 25 50 75 100 125 150
NAGN, A90/1000
0
5
10
15Counts
0
10
20
30
N(S/N<)
0
10
20
30
N(A90<)
0
10
20
30
N(NETG, A90/1000<)
0
10
20
30
N(NAGN, A90/1000<)
IPTA_25 IPTA_30
Figure 6.Distributions of the S/N (upper left panel), size of A90 (upper right panel), number of potential ETG hosts (lower left panel), and AGN hosts (lower
right panel) for the 30 well-localised binaries. The solid lines correspond toIPTA_25, while the dashed ones toIPTA_30. For both configurations we show the
counts per bin on the left-hand side of the vertical axis, and the non-normalized cumulative distribution function on its right-hand side.
missinggalaxiescanpresentasignificantlimitationinfuturesearches
forthehostgalaxy.Therealhostmaycoincidewithoneofthemissing
galaxies, making a multi-messenger detection impossible without
follow-up observations to cover these gaps. This effect also needs to
beaccountedforbothintheestimationoffalse-positiveprobabilities
for the binary-host association, and in any potential ranking systems
which associates to each candidate an absolute probability of being
the true host.
3.5 Host ranking
Finally, for each galaxy within the localisation area we calculate the
host score. We use this to derive the relative ranking of ETGs and
AGN, independently for the two sets of galaxies.
First, we identify galaxies that have𝑝𝑐𝑎𝑡 =0and thus can be
excluded as potential hosts, since their EM properties are incon-
sistent with the GW posteriors. On average, 47.21 percent of the
ETGs are associated to a null score withIPTA_25, and this frac-
tion is further increased to 61.14 percent withIPTA_30. The quar-
tiles of the distribution of the number of remaining ETGs within
A90 are𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴_25
ETG =86,587 146,238
36,315 forIPTA_25 and𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴_30
ETG =
23,950 68,837
3,706 forIPTA_30. On the other hand, the fraction of AGN
that can be excluded based on their EM properties is significantly
lower, 0.26 percent and 3.76 percent forIPTA_25 andIPTA_30,
respectively. Thus the same quartiles for the remaining AGN are
𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴_25
AGN =39,655 76,932
11,786 and𝑁 𝐼 𝑃𝑇 𝐴_30
AGN =12,828 48,692
1,660 .
The significant difference in our ability to exclude different types
of hosts based on their EM properties is caused by the different
information provided in the two employed catalogues. In particular,
a null score for an ETG can be caused by a null value of𝑝Mtot or
𝑝dlum, caused by a high discrepancy between the estimates of the
luminosity distance and, even more importantly, of the total mass
obtained with the GW analysis and the respective values in the EM
catalogue. For instance, in the ETG catalogue, a high fraction (≈83
percent) of the galaxies have an estimated SMBH mass smaller than
108.5 𝑀⊙, lower than any injected binary mass. For this illustrative
examplewechoose10 8.5 𝑀⊙ (eventhoughthelowestsimulatedmass
is higher than109 𝑀⊙) because the posteriors on total mass are very
wide, and we only get a null value of𝑝Mtot if the galaxy has an
estimatedvaluesignificantlyincompatiblefromsuchdistribution.In
the AGN ranking, the information coming from the total mass and
the luminosity distance is combined in the calculation of𝑝𝑚W1,AGN,
whichcomparestheapparentmagnitudesofthehostsestimatedfrom
the GW analysis and those listed in the catalogue. This degeneracy,
along with the poorly constrained chirp mass from the GW pipeline
leads to very wide distributions of apparent magnitudes, resulting in
a much lower fraction of nullHAGN host scores.
Hereafter, we show results of the host ranking obtained after all
potentialhostswithanullscorearediscarded.First,wedemonstrate
the results of the ranking method obtained using the same example
source as in the previous section. Then we show how these results
are generalized for the entire population of simulated and localised
binaries.
After excluding galaxies with a null score, the localisation area of
this binary has a total of 206,543 ETGs with our fiducial configura-
tion, which is reduced to 190,176 forIPTA_30, significantly lower
than the initial number of ETGs within A90 (see Section 3.3). For
our fiducial configuration, for example, this selection removes ap-
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

14N. Veronesi et al.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p(Nmissing ETGs < )
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
pp(Nmissing AGN < )
0 50000 100000 150000 200000
Nmissing ETGs
0
5
10
15Counts
IPTA_25
IPTA_30
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
Nmissing AGN
0
5
10
15Counts
Figure 7.Distributions of the estimated number of potentially missing hosts
due to the gaps in the EM catalogues. Blue solid lines show results obtained
withIPTA_25,andorangedashedlineswithIPTA_30.Theupperpanelshows
the estimated number of missing ETGs, while the lower one the estimated
number of missing AGN.
proximately 51 percent of the galaxies in A90. The remaining AGN
within A90 are 90,132 forIPTA_25 and 62,203 forIPTA_30, only
slightly lower than the initial total number. Figure 8 shows the cu-
mulative distribution functions of the non-null host scores for the
example binary. The vertical lines highlight the medians and the
95−𝑡ℎpercentiles of the distributions. The efficiency parameter (i.e.
the ratio between the score of the top performing galaxies and the
average galaxies) for ETGs isE95−50 =14.44, while for the AGN
scenario goes down toE95−50 =5.26. ForIPTA_30, we see an im-
provement for ETGs, with an efficiency parameterE95−50 =17.33,
but this improvement does not extend to AGN, for which the ef-
ficiency parameter isE95−50 =4.98. We remind the reader that a
higher value of this ratio indicates that the top galaxies differ more
from the lowest ranked and thus we may need to follow-up fewer of
these potential hosts to find the true one. However, since the calcu-
latedscoresdonotcorrespondtoanabsoluteprobabilityofagalaxy
being the binary host, we cannot estimate how many potential hosts
have to be followed up to reach a certain likelihood for finding the
host. The aforementioned differences that allow us to exclude more
ETGs compared to AGN can also explain the higher efficiency in
the ranking of the two types of galaxies. We further discuss this in
Section 4.
The difference in the ranking efficiency between the two galaxy
types is consistently seen in the entire sample of well-localised PTA
sources. We then calculate the ratioE95−50 for all the cases with
𝑓cover >0, and show its distribution for ETGs (upper panel) and for
AGN (lower panel) in Figure 9. In the ETG scenario the quartiles of
the distribution of the efficiency parameter areEETG
95−50 =12.41 14.11
10.06
for our fiducial PTA configuration andE ETG
95−50 =17.20 21.06
13.65 for
10 7
 10 6
 10 5
 10 4
 10 3
 10 2
ETG
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0p( ETG < )
IPTA_25
IPTA_30
10 5
 10 4
 10 3
 10 2
AGN
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0p( AGN < )
Figure 8.Cumulative distribution functions of the non-null host scores for
the ETGs (upper panel) and AGN (lower panel) contained in A90 for the
source used as an example in Section 3.3, the position of which is shown
in Figure 4. Blue solid (orange dashed) lines indicate the distributions for
IPTA_25 (IPTA_30).
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
N( ETG
95 50 < )
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
N( AGN
95 50 < )
0 5 10 15 20 25
ETG
95 50
0
2
4
6
8Counts
IPTA_25
IPTA_30
0 2 4 6 8
AGN
95 50
0
2
4
6
8
10
12Counts
Figure 9.Distribution functions of the ranking efficiencyE95−50 (i.e. the
ratio between the 95-th and the 50-th percentiles of the non-null host score
distributions)forthewell-locsalizedbinarieswith𝑓 cover >0.Theplotonthe
top shows the results of the cross-matches between GW sky maps and the
ETG catalogue, while the lower the results obtained from the cross-matches
withtheAGNcatalogue.ThebluesolidlineshowstheresultsoffiducialPTA
configuration, while the orange dashed lines the ones ofIPTA_30.
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources15
IPTA_30. For AGN the same values areE AGN
95−50 =3.65 4.42
3.20 and
EAGN
95−50 =4.36 5.81
3.51. We note that for both types of potential hosts
the ranking efficiency is improved (albeit marginally for AGN) due
to better constraints on the binary parameters (especially the mass)
obtained withIPTA_30. This is encouraging, especially since the
starting number of galaxies is already smaller due to better localisa-
tion. This is further discussed in Section 4.
4 DISCUSSION
In this section we discuss the implications of our findings and high-
light assumptions and caveats of the method we employ. We also
presentsomealternativeapproachesthatmightbeexploredinfuture
studies.
4.1 Prospects for binary detectability in the near future
Wegenerate1,000binarypopulations,consistentwiththeGWback-
ground measured in NG15 and select the loudest binaries requiring
that there was no evidence for their presence in NG15 (see Section
2.3). We find that a significant fraction of the populations (≈40 per-
cent) could produce a detectable binary in the next 5 years. This
fraction increases to over 50 percent inIPTA_30. However, when
imposing the additional requirement of𝑆/𝑁≥8to be able to lo-
calise the source, only 3.8 percent of the populations pass this cut in
IPTA_25. When simulating their GW signals and running the detec-
tion analysis, this fraction is lowered to 3 percent, given that some
sources have an A90 greater than 2,000deg2 .
Even though this may appear like a pessimistic prediction for
the prospects of multi-messenger discoveries in the near-future, it
is not entirely surprising. By the nature of the experiment, the S/N
of individual binaries, and thus our ability to constrain their sky
location, will increase gradually. Therefore, the most likely scenario
is that PTAs will first find evidence for the presence of a continuous
wave source in their data, and constrain its frequency and strain,
but will not be able to pinpoint its location initially (Petrov et al.
2025).However,withtheadditionofmorepulsarsandtheextension
of baselines we will be able to localise the source with improving
precision as more and more data are collected. For instance, we
see a≈40percent decrease in the size of A90 betweenIPTA_25
andIPTA_30. We also note that in this configuration, the loudest
binary is potentially localisable in approximately 15 percent of the
realizations.
Wealsoseethatthepredictedpopulationofresolvablebinariesin
IPTA_25 is clustered in the sky. This is clearly evident in Figure 1.
This interesting finding suggests that an upcoming detection would
have a high probability of arising from a specific region in the sky,
morespecificallythesouthernhemisphere.Thisclusteringiscaused
by our requirement that such a source was not detectable by NG15.
Asmentionedabove,thisregionexperiencesagreaterboostinsensi-
tivity compared to NG15, because inIPTA_25 we include pulsars in
thesouthernhemispherefromMPTAandPPTA.Thesameclustering
is present, but much weaker, in the binaries potentially localisable
withIPTA_30.
Since we have not imposed the non-detectability selection using
onlythethirddatareleaseofPPTAorthefirstdatareleaseofMPTA,
we cannot conclude whether our prediction regarding the observed
clusteringisrobust.However,itissafetoassumethathadweimposed
the same criterion for the EPTA dataset, we would observe a similar
trend, since there is significant overlap between the NANOGrav and
EPTA pulsars. We note, however, that the PPTA dataset includes
fewer pulsars, while the MPTA data have shorter baselines and thus
may have less constraining power. Therefore, it is possible that even
if we performed similar cuts on their detectability based on PPTA
or MPTA, the remaining sources could still end up mostly in the
southern hemisphere (even though some of the 38 sources would be
excluded).
We emphasize that the main goal of the paper is not to predict the
exact properties of the first resolvable binary, but rather to quantify
their localisability and the number of viable host galaxies. A future
study, one specifically aimed to predict the parameters of the first
source that will be detected above the background, should impose
as criterion that these sources were not detected by any given PTA.
It should also be constrained by the findings of the search in the
upcoming third data release of IPTA.
However,ifthisclusteringfeaturepersists,weneedtoconsiderthe
limitations imposed by the overlap of this region with the Galactic
plane, where the search for binary hosts is heavily limited by gaps
in the coverage of EM surveys. Even so, we find encouraging that
the localisation area of more than 25 percent of the well-localised
binaries is fully covered by both catalogues (see Figure 5).
Finally,wenotethatinsomesimulatedSMBHbinarypopulations
more than one binary is considered either detectable or even poten-
tially localisable according to our selection criteria. Since the focus
of this work is to quantify the number of potential hosts of the first
resolvedPTAsourceandthenrankthem,foreachbinarypopulation
we select only the top binary (in terms of S/N) to simulate its TOAs
and perform a detection analysis. However, since a number of them
have one or more "loud siblings", we highlight the need to further
implement detection pipelines that simultaneously search for multi-
plebinariesontopofthestochasticbackground(Petiteauetal.2013;
Curyło et al. 2026).
4.2 localisation areas and cross-matches
We perform realistic simulations of continuous-wave sources on top
of the GW background and constrain their parameters with a stan-
dard GW detection pipeline. We find the median of A90 for the 30
sources localised byIPTA_25 to beA90=408 deg 2, reduced to
A90=212 deg 2 inIPTA_30, as can be seen from the upper right
panel of Figure 6. Even though the localisation area decreases by
≈40percent on average, it remains large even in the extended PTA
configuration. We note that the poor localisation is typical for GW
experiments across the entire spectrum. These constraints on A90
areconsistentwithfindingsinpreviousstudies(e.g.,Goldsteinetal.
2019Petrovetal.2024,Gardineretal.2025,andTruantetal.2026),
andinevitablyleadtoalargenumberofcandidatehosts,i.e.hundreds
of thousands of ETGs and tens of thousands of AGN. Specifically,
for the 30 well-localised binaries the median number is 189,286 for
ETGs and 39,655 for AGN.
These numbers, which are different with respect to the ones listed
in previous studies (e.g., Goldstein et al. 2019; Petrov et al. 2024),
derivefromthechoiceofall-skysurveysweuseforthecross-match.
The NANOGrav catalogue presented in (Arzoumanian et al. 2021)
andusedinPetrovetal.(2024),forexample,containsatotalof43,532
galaxieswithin500MpcfromEarth.ThecatalogueofETGsweuse
has a factor of approximately 450 more entries. While not complete
over the entire sky, the EM catalogues we adopt have a remarkable
depthanduniformityoutsidetheGalacticplane,andthereforereflect
arealisticscenarioforfuturemulti-messengersearches.Themaindif-
ference in the galaxy catalogue used to test the host ranking method
first presented in Goldstein et al. (2019) is that we use observed ob-
jects, while in the aforementioned work the candidates are extracted
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

16N. Veronesi et al.
from the Millennium Run cosmological simulation (Springel et al.
2005), and have a stellar mass which is knowna prioriand is not
derived from observed magnitudes.
The remarkable number of candidate hosts within every locali-
sation area, even after having discarded the ones with a null host
score, highlights the need for an accurate estimation of the false-
positiveprobabilityforanyfuturesearchforanEMcounterpart.The
source-host association will rely on a specific EM signature (or a
combination of many), and its false-positive probability will depend
onseveralfactors,includingtheinvolvedobservables,andthequality
of the available EM data. Many of the proposed binary signatures in
AGN (e.g., periodic variability or broad line Doppler shifts) can be
confused with the typical AGN behavior (Vaughan et al. 2016; Kr-
ishnanetal.2021;D’Orazio&Charisi2023).InDavisetal.(2024),
for example, is shown that the most luminous single quasars can
efficiently produce binary-like signatures in simulated light-curves
of the Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST,
Ivezićetal.2019),andthiscanleadtofalse-positiveratesashighas
60 percent for such objects. Similar issues may arise for ETG hosts,
which might contain a PTA source without exhibiting any distinct
observable EM property. For instance, the presence of a binary can
berevealedbydetailedobservationsofmorphologicalandkinematic
properties of the galaxies (Bardati et al. 2024), while in typical im-
agesofaveragequalitytheymaylookindistinguishablefromtherest
oftheETGs.Theinformationcomingfromanyoftheseobservables
canbeintroducedinthe𝑝 cat termofthehostscore,makingtherank-
ing system more efficient, further reducing the number of potential
hosts to follow up.
We also note that the localisation areas and the resulting cross-
matches with the EM catalogues are obtained using sky maps with
the resolution of a Healpix map with NSide=32. This choice, which
likely has negligible impact on our main results, was made to avoid
holes in the GW maps (i.e. pixels excluded from A90, while fully
surroundedbypixelsthatwereincluded)causedbyalimitedamount
of posterior samples. Increasing the resolution to NSide=64 would
lead to localisation areas without a compact shape in several cases.
This feature is also present in some A90 calculated with NSide=32,
but negligibly, so it does not affect the cross-matches or the ranking.
Future studies could use longer MCMCs and opt for a higher value
of NSide, with the increased resolution likely resulting in slightly
smaller A90s.
Finally, the precision of PTA sources localisation, together with
the one of the chirp mass constraints, could be greatly improved
by fully leveraging the information contained in the pulsar term
of the GW signal, which would be possible with accurate pulsar
distances measurements to use as priors, and detection pipelines
that don’t consider the phase of such term as nuisance parameter,
but rather derive it from the inferred pulsar distances themselves
(Taylor 2026). This is particularly true for systems with high masses
and low luminosity distance, which are loud enough to be soon
detected by PTAs and have an orbital evolution which happens on
shorter timescales with respect to the rest of the population (see,
e.g., McGrathetal.2022;Deng&Finn2011).Thisworkstherefore
highlights the importance of better pulsar distances constraints and
ofthedevelopmentofefficient"phase-linked"pipelinesforthefuture
of multi-messenger analyses of PTA sources.
4.3 Efficiency of host ranking
Themethodwedevelopallowsustorankthecandidatehostsbasedon
theirskypositionandtheirEMproperties.Usingadditionalinforma-
tionontopoftheirskypositionscanfacilitatefuturemulti-messenger
searches for the host galaxy of the PTA source. In fact, we can ex-
cludeapproximatelyhalfoftheETGswithinA90(theoneswithnull
scores) based only on their photometric properties.
Figure 9 shows that the top performing ETGs in our ranking can
be tens of times more likely to contain the PTA source than the
typical galaxies within A90. In the ETG case, the total mass,𝑀tot,
and the luminosity distance,𝑑lum, enter separately the calculation of
HETG (seeEquation15),thusprovidingmoreconstrainingpower.In
contrast,thebestperformingAGNhaveascoreapproximately4times
higher than the median. This is approximately the ratio we would
obtain considering only the sky positions; the additional constraints
from the apparent W1 magnitude do not significantly improve the
ranking. This is because𝑚W1,AGN is an observable which combines
the total mass of the binary and its luminosity distance from Earth
(which are not listed in the AGN cataloguee we adopt), resulting
in very broad posteriors. Incorporating other sources of uncertainty
(e.g., the Eddington fraction, the bolometric correction) makes this
propertyevenlessconstraining.OurinabilitytoefficientlyrankAGN
may not be a huge limitation, since previous studies suggested that
detectable AGN are less likely to host PTA sources, compared to
quiescent massive galaxies (Truant et al. 2026). However, in this
workweconductthewholeanalysisforbothtypesofhostsinparallel
for completeness.
Based on the above, we conclude that the ranking method can
be boosted with a few improvements in the EM catalogues. For
instance, building an AGN catalogue that provides estimates of the
redshift and the mass of the central SMBH for each galaxy would
result in a ranking efficiency similar to the ETG case. At the same
time, the ranking efficiency for ETGs could be further improved
if the catalogue provided the galaxy morphological type. We note
that the ETG catalogue excludes only AGN and contains all types
of quiescent galaxies. We made an implicit assumption that all of
those are ETGs, by assigning the entirety of the stellar mass to the
bulge when calculating the mass of the central SMBH (see Section
2.5.1). This assumption does not hold for spiral galaxies, in which
only a fraction of the stellar component is in the bulge. Late type
galaxies are present in the catalogue, although they are typically on
the lower end of the stellar mass distribution, and the majority may
have been excluded as potential hosts with null scores. However,
it is possible that some remain even after this cut, and thus our
estimatesonthetotalnumberofpotentialhostscanbeconsideredas
upper limits. Practically, a smaller bulge mass would translate into a
smallerSMBHmass,andcouldbemorelikelyrejectedasapotential
host due to the incompatibility with the (typically high) total binary
mass estimates obtained from the GW analysis.
We emphasize that the main limiting factor comes from the GW
analysis and the wide posteriors of the chirp mass (Veronesi et al.
2025b). Even though these posteriors improve inIPTA_30, they re-
mainwide.Thislargeuncertaintypropagatestothederivedposteriors
of total mass, luminosity distance, and W1 apparent magnitude (for
theAGNcase).Asaresult,insomecasestheskypositionalmostex-
clusivelydeterminestheranking.However,aswehavealreadyseen,
forasignificantfractionofcandidatehosts,includingtheinformation
encoded in𝑝 cat is crucial, since it can reject a considerable fraction
of galaxies and contribute to the relative ranking of the remaining
candidates.
Finally, as mentioned in Section 2.6, the host scores defined by
Equations 15 and 16 only provide the relative ranking of the hosts,
and not the absolute probability that a certain candidate contains
the GW-detected source. In order to estimate such a probability, one
would need to take into account the normalization of the various
probability densities in the score, the total probability density asso-
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

Counting and Ranking Hosts of PTA Sources17
ciated with the part of GW sky map that falls in the gaps of the EM
catalogues,andthecompletenessofthelatter.Thecompletenesscan
be estimated as a function of luminosity and redshift by comparing
the number density of observed galaxies with the estimates from
luminosity functions (see, e.g. Veronesi et al. 2025a). This is non-
trivial and thus the calculation of an absolute probability for each
potentialhostisbeyondthescopeofthiswork,andwillbepresented
in a follow-up publication (Petrov et al. tion).
5 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Inthiswork,weperformrealisticsimulationstopredicttheproperties
of the first PTA source that can be resolved on top of the GW back-
ground in the near future. We focus on sources that can be localised
with sufficient accuracy to allow for multi-messenger searches. We
cross-match the GW maps with EM catalogues to estimate the num-
berofpotentialhosts,excludegalaxiesbasedontheirEMproperties,
and rank the remaining.
Specifically,wegenerate1,000realisticSMBHbinarypopulations
that are compatible with the measured stochastic GW background
in NG15 using semi-analytical models fromholodeck. We select
the loudest binary for each population and simulate their TOAs on
top of the observed background in realistic PTA configurations that
resembleourexpectationsforupcomingIPTAdatasets.Inparticular,
we consider three PTAs:IPTA_20,IPTA_25, andIPTA_30, with
baselines of 20, 25 and 30 years, containing a total of 116, 158
and 200 pulsars, respectively. We then useQuickCW, one of the
standardGWdetectionpipelines,toconstrainthemainpropertiesof
the injected binaries.
Wecross-matchtheresultingskymapswithtwoall-skycatalogues
ofETGsandAGN,whichareexpectedtobecompleteforthemassive
hosts of PTA sources. We estimate the number of potential hosts for
each type of galaxy independently and, for the first time, quantify
the impact of incomplete EM coverage by estimating the number of
missing hosts. We convert the GW posteriors of binary parameters
into EM observables that match the available information in each
galaxy catalogue. We then use this information to discard potential
hoststhatarecompletelyincompatiblewiththeexpectationscoming
fromtheGWanalyses.Weranktheremaininggalaxiesbasedonthe
probability of containing the PTA source. To do so, we develop a
ranking system that takes into account both the photometric and the
astrometric properties of each ETG and AGN.
Our main conclusions can be summarized as follows:
•A total of 212 and 378 populations have a detectable binary
(𝑆/𝑁≥4) inIPTA_20 andIPTA_25, respectively. This number is
increased to 507 inIPTA_30. Our estimated probability to resolve
one of these detectable sources in the next ten years is therefore ap-
proximately 50 percent. These detectable sources are isotropically
distributed in the sky with their main parameters (total mass, mass
ratio,luminositydistancefromEarth)followingtheunderlyingpop-
ulationofloudestbinariesfromeachsimulatedpopulation.Approxi-
mately70percentofthedetectablebinarieshaveafrequency𝑓≲10
nHz.
•A total of 3, 38, and 141 binary populations have a binary that
reaches𝑆/𝑁≥8andispotentiallylocalisablebyIPTA_20,IPTA_25
andIPTA_30,respectively.Similarlytothedetectablebinaries,these
sources typically have low frequencies. They also have lower lumi-
nosity distances from Earth and higher total masses with respect to
the rest of the population. ForIPTA_25 (our fiducial configuration),
mostoftheselocalisablesourcesareclusteredintheareawith90 ◦ <
RA<225 ◦ and−45 ◦ <Dec<0 ◦. An over-density in the same sky
region is also observed inIPTA_30, but the clustering is weaker.
•For our fiducial configuration, 30 binaries have a localisa-
tion area smaller than A90 = 2,000deg2, and are considered well-
localised.TheirtypicalsizeofA90spanshundredsofsquaredegrees
withamedianofA90=408deg 2,containinghundredsofthousands
of ETGs and tens of thousands of AGN. The median number of
potential hosts within A90 is≈190,000 for ETGs and≈40,000 for
AGN. The size of A90 and, in turn, the number of potential hosts is
approximately 40 percent smaller inIPTA_30.
•In our fiducial PTA configuration 22 (21) of the 30 well-
localised binaries have an A90 partially outside of the footprint of
the ETG (AGN) catalogue. InIPTA_30 this slightly decreases with
13 for ETGs and 11 for the AGN case having total coverage, while
we also find cases (5 for ETGs and 4 for AGN) in which A90 is
completely outside of the footprint of the surveys. Incomplete EM
coverage implies that the true binary host might not be present in
the EM catalogues. The median of the number of potentially miss-
ing hosts is≈20,000 for ETGs and≈6,000 for AGN in our fiducial
configuration, and only slightly decreases inIPTA_30 (≈19,500 and
≈6,000).
•Our ranking method assigns a null score on average to approx-
imately 47 and 61 percent of the ETGs forIPTA_25 andIPTA_30,
respectively. These are galaxies with an estimated luminosity dis-
tanceorcentralSMBHbinarymassincompatiblewiththeestimates
obtained from the GW analysis. The selection based on the apparent
W1 magnitude for AGN can reject only approximately 0.3 and 4
percentofthepotentialhostsinIPTA_25andIPTA_30,respectively.
•With our fiducial configuration, among the non-rejected hosts,
thetopperformingETGs(AGN)haveascorewhichis≈12.4(≈3.7)
timeshigherthantheaveragecandidate.Amarginallyhigherranking
efficiency is achieved withIPTA_30, where the respective median
values are≈17.2(≈4.4). The lower ranking efficiency for AGN is
duetotheuseofapparentmagnitudesinsteadofseparatelyusingthe
total SMBH mass and the luminosity distance, like for ETGs.
ThankstothealwaysimprovingPTAsensitivity,thefirstresolved
source has a non-negligible chance to be detected in the next 10
years. Once the binary is localised, a ranking system like the one
proposed in this work will be an essential starting point for the bi-
nary host search. Our method identifies which galaxies are the most
promisingandthusworthprioritizinginsearchesforEMbinarysig-
natures. This work also highlights the need for EM catalogues with
sky coverages as complete as possible. The comparison of results
between the two catalogues shows that having estimates of the total
mass of the SMBH as well as of their redshift can boost the ranking
efficiency and exclude more candidate hosts. Therefore, building an
AGN catalogue with these quantities is important. Our chances of
discovering the first multi-messenger SMBH binary greatly depend
onboththesensitivityofPTAsandthecompletenessanduniformity
oftheavailableEMdata.SinceaperfectlycompletecensusofETGs
andAGNisimpossibletoobtainintheforeseeablefuture,adetailed
estimationofthecatalogues’completeness(asafunctionofluminos-
ity,redshift,andskyposition)willbecrucialforcorrectlyestimating
the false-positive probability of any future host-binary association.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Emiko Gardiner and Bence Bécsy for their help
and support with the creation of binary populations and the trouble-
shootingwiththeMCMCsalgorithms.MCacknowledgessupportby
theEuropeanUnion(ERC,MMMonsters,101117624).Thisresearch
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)

18N. Veronesi et al.
usedresourcesoftheCenterforInstitutionalResearchComputingat
Washington State University. SRT is a member of the NANOGrav
collaboration, which receives support from NSF Physics Frontiers
Center award number 1430284 and 2020265. SRT acknowledges
supportfromanNSFCAREER#2146016,NSFAST-2307719,NSF
NRT-2125764, and NASA LPS-80NSSC26K0342. SRT also ac-
knowledges support from a Chancellor’s Faculty Fellowship from
VanderbiltUniversity.DJDacknowledgessupportfromSapereAude
StartinggrantNo.121587throughtheDanishIndependentResearch
Fund.Softwares:Numpy(Harris et al. 2020);Matplotlib(Hunter
2007);SciPy(Virtanen et al. 2020);Astropy(Astropy Collabora-
tion et al. 2018);Healpy(Zonca et al. 2019);Enterprise(Ellis
et al. 2020);QuicCW(Bécsy et al. 2022a).
REFERENCES
Agazie G., et al., 2023a, ApJ, 951, L8
Agazie G., et al., 2023b, ApJ, 951, L9
Agazie G., et al Nanograv Collaboration 2023c, ApJ, 952, L37
Agazie G., et al., 2024, ApJ, 966, 105
Agazie G., et al., 2025, ApJ, 978, 31
Arzoumanian Z., et al., 2021, ApJ, 914, 121
Assef R. J., Stern D., Noirot G., Jun H. D., Cutri R. M., Eisenhardt P. R. M.,
2018, ApJS, 234, 23
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2018, AJ, 156, 123
Bardati J., Ruan J. J., Haggard D., Tremmel M., 2024, ApJ, 961, 34
Bécsy B., Cornish N. J., Digman M. C., 2022a, Phys. Rev. D, 105, 122003
Bécsy B., Cornish N. J., Kelley L. Z., 2022b, ApJ, 941, 119
Begelman M. C., Blandford R. D., Rees M. J., 1980, Nature, 287, 307
BilickiM.,JarrettT.H.,PeacockJ.A.,CluverM.E.,StewardL.,2014,ApJS,
210, 9
Bilicki M., et al., 2016, ApJS, 225, 5
BluckA.F.L.,MendelJ.T.,EllisonS.L.,MorenoJ.,SimardL.,PattonD.R.,
Starkenburg E., 2014, MNRAS, 441, 599
Cardelli J. A., Clayton G. C., Mathis J. S., 1989, ApJ, 345, 245
Charisi M., Taylor S. R., Witt C. A., Runnoe J., 2024, Phys. Rev. Lett., 132,
061401
Charisi M., Taylor S. R., Runnoe J., Witt C., Petrov P., 2026, MNRAS,
Chiang Y.-K., 2023, ApJ, 958, 118
Cluver M. E., et al., 2014, ApJ, 782, 90
Curyło M., Thrane E., Lasky P. D., Gaynor D. S., 2026, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2604.19073
Cutri R. M., et al., 2003, 2MASS All Sky Catalog of point sources.
D’Orazio D. J., Charisi M., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2310.16896
Davis M. C., et al., 2024, ApJ, 965, 34
Deng X., Finn L. S., 2011, MNRAS, 414, 50
Dewdney P. E., Hall P. J., Schilizzi R. T., Lazio T. J. L. W., 2009, IEEE
Proceedings, 97, 1482
EPTA Collaboration et al., 2023, A&A, 678, A50
EllisJ.A.,VallisneriM.,TaylorS.R.,BakerP.T.,2020,ENTERPRISE:En-
hanced Numerical Toolbox Enabling a Robust PulsaR Inference SuitE,
Zenodo, doi:10.5281/zenodo.4059815,https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.4059815
Ferrarese L., Merritt D., 2000, ApJ, 539, L9
Gardiner E. C., Kelley L. Z., Lemke A.-M., Mitridate A., 2024, ApJ, 965,
164
Gardiner E. C., Bécsy B., Kelley L. Z., Cornish N. J., 2025, arXiv e-prints,
p. arXiv:2502.16016
Goicovic F. G., Sesana A., Cuadra J., Stasyszyn F., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 514
Goldstein J. M., Veitch J., Sesana A., Vecchio A., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 5447
Goldstein J. M., Sesana A., Holgado A. M., Veitch J., 2019, MNRAS, 485,
248
Hallinan G., et al., 2019, in Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society.
p. 255 (arXiv:1907.07648), doi:10.48550/arXiv.1907.07648
Hambly N. C., et al., 2001, MNRAS, 326, 1279
Harris C. R., et al., 2020, Nature, 585, 357
Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 90
Ivezić Ž., et al., 2019, ApJ, 873, 111
Kauffmann G., et al., 2003, MNRAS, 346, 1055
KelleyL.Z.,BlechaL.,HernquistL.,SesanaA.,TaylorS.R.,2018,MNRAS,
477, 964
Kelley L., et al., 2019, BAAS, 51, 490
Krishnan S., Markowitz A. G., Schwarzenberg-Czerny A., Middleton M. J.,
2021, MNRAS, 508, 3975
Laal N., Taylor S. R., Matt C., Gultekin K., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2512.11981
Lang P., et al., 2014, ApJ, 788, 11
Lyke B. W., et al., 2020, ApJS, 250, 8
Ma C.-P., Greene J. E., McConnell N., Janish R., Blakeslee J. P., Thomas J.,
Murphy J. D., 2014, ApJ, 795, 158
McConnell N. J., Ma C.-P., 2013, ApJ, 764, 184
McGrath C., D’Orazio D. J., Creighton J., 2022, MNRAS, 517, 1242
Miles M. T., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 519, 3976
Miles M. T., et al., 2025, MNRAS, 536, 1489
Mingarelli C. M. F., et al., 2017, Nature Astronomy, 1, 886
Petiteau A., Babak S., Sesana A., de Araújo M., 2013, Phys. Rev. D, 87,
064036
Petrov P., Taylor S. R., Charisi M., Ma C.-P., 2024, ApJ, 976, 129
PetrovP.,SchultL.,TaylorS.R.,PolN.,LaalN.,CharisiM.,MaC.-P.,2025,
arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2510.01316
Petrov et al., In preparation, In preparation
Pilawa J., et al., In preparation, In preparation
Planck Collaboration et al., 2020, A&A, 641, A6
Reardon D. J., et al., 2023, ApJ, 951, L6
Rosado P. A., Sesana A., Gair J., 2015, MNRAS, 451, 2417
Runnoe J. C., Brotherton M. S., Shang Z., 2012, MNRAS, 422, 478
Sato-Polito G., Zaldarriaga M., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2509.08041
Sesana A., 2015, in Sopuerta C. F., ed., Astrophysics and Space Sci-
ence Proceedings Vol. 40, Gravitational Wave Astrophysics. p. 147
(arXiv:1407.5693), doi:10.1007/978-3-319-10488-1_13
Sesana A., Vecchio A., 2010, Phys. Rev. D, 81, 104008
Shang Z., et al., 2011, ApJS, 196, 2
Springel V., et al., 2005, Nature, 435, 629
Taylor S. R., 2026, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2603.10120
Taylor S. R., Huerta E. A., Gair J. R., McWilliams S. T., 2016, ApJ, 817, 70
Truant R. J., Izquierdo-Villalba D., Sesana A., Shaifullah G. M., Bonetti M.,
2025, A&A, 694, A282
Truant R. J., Izquierdo-Villalba D., Sesana A., Mohiuddin Shaifullah G.,
Bonetti M., Spinoso D., Bonoli S., 2026, A&A, 706, A115
Turski C., Bilicki M., Dálya G., Gray R., Ghosh A., 2023, MNRAS, 526,
6224
Vaughan S., Uttley P., Markowitz A. G., Huppenkothen D., Middleton M. J.,
Alston W. N., Scargle J. D., Farr W. M., 2016, MNRAS, 461, 3145
Veale M., Ma C.-P., Greene J. E., Thomas J., Blakeslee J. P., Walsh J. L., Ito
J., 2018, MNRAS, 473, 5446
Veronesi N., van Velzen S., Rossi E. M., Storey-Fisher K., 2025a, MNRAS,
536, 375
VeronesiN.,CharisiM.,TaylorS.R.,RunnoeJ.,D’OrazioD.J.,2025b,ApJ,
990, 46
Virtanen P., et al., 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261
Wright E. L., et al., 2010, AJ, 140, 1868
Wu Q., Shen Y., 2022, ApJS, 263, 42
Xu H., et al., 2023, Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics, 23, 075024
Zic A., et al., 2023, Publ. Astron. Soc. Australia, 40, e049
Zonca A., Singer L., Lenz D., Reinecke M., Rosset C., Hivon E., Gorski K.,
2019, Journal of Open Source Software, 4, 1298
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
MNRAS000, 1–18 (XXXX)