Title: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields using Herschel and Planck data in star-forming regions
Authors: Jonathan Oers, Isabelle Ristorcelli, Katia Ferrière, Mika Juvela, Ludovic Montier, Dana Alina, Julien Montillaud
Published: 2026-06-03
Categories: astro-ph.GA

Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. aa56702-25corr©ESO 2026
June 4, 2026
Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments
and magnetic fields usingHerschelandPlanckdata in
star-forming regions
J. Oers1 , I. Ristorcelli1 , K. Ferrière1 , M. Juvela2 , L. Montier1, D. Alina3 , and J. Montillaud4
1 IRAP, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, 9 avenue du colonel Roche, BP 44346, 31400 Toulouse Cedex 4, France
2 Department of Physics, PO Box 64, 00014, University of Helsinki, Finland
3 Department of Physics, School of Sciences and Humanities, Nazarbayev University, Kabanbay batyr ave, 53, Nur-Sultan 010000,
Kazakhstan
4 Université Marie et Louis Pasteur, CNRS, Institut UTINAM, UMR 6213, F-25000 Besançon, France
e-mail:jonathanoers@gmail.com
Received ???/???
ABSTRACT
Context.Filamentary structures are ubiquitous in the interstellar medium (ISM). This is particularly true in molecular clouds, with
most clumps and cores forming inside the densest regions of filaments. Observations and simulations both suggest that magnetic
fields play a key role in the formation and evolution of filaments and in the process of star formation, yet their exact role is still poorly
understood. In this context, the study of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields has become a go-to method to
obtain new insight.
Aims.We aim to statistically examine the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields in various star-forming regions
with different physical properties and Galactic environments.
Methods.We used a dedicated method,FilDReaMS, that relies on a template that has the shape of a rectangular bar with a variable
width to detect and extract filaments at multiple scales. We appliedFilDReaMSto the 116 fields of theHerschel"Galactic Cold
Cores" (GCC) key project (18 ′′-36′′ resolution), which measured dust emission in diverse star-forming regions. We then compared
the filament orientations to the orientation of the plane-of-sky (PoS) magnetic field (B PoS), inferred fromPlanckobservations of the
dust polarized thermal emission (7 ′ resolution) using histograms of relative orientations (HROs). Additionally, we used a catalog of
dense cold cores detected in the GCC fields to study the relative orientations of filaments hosting cores.
Results.We present the results of our statistical analysis of these relative orientations as functions of filament effective width, H 2
column density (N H2), evolutionary stage, and Galactic environment. We find that low-N H2 filaments tend to be roughly parallel to
BPoS at all scales, while narrow high-N H2 filaments do not have any preferred orientations and wide high-N H2 filaments tend to be
roughly perpendicular. This change in preferred orientations occurs at transition column density (N H2)t values typically in the range
[0.8, 8]×10 21 cm−2, a range that is consistent with results of previousPlanckstudies. We also analyzed the HROs for filaments with
embedded cores and find them to be consistent with HROs for high-N H2 filaments, although the trend is less pronounced. However,
several fields do not follow the general trends, with a variety of behaviors that can be due to factors such as projection effects,
confusion along the line of sight (LoS), magnetic field tangling, or different magnetic field strengths. Our analysis of projection
effects shows that, statistically, preferred orientations in the PoS are indicative of true preferred orientations in 3D. Our results suggest
that higher polarization fractions,p, entail weaker projection effects, consistent with the presumed link betweenpand the magnetic
field inclination to the LoS.
Conclusions.Our results confirm the existence of a coupling between magnetic fields at cloud scales and filaments at smaller scales
while also highlighting the complexity of the ISM. They also call for further statistical analyses studying magnetic fields and other
physical processes at smaller scales to better understand the variety of behaviors seen in the HROs.
Key words.Sub-millimeter: ISM – ISM: clouds – ISM: structure – ISM: magnetic fields – ISM: dust – Polarization – Galaxies: star
formation
1. Introduction
The early stages of star formation involve a combination of
physical processes, including turbulence, gravity, and magnetic
fields, whose respective roles across spatial and temporal scales
remain poorly constrained. In particular, while the impact of
magnetic fields is increasingly supported by observations and
simulations, advancing our understanding requires systematic
multiscale observational studies of star-forming structures, from
molecular clouds to filaments, clumps, and dense cores.
Filamentary structures are now recognized as being ubiqui-
tous in a wide range of environments of the interstellar medium
(ISM). Filaments were initially observed via dust extinction and
later through molecular spectral lines (see, e.g., review by Hacar
et al. 2023, and references therein), but their prevalence and mor-
phology were later revealed in unprecedented detail by theHer-
schelSpace Observatory (see review by André et al. 2014). In
addition, these observations established that star formation is
tightly linked to filamentary networks, with a significant fraction
of prestellar cores located within the densest filaments (Poly-
Article number, page 1 of 30
arXiv:2606.04713v1  [astro-ph.GA]  3 Jun 2026

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
chroni et al. 2013; Könyves et al. 2015; Montillaud et al. 2015).
Understanding the origin and evolution of filaments, which are
closely linked to dense cores, is thus essential for unveiling the
early stages of star formation.
Numerical simulations of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
turbulence have consistently reproduced filamentary structures.
They have also demonstrated that the relative orientations be-
tween filaments and magnetic fields are sensitive to the mag-
netization of the medium (Soler et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2016;
Soler & Hennebelle 2017; Hennebelle & Inutsuka 2019). In
weakly magnetized environments, density structures tend to line
up parallel to the magnetic field, whereas in strongly magnetized
regimes, a transition from parallel to perpendicular alignment is
observed at a critical column density.
Observationally, an increasing number of studies have re-
vealed preferential relative orientations between filaments and
plane-of-sky (PoS) magnetic fields (B PoS), whose orientation
is inferred from either starlight polarization or dust polarized
emission (e.g., review by Pattle et al. 2023 and references
therein). In particular, dust polarization measurements from the
Planckall-sky survey enabled statistical studies of these rela-
tive orientations over interstellar structures resolved byPlanck
all around the Galaxy, as the authors found that elongated struc-
tures are predominantly parallel to the magnetic field in the dif-
fuse (neutral) medium, while they are mostly perpendicular in
dense molecular clouds (Planck Collaboration Int. XXXII 2016;
Planck Collaboration Int. XXXV 2016), with a transition at a
column density1 (NH)t ≈10 21.7 cm−2 (Planck Collaboration Int.
XXXV 2016).
Based onPlanckdata alone on filaments hosting clumps,
Alina et al. (2019) found that low-density contrast filaments tend
to line up parallel to the magnetic field in low-density regions,
while these filaments tend to be perpendicular to the magnetic
field in high-density regions. However, no preferential relative
orientation prevails for the high-density contrast filaments re-
gardless of the density of their environment. Alina et al. (2019)
also found that the transition in relative orientations occurs in
the dense medium at a density around (n H)t ≃10 3 cm−3. These
results are consistent with the previous analysis by Fissel et al.
(2019), in Vela-C, based on observations with the BLAST-pol
balloon-borne experiment and molecular spectral lines tracing
different gas densities. These results confirm that even if low-
density regions are mostly dominated by turbulence and mag-
netic fields, leading to preferential parallel alignments, self-
gravity must play a significant role for high-density structures,
leading to filaments oriented perpendicular to the magnetic field.
CombiningPlanckpolarization data with high-resolution
Herschelobservations can provide new insights to investigate
the above trends across various environments and scales. Mali-
nen et al. (2016), Cox et al. (2016), and Soler (2019) reported
similar trends in relative orientations by comparingB PoS orien-
tation inferred fromPlanck(at≃10 ′ resolution) and the ori-
entations of filaments traced byHerschel(36 ′′ resolution) in a
sample of nearby molecular clouds. They found that filaments
with lower column densities tend to be parallel toB PoS, while
those with higher column densities are generally perpendicu-
lar toB PoS, with similar thresholds in column density marking
this transition, which are consistent with previousPlanck-only
results. These findings support the idea that magnetic fields at
cloud scales are linked to the structure and alignment of fila-
ments at smaller scales and motivate further investigation with a
statistical analysis.
1 In a purely molecular medium,N H =2N H2.
TheHerschelGalactic Cold Cores (GCC) program (Juvela
et al. 2010) provides a suitable dataset, covering 116 fields with
broad ranges of physical conditions and evolutionary stages. A
systematic analysis of the relative orientations between filaments
and magnetic fields in this sample requires robust methods capa-
ble of tracing filamentary structures across wide dynamic ranges
in scale and column density. Several methods have been devel-
oped to extract elongated structures from two-dimensional maps
(e.g., see description in Carrière et al. 2022a). Previous studies of
relative orientations have often used local methods, which com-
pute either the gradient (first-order derivatives; e.g., Soler et al.
2013; Planck Collaboration Int. XXXV 2016) or the Hessian
matrix (second-order derivatives; e.g., Polychroni et al. 2013;
Schisano et al. 2014; Planck Collaboration Int. XXXII 2016) at
each pixel of the considered map. Nonlocal methods focus on a
given scale around each pixel, such as template matching (Ju-
vela 2016), Rolling Hough Transform (RHT; Clark et al. (2014)
used in Malinen et al. (2016) and Alina et al. (2019) studies),
and Filament Detection and Reconstruction at Multiple Scales
(FilDReaMS; Carrière et al. 2022a,b). A comprehensive com-
parison of these various techniques would be highly valuable,
but only a limited number of studies have addressed this issue so
far. Micelotta et al. (2021) conducted a comparative analysis of
the gradient and RHT methods, based on simulation data. Their
findings revealed both similarities and differences between the
results of the two methods, with disparities attributed to the in-
trinsic characteristics of the filamentary structures identified by
each method.
For this study, we used the recent method calledFilDReaMS,
developed by Carrière et al. (2022a), to detect and extract fil-
aments of different effective widths. The method was first ap-
plied to a sample of four GCC fields by Carrière et al. (2022b).
Their analysis revealed that narrow low-column-density fila-
ments tend to be parallel to the magnetic field, while wider
high-column-density filaments are predominantly perpendicular.
A transition between these relative orientations was observed
in the two closest fields, around (N H2)t ≃1.1×10 21 cm−2 and
(NH2)t ≃1.4×10 21 cm−2, respectively, consistent with results
from previous studies. Interestingly, one of the fields showed
preferred parallel relative orientations for all filaments, regard-
less of their widths and column densities.
In this paper, we extend the analysis to the whole sample of
116 GCC fields with the purpose of performing both individual
and statistical analyses of the relative orientations and exploring
possible variations with diverse physical parameters. In Sect. 2,
we present the data used in our study. In Sect. 3, we describe the
FilDReaMSmethod used to extract filaments, and we explain
how histograms of relative orientations (HROs) are built and ex-
ploited for our analysis. In Sect. 4, we discuss the samples used
for the statistical analysis, which depend on the physical proper-
ties of the GCC fields, the extracted filaments, and the detected
cores. In Sect. 5, we applyFilDReaMSto the column density
maps of the 116 GCC fields and present both an overview of the
results obtained for the individual fields and the statistical results
obtained for various filament samples. In Sect. 6, we explore pro-
jection effects using both an analytical analysis and a toy model.
In Sect. 7, we provide a summary of our results and discuss their
implications. Finally, Sect. 8 presents our conclusions and per-
spectives.
Article number, page 2 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
Fig. 1.Representation of the angular coordinates used in the paper, both
in 3D (a) and in the 2D PoS (b). Note that (θ, ψ) are the standard spher-
ical angular coordinates, with subscripts f and B referring to the local
filament and localB, respectively; (x,y,z) are the cartesian coordinates.
Thexy-plane corresponds to the PoS, withx-axis pointing north, the
y-axis pointing east, and thez-axis along the LoS toward the observer.
The solid red and blue lines show the orientations of the local filament
and localB, respectively. The dashed red and blue lines represent the
respective projections of the solid lines onto the PoS. The symbolϑis
the angle between the local filament and the localBin 3D (given by
Eq. (10)). Finally,α=ψ f −ψ B is the relative orientation angle in the
PoS (Eq. (9)).
2. Data
2.1. Planck
Planck-HFI measured polarized emission at 353 GHz, which is
dominated by dust thermal emission in the Galaxy (Planck Col-
laboration Int. XIX 2015; Planck Collaboration Int. XX 2015).
The full mission data are available as part of thePlanckProduct
Release 2018.Planckobservations provide maps of the StokesI,
Q, andUparameters, which correspond to the total intensity and
the linear polarization components. We derived the PoS mag-
netic field (BPoS) orientation angle,ψ B, using
ψB = 1
2 arctan
 U
Q
!
±90 ◦ ,(1)
where arctan is the two-argument arctangent function defined
from−180 ◦ to+180 ◦. Since polarization data only give access
to the magnetic field orientation, and not its direction, there is
a 180◦ ambiguity onψ B. Hence, we can defineψ B in the range
[−90◦,+90 ◦] by choosing the+or−sign in the last term of
Eq. (1) accordingly. Here, we adopt the IAU convention, where
the polarization angle increases from Galactic north to east (see
Fig. 1b), opposite to theHealpixconvention used by thePlanck
community. As such, we flipped the sign ofUtaken from the
PlanckLegacy Archive. 2 Following Montier et al. (2015a), we
computed the uncertainty inψ B,σ ψB, which is equal to the un-
certainty in the polarization angle, using
σψB = 1
2
s
Q2σ2
U +U 2σ2
Q −2QUσ QU
(Q2 +U 2)2 ·(2)
We extracted from the all-skyPlanckdata the Stokes param-
eters and their uncertainties at 353 GHz as 2◦ ×2 ◦ maps centered
on theHerschelfields from the GCC program (presented in Sect.
2.2). We smoothed thePlanckmaps from 4.7 ′ to 7′ to improve
the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N).
From StokesI,Q, andU, we derived the polarized intensity
and the polarization fraction, respectively, given by
P≡
p
Q2 +U 2 (3)
and
p≡ P
I ·(4)
In this analysis, we debiased the polarization fraction,p, by
using the modified asymptotic (MAS) estimator (Plaszczynski
et al. 2014; Montier et al. 2015b), only valid for polarized-
intensity S/N≥2 (Montier et al. 2015a,b). Following posterior
characterizations of polarization efficiencies (Planck Collabora-
tion III 2020; Planck Collaboration XI 2020) on 2018 data from
thePlanckLegacy Archive, we assumed a 1.5% photometric un-
certainty in the 353 GHz StokesQandUpolarization maps.
2.2. Herschel
TheHerschelSpace Observatory (Pilbratt et al. 2010), hereby
Herschel, measured dust thermal emission in far-infrared and
submillimeter wavelengths, from 70µm to 500µm, at angular
resolutions of 5 ′′ - 36′′, which made it possible to probe star-
forming regions.Herschelprovided observations of filaments
and cores within molecular clouds at higher angular resolution
thanPlanck.
TheHerschelkey program GCC (Juvela et al. 2010) is a
follow-up program designed to map out a sample of regions
around cold clumps previously detected in thePlanckall-sky
survey. The regions were selected using thePlanckcatalog of
Galactic cold clumps by ensuring a full coverage of physical
2 PlanckLegacy Archive: https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/planck/pla.
Article number, page 3 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
properties and Galactic environments representative of the cold
clump population, complementary to otherHerschelGalactic
surveys (Juvela et al. 2012).
This follow-up is composed of 116 fields with a typical size
of 40 ′, up to 1 ◦, observed in the 100 and 160µm bands with
the PACS instrument (Poglitsch et al. 2010) and in the 250, 350
and 500µm bands with the SPIRE instrument (Griffin et al.
2010), with angular resolutions of 7.7, 12, 18, 25, and 36 ′′, re-
spectively. The observed fields and their properties are presented
in Montillaud et al. (2015). The authors used the source extrac-
tion algorithmgetsources(version v1.130401; Men’shchikov
et al. 2012) developed forHerschelsurveys, to build a cata-
log of 4466 cold and compact sources across the GCC fields,
identifying their positions and temperatures, and providing esti-
mates of their evolutionary stages from gravitationally unbound
to prestellar and protostellar cores. Montillaud et al. (2015) di-
vided the catalog into two sets of sources depending on their
physical sizes: cores, which are small (≲0.2 pc) and individual
sources, and clumps, which are large (≳0.2 pc) sources of size
that may be composed of several cores. For simplicity, we em-
ploy the general term of "core" for all sources throughout this
paper.
In this study, we used the maps of H 2 column density,
NH2, presented in Montillaud et al. (2015) and derived from
the dust spectral energy distribution fit using only the 250, 350,
and 500µm SPIRE maps. The authors assumed a dust opacity
κ=0.1 cm 2 /g (ν/1000 GHz) β, with a fixed emissivity spectral
indexβ=2.0, suited for high-density environments (Hildebrand
1983; Beckwith et al. 1990). TheN H2 maps have an angular res-
olution of 36′′.
Distance estimates are essential for our study. Montillaud
et al. (2015) provided a distance estimate for the molecular cloud
targeted in each GCC field. Here, we assign the distance of the
cloud to the distance of its filaments and cores, and we refer to it
as the distance of the GCC field itself. We revisited 33 of the 116
GCC fields with unreliable or missing distance estimates. We es-
timated their new distances usingGaiaobservations and the dust
extinction method described by Marshall et al. (in prep.).
3. Method
3.1. FilDReaMS
In order to extract filaments and their physical properties in each
NH2 map, we used theFilDReaMSmethod developed by Car-
rière et al. (2022a).FilDReaMSis designed to detect filamentary
structures, which we call filaments from hereon, in an image and
provide information on their widths, their orientations, and the
robustness of the detection.
More specifically,FilDReaMSrelies on a model template
which has the shape of a rectangular bar (referred to as the model
bar) defined by its widthW b, its lengthL b, and hence its aspect
ratior b =L b/Wb. In the following astrophysical application,
we adoptr b =3 (Panopoulou et al. 2014; Arzoumanian et al.
2019; Carrière et al. 2022a), and we consider values ofWb span-
ning the range [(W b)min,(W b)max], with (W b)min =5 pixels and
(Wb)max equal to the widest filament detected in the image, with
an upper limit set to one-ninth the size of theHerschelmap. The
orientation angle of the model bar,ψ b, is defined in the range
[−90◦,+90 ◦] and follows the IAU convention (see Sect. 2.1 and
Fig. 1b). For each considered value ofW b,FilDReaMSfilters
out structures wider thanW b, then converts the resulting image
into a binary map. Next, FilDReaMS successively considers all
the active pixels of the binary map, which trace the remaining
structures after filtering. At every active pixeli,FilDReaMSre-
trieves the orientation angle of the model bar that best matches
the map, (ψb)i, and computes the corresponding significance,S i,
which compares the detected filament to an ideal case. IfS i >1,
FilDReaMSconfirms the detection of a filament with orienta-
tion angle (ψ f)i =(ψ b)i at pixeli. If a given pixeli ′ belongs to
two or more filaments, the filament orientation angle assigned to
pixeli ′ is the orientation angle of the most significant filament.
Once all the pixels have been processed,FilDReaMScreates a
filament mask by multiplying the above binary map by a new bi-
nary map formed by the model bars of all the detected filaments.
This mask is then applied to the initial image to reconstruct the
physical network of detected filaments of bar widthW b, with
their true shapes and their intensities. This process is repeated
over the whole range ofW b, leading to filamentary networks of
different bar widths. Ultimately,FilDReaMSprovides pixel-by-
pixel information on filament bar width,W b, and orientation an-
gle,ψ f. The uncertainties in the filament orientation angles are
below 3◦, and they decrease with increasingW b.
3.2. Histogram of relative orientations
Following previous studies (Soler et al. 2013; Planck Collabora-
tion Int. XXXII 2016; Planck Collaboration Int. XXXV 2016;
Soler 2019; Alina et al. 2019; Carrière et al. 2022b), we use
HROs to quantify the statistics of relative orientation angles.
Soler et al. (2013) first used this name to refer to their algorithm
which uses column density gradients to detect structures in an
image and extracts their orientations, which are then compared to
the magnetic field orientation. The relative orientations between
the column density structures and the magnetic field were char-
acterized through histograms. In this paper, we use the acronym
HRO with a different meaning, only to refer to the histograms
characterizing the relative orientations. In most of the paper, we
analyze the differences between the orientation angles of fila-
ments extracted withFilDReaMS,ψ f, and the orientation angle
ofB PoS inferred fromPlanckpolarization data,ψ B (Eq. (1)). In
addition, we also consider the orientation angle of the major axis
of each GCC core,ψ c, provided in the GCC catalog (Montillaud
et al. 2015), and we analyze the differences betweenψc andψ f,
or betweenψ c andψ B (see Sect. 5.3.2).
We now describe the relative orientations between filaments
andB PoS, but this can be generalized to any two objects with a
180◦ ambiguity. We defineψ f andψ B in the range [−90 ◦,+90 ◦]
and define the difference betweenψf andψ B,ψ f −ψ B (also called
αin Fig. 1b and Eq. (9)), in the range [−180 ◦,180 ◦]. Since the
180◦ ambiguity remains for (ψf −ψB), we redefine (ψf −ψB) in the
range [−90◦,90 ◦] by adding±180 ◦. If the two objects are nearly
parallel,|ψ f −ψ B| ≃0 ◦. Conversely, if the two objects are nearly
perpendicular,|ψ f −ψ B| ≃90 ◦. We only compute the relative
orientation angles where the uncertainty in the angle estimates is
below 10◦. We compute (ψf −ψ B) pixel by pixel over all pixels
of all the maps of a sample, then build our histogram of|ψf −ψ B|
in 9 angle bins of 10◦ each, from 0◦ to 90◦.
We also construct 2D histograms (2D HROs) of (ψ f −ψ B)
as functions ofN H2 (Malinen et al. 2016; Carrière et al. 2022b).
To this end, we divide the sample of pixels into continuous bins
ofN H2 containing an equal number of pixels, and we perform
the HRO analysis in eachN H2 bin. The number of angle orN H2
bins is determined by requiring a sufficient number of bins to
resolve high-NH2 trends, while maintaining significant statistics.
The HROs have 18 angle bins of 10◦ from−90 ◦ to 90◦. The 2D
HROs are built in 18N H2 bins.
Article number, page 4 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
Fig. 2.Locations of the fields observed with
Herschelfrom the GCC program (Juvela et al.
2010, 2012). The background map shows the
Planckintensity at 353 GHz.
We estimate the uncertainties in our HROs by using the boot-
strap technique (Efron 1979; Efron & Tibshirani 1993) consist-
ing of random sampling with replacement, from the correspond-
ing pixel samples. To properly estimate the uncertainties, we
need to bootstrap on independent filament pixels. As a compro-
mise between bootstrapping on independent pixels, computation
time, and accuracy, we resampled the pixel population to 1 pixel
every 36′′ (down from 1 pixel every 12 ′′). We verified that the
resulting HRO of each resampled pixel used in the bootstrap is
consistent with the HRO of the original pixel sample. The un-
certainty in each HRO bin is calculated as the standard deviation
of the HRO values obtained in the different bootstrap realiza-
tions, centered on the average of these values. Since the number
of bootstrap realizations depends on the sample size and scat-
ter, we determine the required number of realizations by verify-
ing that the average and standard deviation of the bootstrapped
HROs converge, and that the average of the bootstrapped HROs
matches the HRO obtained directly from the data.
TheHerschelandPlanckmaps that we combine have differ-
ent angular resolutions (36′′ and 7′, respectively). Such a combi-
nation of different resolutions was already used in previous stud-
ies (see, e.g., Malinen et al. 2016; Soler 2019; Carrière et al.
2022b). With 1 pixel every 36′′, ourHerschelpixels are now in-
dependent, while ourPlanckpixels remain over-sampled. How-
ever, this is in line with our purpose to consider the relative orien-
tations between filaments at 36′′ scale, observed withHerschel,
and the mean magnetic field of the surrounding medium at 7 ′,
observed withPlanck. From now on, we consider that pixels
used throughout the analysis are independent.
3.3. Preferred alignment criteria
To quantify the preferred alignment in the HROs, previous stud-
ies have used the so-called histogram shape parameter, first in-
troduced by Soler et al. (2013) and later redefined by Soler et al.
(2017) asξ=(A 0 −A 90)/(A0 +A 90), whereA 0 andA 90 are the ar-
eas of the histogram for|ψ f −ψ B| ≤22.5 ◦ and|ψ f −ψ B| ≥67.5 ◦,
respectively. An important limitation of this approach is that it
only distinguishes between uniform (ξ≈0), preferentially par-
allel (ξ >0), and preferentially perpendicular (ξ <0) relative
orientations, with no way of uncovering preferentially interme-
diate (|ψf −ψ B| ∼45 ◦) or bimodal parallel-perpendicular distri-
butions.
This limitation naturally led us to propose a new criterion
based on the three following ratios,
r∥ = N∥
N ,r int = Nint
N ,r ⊥ = N⊥
N ,(5)
whereN ∥ is the number of pixels with|ψf−ψB| ∈[0 ◦,30 ◦] (mostly
parallel orientations),N int the number of pixels with|ψ f −ψ B| ∈
]30◦,60 ◦[ (intermediate orientations),N ⊥ the number of pixels
with|ψ f −ψ B| ∈[60 ◦,90 ◦] (mostly perpendicular orientations),
andN=N ∥ +N int +N ⊥ is the total number of pixels. All three ra-
tios range from 0 to 1, and they sum up to 1. They make it possi-
ble to distinguish between uniform (r∥ ≈r int ≈r ⊥), preferentially
parallel (r∥ >r ⊥,r int), preferentially perpendicular (r⊥ >r ∥,r int),
preferentially intermediate (r int >r ∥,r ⊥), and bimodal parallel-
perpendicular (r ∥,r ⊥ >r int) distributions. We also quantify the
preferred alignment in the 2D HROs by computing the three ra-
tios in each of the 18N H2 bins. The uncertainties in the different
ratios can be estimated by applying the bootstrap technique in-
troduced above to HROs with three angle bins of 30◦ each.
The criterion based on the ratios defined in Eq. (5) suffers
from a loss of information resulting from the binning process. To
better utilize all the information contained in the data, we drew
inspiration from the projected Rayleigh statistic,Z x, used in Jow
et al. (2018) and defined the three following improved ratios:
r∥ =2
X
0◦≤|αi|≤45◦
cos2(2αi)
X
|αi|

1+cos 2(2αi)
 ,
rint =
X
0◦≤|αi|≤90◦
sin2(2αi)
X
|αi|

1+cos 2(2αi)
 ,
r⊥ =2
X
45◦≤|αi|≤90◦
cos2(2αi)
X
|αi|

1+cos 2(2αi)
 ,
(6)
withα i =ψ f,i −ψ B,i defined in the range [−90◦,90 ◦].
These ratios have the sought-after properties:
Article number, page 5 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
-r ∥ +r int +r ⊥ =1;
-r ∥ =r int =r ⊥ = 1
3 for a uniform distribution;
-r ∥ >r int,r ⊥ for a preferentially parallel distribution, withr ∥ =1
if allα i =0 ◦;
-r int >r ∥,r ⊥ for a preferentially intermediate distribution, with
rint =1 if allα i =±45 ◦;
-r ⊥ >r ∥,r int for a preferentially perpendicular distribution, with
r⊥ =1 if allα i =±90 ◦;
-r ∥,r ⊥ >r int for a bimodal parallel-perpendicular distribution,
withr ∥ =r ⊥ =0.5 if theα i are equally split betweenα i =0 ◦ and
αi =±90 ◦.
Expressions for the uncertainties inr ∥,r int, andr ⊥ can be
obtained from the general analytical formula
σ2(r⋆)=
X
i
 ∂r⋆
∂xi
!2
σ2(xi),(7)
where subscript⋆stands for∥, int, or⊥;x i =cos 2(2αi), and
σ(xi) is the uncertainty inx i. The latter is the quadratic sum of
the measurement error inx i and the statistical uncertainty inx i,
which can be approximated by the r.m.s. dispersion in the mea-
sured values ofx i,σ x. In practice, the statistical uncertainty gives
the dominant contribution, and we may useσ(x i)=σ x. Apply-
ing Eq. (7) to Eq. (6) successively yielded
σ2(r∥)= 4
(N+Y) 4
h
N< (N+Y >)2 +N > Y2
<
i
σ2
x,
σ2(rint)= 4N 3
(N+Y) 4 σ2
x,
σ2(r⊥)= 4
(N+Y) 4
h
N> (N+Y <)2 +N < Y2
>
i
σ2
x ,
(8)
where, as before,Nis the number of independent pixels,Y=P
i xi = P
i cos2(2αi), and subscript<[>] indicates that only
pixels with|α i| ≤45 ◦ [≥45 ◦] are included. Strictly speaking,
Eq. (7) and the ensuing Eq. (8) are valid only ifr ⋆ is approx-
imately linear over the interval [x j −σ x,x j +σ x]∀x j. This is
indeed the case, as the only nonlinearity arises from the termx j
in the denominator ofr ⋆, and this term is much smaller than the
denominator itself as soon as there are at least a dozen pixels.
We verified with random drawings that Eq. (8) is valid to good
accuracy.
3.4. Relative orientation analysis
Our study of HROs is divided into three parts. First, we ana-
lyze the 116 GCC fields individually, with their respective net-
works of filaments and HROs, and present an overview of the
results obtained for this sample of maps (Sect. 5.1). Then, we
consider all filaments extracted withFilDReaMSover the 116
GCC fields and perform a combined analysis of relative orien-
tations and their variations with a number of physical properties
of the GCC fields and filaments (Sect. 5.2). Finally, we focus
on filaments with at least one embedded core from the catalog
described in Sect. 2.2 (Montillaud et al. 2015), and perform the
same combined analysis, additionally taking core properties into
account (see Sect. 5.3).
When considering filament orientations, we start from the
data cubes of filamentψ f andSextracted withFilDReaMSfor
eachW b, and for each pixel that belongs to at least one filament,
we retain only theW b andψ f values corresponding to the fila-
ment with the highestS, referring to them asW ⋆
b andψ ⋆
f , respec-
tively. This procedure reduces the filament cubes to 2D maps
ofW ⋆
b andψ ⋆
f for each considered pixel. We then compute the
relative orientations between these filaments andB PoS, given by
ψ⋆
f −ψ B, and perform the HRO analysis described above.
In the final case, we focus on filaments with at least one em-
bedded core from the GCC catalog (Montillaud et al. 2015). For
each core, we considered the pixel corresponding to the center
of the core, and we checked whether it lies within a filament. We
then retained the orientation angle of the most significant fila-
ment associated with each core,ψ ⋆
f ; the orientation ofB PoS,ψ B;
and the orientation angle of the core itself,ψ c. Hence, we built
three different sets of HROs, for|ψ⋆
f −ψ B|,|ψ ⋆
f −ψc|, and|ψ c −ψ B|,
respectively.
4. Description of the samples
We aim to better understand the physical agents that may in-
fluence the orientations of the considered structures and there-
fore their orientations relative to the magnetic field. Hence, we
grouped the GCC fields, filaments, and cores according to phys-
ical parameters derived fromPlanckandHerscheldata, and we
performed our HRO analysis on each group, which we refer to as
a sample. In the hypothesis that all the structures within a given
Herschelfield interact with each other and may be dynamically
linked, it is interesting to consider not only the properties of in-
dividual filaments or cores, but also those of the environment in
which they form.
4.1. Herschel-GCC fields
We built samples of GCC fields with similar physical properties
and perform our HRO analysis on each sample to identify pos-
sible correlations between the regions’ properties and preferred
relative orientations. For each considered parameter, we exam-
ined the distribution of GCC fields and defined thresholds that
separate different regimes or behaviors while ensuring that each
sample contains enough fields to maintain statistical significance
in the HRO analysis.
A key parameter to consider was distance, which enabled
us to more accurately compare structures with similar physi-
cal scales. The field distances in our sample range from 110 pc
to 3.8 kpc. We defined a distance threshold of 500 pc, and we
considered two samples of GCC fields withd≤500 pc and
d>500 pc.
We also investigated the potential dependence on Galactic
latitude. Fields at higher latitudes have weaker line of sight (LoS)
confusion and background contamination compared to fields at
lower latitudes, thus allowing for a more reliable analysis of in-
dividual regions. The field absolute latitudes,|b|, range from 1 ◦
to 70◦. We define two latitude thresholds and consider samples
of fields with|b|>5 ◦ and|b|>10 ◦, to examine how the HROs
evolve as the latitude threshold increases.
Another obvious parameter of interest isN H2. We aim to
determine whether there are differences in HROs for filaments
in high-N H2 or low-N H2 environments. Here, we compute the
average column density,⟨N H2 ⟩, of each GCC field. Based on
the⟨N H2 ⟩distribution, which ranges from 9×10 19 cm−2 to
8×10 21 cm−2, we define various thresholds to study different
⟨NH2 ⟩ranges. Two of the⟨N H2 ⟩ranges are complementary, pro-
viding a full coverage of the sample, while the other⟨NH2 ⟩ranges
only cover the lowest and highest-⟨N H2 ⟩cases. Hence, we per-
form our HRO analysis on five samples of fields with:⟨N H2 ⟩ ≤
Article number, page 6 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
1021 cm−2,⟨N H2 ⟩ ≤1.5×10 21 cm−2,⟨N H2 ⟩>1.5×10 21 cm−2,
⟨NH2 ⟩>2×10 21 cm−2 and⟨N H2 ⟩>2.5×10 21 cm−2.
Likewise, we investigated whether regions with higher polar-
ization fractions show different behaviors in the HROs. To this
end, we used the polarization fraction averaged over the GCC
field,⟨p⟩. From the⟨p⟩distribution, we defined a⟨p⟩threshold
at 5% and considered two samples of GCC fields with⟨p⟩ ≤5%
and⟨p⟩>5%.
We extended our analysis by testing various combinations of
the parameters and thresholds described above. This allowed us
to refine the selection criteria for each sample of GCC fields in
order to better understand their similarities and differences and
how these relate to the observed HROs.
4.2. Filaments
In the first part of our study, we consider all the filaments de-
tected in the GCC fields and we examine their properties. We
focus on two filament properties: the column density,N H2, and
the filament bar width,W b. Here, filament pixels are treated in-
dividually, withN H2 andW b varying from pixel to pixel.
To characterize the filament column density, we examine
the distribution ofN H2 for filament pixels in all GCC fields
shown in the top panel of Fig. 3. The distribution of filament
NH2 follows a log-normal shape, but with a pronounced tail to-
ward highN H2. The distribution ranges from 8.7×10 19 cm−2 to
7.1×10 22 cm−2, with a peak around 1.6×10 21 cm−2. We useNH2
to split pixels in two different ways. First, we define a threshold
at 1021.5 cm−2 and consider twoN H2 bins, withN H2 ≤10 21.5 cm−2
andN H2 >10 21.5 cm−2. Second, as we described in Sect. 3.2, we
split pixels into equal-sized bins ofN H2 to closely examine how
relative orientations evolve withN H2.
Additionally, we used the bar widthW ⋆
b of the most sig-
nificant filament passing through each pixel together with the
distance to the corresponding GCC field to compute the effec-
tive physical width of the filament in parsecs. For this parame-
ter, we examined the overallW ⋆
b distribution as well as theW ⋆
b
distributions for nearby (d≤500 pc) and distant (d>500 pc)
GCC fields. We defined two thresholds at 0.2 pc and 0.5 pc. As
such, we grouped the pixels into three samples ofW ⋆
b , with
W ⋆
b ≤0.2 pc, 0.2 pc<W ⋆
b ≤0.5 pc, andW ⋆
b >0.5 pc.
4.3. Cores
In the second part of our study, we focus on filaments with em-
bedded cores from the GCC catalog (Montillaud et al. 2015).
We aim to examine how the relative orientations vary in the
vicinity of cores embedded within filaments, as well as possi-
ble correlations with the orientations of embedded cores. The
catalog includes a total of 4466 cores. Montillaud et al. (2015)
described the extraction process and provided a wide array of
physical properties, which we use to categorize the cores and the
corresponding pixels of their parent filaments. Out of the 4466
cores, 222 were identified as potential extra-galactic sources and
were therefore excluded from our analysis. Hence, we retain the
remaining 4244 cores in our analysis.
The catalog provides estimates of core masses,M c, which
are useful to identify potentially massive cores associated with
regions forming high-mass stars. This allowed us to investigate
possible correlations between the relative orientations and high-
mass or low-mass star formation. We find a positive correlation
between the masses and distances of cores (Fig. C.8), which is
due to the physical sizes of the cores, beam dilution and inte-
Fig. 3.Histograms of filament properties derived from values in pixels
belonging to filaments in all the GCC fields.Top:Histogram of the
H2 column density,N H2. The dashed line represents the threshold at
1021.5 cm−2 introduced in Sect. 4.2.Bottom:Histogram of the bar width
of the most significant filament,W ⋆
b . The two dashed lines represent the
thresholds at 0.2 pc and 0.5 pc, respectively (Sect 4.2).
gration along the LoS, all scaling with distance. Therefore we
analyze the core mass distribution for the whole sample as well
as for nearby (d≤500 pc) and distant (d>500 pc) samples
separately. We define a different mass threshold to split the pix-
els depending on the distance category.M c range from 0.01 to
481M ⊙. For cores in nearby fields, we adopt a mass threshold at
0.5M ⊙. Otherwise, if the samples also include distant cores, we
adopt a mass threshold at 5M ⊙.
We estimated the mean hydrogen volume density of cores,
nH,c, by combining their masses and volumes. Cores in the cat-
alog are described as ellipses, with measured angular sizes of
the major and minor axes in the PoS. We estimated the core
depths along the LoS by taking the root mean square of the ma-
jor and minor axes, and use the LoS depths to estimaten H,c. We
show the distribution of resultingn H,c in Fig. C.9. We defined
a threshold at 10 3.5 cm−3 and considered two samples of cores
withn H,c ≤10 3.5 cm−3 andn H,c >10 3.5 cm−3.
The catalog further provides a classification of cores as grav-
itationally bound or gravitationally unbound, based on a virial
analysis (see Montillaud et al. 2015 for more details). We use
this classification to separate bound cores from unbound cores
and perform our HRO analysis on each sample. Additionally,
the catalog includes an estimate of the evolutionary stage of each
core, distinguishing between starless and protostellar cores. This
classification is derived by combining two methods, one using
mid-IR data and the other using submillimeter data (see Montil-
laud et al. 2015 for more details). We use this classification of
Article number, page 7 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
the evolutionary stage and perform our HRO analysis on each
sample.
We investigated possible correlations between the properties
of cores, filaments, and GCC fields separately. We also extended
our statistical analysis by testing each parameter described in this
subsection as well as by combining them with those discussed in
Sects. 4.1 and 4.2.
5. Results
In Sect. 5.1, we summarize our analysis of the individual GCC
fields and present an overview of the results. In Sect. 5.2, we
present the statistical analysis, over all the GCC fields, of the
filament-BPoS relative orientations (see Sect. 3.2) for each fil-
ament sample described in Sect. 4. In Sect. 5.3, we present a
similar statistical analysis, this time focusing on filaments with
embedded cores from the GCC catalog (Montillaud et al. 2015).
5.1. Individual GCC fields
We appliedFilDReaMSto the 116 GCC fields and performed
our analysis of the relative orientations (Sect. 3.2) for each GCC
field individually. In Sect. 5.1.1, we present the results obtained
for a sample of three GCC fields, chosen to illustrate different
behaviors in filaments,B PoS, and their relative orientations. In
Sect. 5.1.2, we present an overview of the results obtained for
the 116 GCC fields separately.
5.1.1. Sample of three typical GCC fields
Figure 4 is a summary of the main results of our analysis on a
sample of three GCC fields: G219.29-9.25 (hereby G219), in the
left column; G159.34+11.21 (hereby G159), in the center col-
umn; and G271.51+5.14 (hereby G271), in the right column. In
the top row, we find theHerschel N H2 map, with the orientation
ofB PoS indicated using black half-vectors with lengths propor-
tional to the polarization fraction,p. The center row shows the
most significant filaments reconstructed withFilDReaMSand
their absolute orientation angles relative toB PoS,|ψ ⋆
f −ψ B|, with
the orientation ofB PoS visualized in the background using Line
Integral Convolution (LIC) in grayscale. The bottom row shows
the 2D HROs of (ψ ⋆
f −ψ B) as functions ofN H2. Here, we build
the 2D HROs in 36 angle bins of equal size from−90 ◦ to 90 ◦
and in 18N H2 bins with equal number of pixels.
In G219 (Fig. 4, left column), the top panel reveals a main
filament spanning the whole region from north to south.B PoS
is well ordered, roughly orthogonal to the main filament, with
⟨p⟩ ≈6%. The center panel shows that most of the main fila-
ment was properly reconstructed and is oriented≳50 ◦ relative to
BPoS. A few narrower filaments were detected around the main
filament, most of which are roughly parallel or oblique toB PoS
(|ψ⋆
f −ψ B|≲45 ◦), and oriented close to perpendicular to the main
filament. In the bottom panel, filaments haveN H2 ranging from
1.1×10 21 cm−2 to 2.3×10 22 cm−2. Lower-NH2 filaments have
a slight preference for relative orientations≲45 ◦, while higher-
NH2 filaments have relative orientations≳50 ◦. The transition in
relative orientations occurs atN H2 ≃2.9×10 21 cm−2.
In G159 (center column), the top panel reveals a filament
spanning the region from north-east to south-west. Here,B PoS
is ordered and well aligned with the main filament, with⟨p⟩ ≈
6.1%. The center panel shows that the main filament was prop-
erly reconstructed as well as two slightly narrower secondary
filaments and a few narrower filaments in between. Most of the
network of filaments is nearly parallel toB PoS (|ψ⋆
f −ψ B|≲30 ◦).
The 2D HRO (bottom panel) also shows that most filaments,
withN H2 ranging from 0.45×10 21 cm−2 to 4.5×10 21 cm−2,
are oriented close to parallel toB PoS.
G271 (right column) has a more complex morphology.N H2
structures in this region are shaped as a horseshoe and extend
westward, past the toe of the horseshoe.N H2 peaks around the
southern toe of the horseshoe, where the structures meet. Here,
BPoS is ordered in regions outside of the horseshoe structure and
in the southern part of the horseshoe.B PoS appears more tan-
gled in the inner and northern parts of the horseshoe, and the
polarization fraction drops compared to the two previous ex-
amples, with⟨p⟩ ≈3.3%. The center panel shows that most
of the detected filaments are aligned with each other. However,
their orientations relative toB PoS appear to be random, regard-
less of the filament size or the considered region. The bottom
panel shows that filamentN H2 range from 0.46×10 21 cm−2 to
2.2×10 22 cm−2. Filaments at mostN H2 have random relative
orientations, with a slight preference for (ψ ⋆
f −ψ B)≈ −45 ◦ for
NH2 ≳1.74×10 21 cm−2.
5.1.2. Overview of the 116 GCC fields
We extend this analysis to each of the 116 GCC fields individu-
ally. The results are displayed in the form of an "identity card"
(ID card) for each GCC field. In Appendix B, we present the ID
cards of the GCC fields analyzed in Sect. 5.1.1, while the rest of
the ID cards can be found on Zenodo.
In this section, we present an overview of the results that
emerge from the extended analysis. In each of the GCC fields,
FilDReaMSdetected a network of filaments and substructures
of different physical scales andN H2. While the physical scales
of filaments differ from one GCC field to another due to differ-
ences in distance, size of the map, or shape of theNH2 structures,
a few general trends emerged, with other less recurring trends
depending on the considered GCC fields.
When numerous filaments are detected in a wide range of
physical scales, they are intertwined and form a clear network.
The widest detected structures in the GCC fields form either fil-
aments or elongated portions of a cloud depending on the ob-
served region. They are among the highest-NH2 (i.e., highest-NH2
bin) structures in each GCC field. If two or more wide structures
are detected in the same GCC field, they are usually parallel.
Medium-sized structures are detected at the edges of the wide
structures, and they have lowerN H2. These medium-sized struc-
tures seem to connect with wide filaments at one end, and nar-
row, lower-NH2 filaments at the other end. They are also oriented
oblique or perpendicular to the wider structures.
We detect two main types of narrow filaments. The first type
of narrow filaments appear around the wider structures, all over
each of the GCC fields. They are either completely isolated or
seem to connect with medium-sized filaments. They have lower
NH2 than the medium-sized filaments and are more blended into
the background. While most of these narrow filaments seem to
have random orientations, there is a tendency toward oblique or
perpendicular orientations relative to the wider structures that
they surround. In a few regions, these narrow filaments seem to
line up and form striation patterns. The second type of narrow fil-
aments is comprised of crests, which we define as the high-N H2
spines of wide filaments, or clumps, which we define as high-
NH2, compact structures that can either be isolated or inside a
wider filament. Crests are roughly aligned with their parent fil-
aments. Clumps inside filaments are mostly aligned with their
Article number, page 8 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
Fig. 4.Summary of the main results of our HRO analysis of three typical GCC fields: left column - G219.29-9.25; center column - G159.34+11.21;
right column - G271.51+5.14. Top row:Herschel N H2 maps withB PoS visualized using half-vectors with lengths proportional to the polarization
fraction. Center row: Absolute relative orientation angle between the most significant filament andBPoS,|ψ ⋆
f −ψ B|. TheB PoS orientation is visualized
using LIC in grayscale in the background.Bottom row: Two-dimensional HROs of (ψ ⋆
f −ψ B) as functions ofN H2.
parent filaments, though with a higher dispersion in orientations,
and isolated clumps have more random orientations.
Furthermore, in agreement with previous studies, we con-
firm that in most of the GCC fields, small-W ⋆
b , low-N H2 fila-
ments (lowerN H2 bins of a GCC field) are mostly parallel to
BPoS, while high-NH2 filaments (higherN H2 bins of a GCC field)
at all scales range from mostly oblique to perpendicular toB PoS
(see, e.g., G219, left column of Figs. 4 and B.1). In most cases
with this dual distribution of relative orientations, we observe a
transition in relative orientations from roughly parallel at low-
NH2 to roughly perpendicular at high-N H2 by checking whether
r∥ >r ⊥,r int at lowN H2 andr ⊥ >r ∥,r int at highN H2. This
NH2 transition, (N H2)t, is clearly identified in 40% of the GCC
fields, and the corresponding (N H2)t typically lie in the range
[0.8, 8]×10 21 cm−2. In about 20% of cases, theN H2 range is
possibly not suitable to clearly observe a transition in relative
orientations.
However, nearly 40% of the GCC fields do not show this
usual trend between filaments andB PoS. About 15% of the GCC
fields exhibit the reverse trend, where small-W ⋆
b , low-N H2 fil-
aments are mostly perpendicular toB PoS (r⊥ >r ∥,r int), while
high-NH2 filaments at all scales are mostly parallel toB PoS
(r∥ >r ⊥,r int; e.g., G92.04+3.93, see Fig. B.4). In most of
these cases, this reverse transition occurs for (N H2)t in the range
[1,6]×10 21 cm−2, which matches the (NH2)t range for the more
common parallel to perpendicular transition. About 15% of GCC
fields show another trend where all filaments at all scales are
mostly parallel toB PoS (e.g., G159, center column of Fig. 4 and
Fig. B.2). Finally, another 10% of GCC fields have more random
Article number, page 9 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
relative orientations (see, e.g., G271, right column of Fig. 4 and
Fig. B.3).
The various behaviors we see in our analysis suggest that
magnetic fields play a role in filament formation, but the inter-
play between magnetic fields and filament evolution is not as
simple. Understanding each behavior and its origin is key to
gaining insight into star formation. This motivates the statisti-
cal analysis we present in Sects. 5.2 and 5.3, where we strive to
identify possible correlations between the relative orientations
and the physical properties introduced in Sect. 4.
5.2. Statistical analysis of all filaments over all the GCC fields
We aim to determine what physical parameters have an impact
on filament orientations relative toBPoS in order to better explain
the different trends identified in Sect. 5.1.2. Hence, we perform
a statistical analysis of the relative orientations of all filaments
extracted from the 116 GCC fields and sample them according
to the different parameters introduced in Sect. 4. In this part of
the study, we degraded the resolution of our sample to 1 pixel
every 36′′ (down from 1 pixel every 12 ′′) to properly estimate
the uncertainties in our HROs (see Sect. 3.2). The values of both
sets of ratios defined in Eqs. (5) and (6), as well as the associ-
ated uncertainties (see Sect. 3.3) for the samples presented in this
section are summarized in Table A.1, which is used to directly
identify and compare trends between samples.
Figure 5 shows histograms of the relative orientations be-
tween filaments andB PoS for the entire sample of GCC fields,
and for samples depending on filamentN H2 andW ⋆
b . Panel
(a) shows the HRO for all filaments, as well as the HROs
for filaments subdivided into twoN H2 bins with a threshold at
1021.5 cm−2. Overall, the relative orientations are not uniform,
with a preference for nearly parallel relative orientations. The
lower-NH2 filaments (N H2 ≤10 21.5 cm−2) have a similar dis-
tribution, while the higher-N H2 filaments (NH2 >10 21.5 cm−2)
have a nearly flat HRO. Panel (b) shows the HROs for fila-
ments subdivided into threeW ⋆
b bins with thresholds at 0.2 pc
and 0.5 pc (see Fig. 3). We see thatr⊥ increases asW ⋆
b increases,
implying that perpendicular orientations become relatively more
prevalent. Panels (c) and (d) show a combination of both cri-
teria: the threeW ⋆
b bins forN H2 ≤10 21.5 cm−2 (panel (c)) and
forN H2 >10 21.5 cm−2 (panel (d)), respectively. For the lower-
NH2 filaments, there is a preference for nearly parallel orienta-
tions regardless of theW ⋆
b range. However, for the higher-N H2
filaments, results depend onW ⋆
b : high-NH2, small-W ⋆
b filaments
(W ⋆
b ≤0.2 pc) have a flat HRO; high-N H2, intermediate-W ⋆
b fil-
aments are slightly more parallel toB PoS; and high-N H2, large-
W ⋆
b filaments (W ⋆
b >0.5 pc) have a slightly bimodal parallel-
perpendicular distribution.
Figure 6 displays the relative orientations in 18N H2 bins of
equal number of pixels (see Sect. 3.2). The top panel exhibits
the 2D HRO of (ψ ⋆
f −ψ B) as a function ofN H2 (see Sect. 3.2).
We see that low-N H2 filaments are mostly parallel toB PoS, and
the distribution of (ψ ⋆
f −ψ B) fans out to all orientations for
NH2 ≳2×10 21 cm−2, with a preference toward≈ −90 ◦ for
NH2 ≥6.2×10 21 cm−2. The bottom panel shows the values of
r∥ andr ⊥ (Eq. (6)) in eachN H2 bin. Again, we see that in lower-
NH2 bins, filaments are mostly parallel toB PoS, withr ∥ reaching
≳47% andr ⊥ ≲24% forN H2 ≤10 21 cm−2.r ∥ decreases and
r⊥ increases with increasingN H2, and filaments transition from
being mostly parallel to mostly perpendicular toB PoS wherer ∥
andr ⊥ cross, at (NH2)t ≃10 21.7 cm−2.
Fig. 5.Histograms of relative orientations for filaments in all GCC
fields.(a)HROs of all pixels (black), pixels withN H2 ≤10 21.5 cm−2
(blue), and pixels withN H2 >10 21.5 cm−2 (red) (see Sect. 4.2).(b),(c),
and(d)show a decomposition of the three HROs of(a)for allN H2,
NH2 ≤10 21.5 cm−2, andN H2 >10 21.5 cm−2, respectively. The HROs are
decomposed into the threeW ⋆
b bins introduced in Sect. 4.2:W ⋆
b ≤0.2 pc
(blue), 0.2 pc<W ⋆
b ≤0.5 pc (green), andW ⋆
b >0.5 pc (red). The un-
certainties in all HROs are shown in gray shaded areas.
We repeat the above analysis subsequently for the samples
of filaments that meet the various criteria and combinations of
criteria listed in Sect. 4. When combining criteria, we also check
for possible correlations between the criteria to better compare
their impact on the relative orientations. Here, we only present
the main results and the main trends that emerge from this sta-
tistical analysis.
We separated our GCC fields into two samples according to
distance. Overall, distant fields (d>500 pc) have higher⟨N H2 ⟩
than nearby fields (d≤500 pc). In both samples, we find that
low-NH2 filaments at all scales are mostly parallel toB PoS, but
the trend is more pronounced for nearby fields. However, we
Article number, page 10 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
Fig. 6.Measures of the relative orientations in 18N H2 bins with an
equal number of pixels for the full sample of GCC fields.Top: Two-
dimensional HRO of (ψ⋆
f −ψ B) in 18 angle bins.Bottom:Values ofr ∥
andr ⊥ (defined in Eq. (6)) in the 18NH2 bins. TheN H2 bins are delimited
by the dashed vertical lines.
do not recover theN H2 transition from parallel to perpendicular
orientations for nearby fields. In distant fields, high-N H2, large-
W ⋆
b filaments have a bimodal distribution, with a clear transition
from parallel to perpendicular orientations with increasingN H2.
High-latitude fields exhibit similar trends to nearby fields.
Next, we built five samples of GCC fields with different
ranges of⟨N H2 ⟩, as explained in Sect. 4.1. We find a positive
correlation between⟨N H2 ⟩and the number of high-N H2 (NH2 >
1021.5 cm−2) pixels within filaments. Additionally, low-N H2 fil-
aments are mostly parallel toB PoS while high-N H2 filaments
have a flat or slightly more perpendicular distribution. However
with increasing⟨N H2 ⟩, the HROs become increasingly flat with
a slight parallel-perpendicular bi-modality. The trends are more
pronounced in the lowest⟨N H2 ⟩range, where high-N H2 filaments
are more contrasted with respect to their environment. As⟨N H2 ⟩
increases, there are more filaments perpendicular toBPoS, but the
preferred orientations are less clear. In each⟨NH2 ⟩range, we find
a transition from parallel to perpendicular orientations for (NH2)t
between 10 21.5 and 10 21.8 cm−2 (see Figs. D.4, D.5 and D.6 in
Appendix D).
Similarly, we built two samples of GCC fields according
to⟨p⟩with a threshold at 5%. Figure 7 shows HROs for fila-
ments in GCC fields with either low⟨p⟩(⟨p⟩ ≤5%) or high
⟨p⟩(⟨p⟩>5%. In the top panel, we see HROs of pixels with
NH2 ≤10 21.5 cm−2. We recover the trend that low-NH2 filaments
are mostly parallel toB PoS, yet the trend is weaker in low-⟨p⟩
GCC fields, withr ∥ =40.5%, and more pronounced in high-
⟨p⟩GCC fields, withr ∥ =46.5% (see Table A.1). In the bot-
tom panel, we see HROs of pixels withN H2 >10 21.5 cm−2 and
W ⋆
b >0.5 pc. We recover the trend that high-N H2, large-W⋆
b fila-
ments in low-⟨p⟩GCC fields have a nearly flat HRO. However,
Fig. 7.Histograms of relative orientations for filaments in two samples
of GCC fields with⟨p⟩ ≤5% (blue) and⟨p⟩>5% (red). The un-
certainties are shown in gray shaded areas.Top:HROs of pixels with
NH2 ≤10 21.5 cm−2.Bottom:HROs of pixels withN H2 >10 21.5 cm−2 and
W ⋆
b >0.5 pc.
we derive slightly different trends for high-N H2, large-W ⋆
b fil-
aments in high-⟨p⟩GCC fields depending on the set of ratios
used. With the first set of ratios (Eq. (5)), we findr ∥ =39.1%
andr ⊥ =41.1% (see Table A.1), which implies a bimodal
parallel-perpendicular distribution. With the second set of ratios
(Eq. (6)), we findr ∥ =37.8% andr ⊥ =34.9% (see Table A.1),
which implies no preference for perpendicular relative orienta-
tions. The difference between the two sets of ratios is due to
the lack of filaments with|ψ ⋆
f −ψ B| ∈[80 ◦,90 ◦]. Overall, each
sample of filaments inside high-⟨p⟩GCC fields exhibits simi-
lar results to the full sample, but trends are usually more pro-
nounced, with more filaments being either parallel or perpendic-
ular toB PoS.
We then combined the different criteria to examine their pos-
sible joint impact on the HROs, while keeping sufficiently large
samples for statistical significance. For example, Fig. 8 displays
HROs for filaments in GCC fields combining three criteria on
GCC field properties:d>500 pc,⟨N H2 ⟩>1.5×10 21 cm−2 and
⟨p⟩>5%. The top panel shows the HRO for all filaments for this
sample, as well as the HROs for filaments subdivided into two
NH2 bins with a threshold at 10 21.5 cm−2. We find that low-N H2
filaments are mostly parallel toB PoS, while high-N H2 filaments
are mostly perpendicular toB PoS. The bottom panel exhibits the
HRO for high-N H2 filaments subdivided into twoW ⋆
b bins with
a threshold at 0.5 pc, set for distant fields. In both cases, we find
that filaments are mostly perpendicular toBPoS, withr ⊥ =46.9%
andr ⊥ =42.6% for small-W ⋆
b and large-W ⋆
b filaments, respec-
tively (see Table A.1). The perpendicular trend for high-NH2 fil-
aments ind>500 pc,⟨N H2 ⟩>1.5×10 21 cm−2 and⟨p⟩>5%
GCC fields is more pronounced compared to other combinations
of criteria.
Article number, page 11 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
Fig. 8.Histograms of relative orientations for filaments in GCC fields
withd>500 pc,⟨N H2 ⟩>1.5×10 21 cm−2, and⟨p⟩>5%. The uncer-
tainties are shown in gray shaded areas.Top:Similar HROs to Fig. 5a.
Bottom:Similar HROs to Fig. 5d, except that the HRO is decomposed
into twoW ⋆
b bins:W ⋆
b ≤0.5 pc (blue) andW ⋆
b >0.5 pc (red).
The parameters with the strongest effects on the HROs are
the filamentN H2,W ⋆
b and the GCC field⟨p⟩, while other param-
eters play a smaller role. Here, we summarize our key findings.
–Low-N H2 filaments are mostly parallel toB PoS at all scales,
while high-N H2 filaments usually have flat or bimodal
parallel-perpendicular HROs.
–High-N H2, small-W ⋆
b filaments have flat, slightly parallel, or
slightly perpendicular HROs, whereas high-N H2, large-W ⋆
b
filaments have flat, bimodal parallel-perpendicular, or mostly
perpendicular HROs.
–In high-⟨p⟩GCC fields, both HROs and 2D HROs show
more pronounced trends than in low-⟨p⟩GCC fields.
–Criteria based on distance or latitude play a more indirect
role: GCC fields at closer distances or higher latitudes usu-
ally have lower⟨N H2 ⟩than GCC fields at longer distances or
lower latitudes, which is reflected in the results of this com-
bined analysis.
Combining criteria enables us to identify a few trends in the
HROs more clearly (see, e.g., Fig. 8). Improving the estimates of
the different criteria used in this study as well as adding criteria
on other physical parameters could help improve the constraints
and the analysis of the results.
5.3. Statistical analysis of filaments hosting cores over all the
GCC fields
Out of the final 4244 cores from the GCC catalog (Montillaud
et al. 2015) considered in our study, 93% are located inside fil-
aments. We find a positive correlation between the number of
high-NH2 pixels within filaments and the number of cores in a
GCC field, with most cores located within the highest-N H2 fil-
aments, confirming the strong link between filaments and star
formation (André et al. 2014). We aim to investigate the link be-
tween the presence of a core and the relative orientations, as well
as its dependence on physical properties (see Sect. 4). Here, we
focus on filaments with embedded cores from the GCC catalog,
and we proceed with the same analysis as in Sect. 5.2. Moreover,
we have access to the core properties introduced in Sect. 4.3, pro-
viding additional characterization of the sampled filaments and
cores.
However, one must be cautious when analyzing the HROs for
filaments with embedded cores.FilDReaMSdetects elongated
structures that can be well modeled by a rectangular bar. There-
fore, if a model bar of aspect ratior b =3 can fit within the
FWHM (full width at half maximum) ellipse of a core, that core
can potentially be detected as a filament byFilDReaMS, which
artificially increases the number of cores parallel to their host
filaments. To limit this effect, we retain the most significant fil-
ament that each core belongs to, as these filaments tend to have
W ⋆
b larger than the FWHM ellipses of the embedded cores.
In Sect. 5.3.1, we analyze the relative orientations between
filaments hosting cores andB PoS. In Sect. 5.3.2, we consider the
position angles of cores, first analyzing their orientations relative
to their host filaments, then their orientations relative toB PoS.
The values of both sets of ratios defined in Eqs. (5) and (6), as
well as the associated uncertainties (see Sect. 3.3) for the sam-
ples presented in this section are summarized in Table A.1.
5.3.1. HROs of|ψ ⋆
f −ψ B|
Here, we focus the HRO analysis on the relative orientations
between filaments with embedded cores andB PoS. Our results
show that the HROs are similar to those of filaments withNH2 >
1021.5 cm−2, but trends are comparatively less pronounced. This
similarity is mostly due to cores being usually detected in high-
NH2 filaments (see Fig. C.7). Within samples where high-N H2
filaments are mostly parallel toB PoS, we also find that filaments
with embedded cores are mostly parallel toB PoS. However, in
samples where high-N H2 filaments have bimodal HROs, fila-
ments hosting cores have different behaviors in their HROs de-
pending on⟨p⟩and core properties.
Figure 9 displays HROs for filaments hosting cores in GCC
fields withd>500 pc and⟨p⟩>5%, as well as the HROs
for filaments subdivided into two coren H,c bins with a threshold
at 10 3.5 cm−3. We see that the HRO for filaments in the sam-
ple including alln H,c shows a slight preference for perpendicular
relative orientations. Additionally, the HRO for filaments with
low-nH,c cores is mostly flat, while the HRO for filaments with
high-nH,c cores displays a strong preference for perpendicular
relative orientations, withr ⊥ =58.6% (see Table A.1).
Overall, we find that filaments with high-M c cores (M c >
5M ⊙) tend to be slightly more perpendicular toB PoS, whereas
filaments with low-M c cores have random orientations, with a
slight preference toward orientations parallel toB PoS. The par-
allel trends are reinforced if we only consider nearby fields
(d≤500 pc), where the detected cores are less massive by at
least an order of magnitude than distant (d>500 pc) cores (see
Fig. C.8). This supports the natural notion that filamentN H2 and
core masses are correlated, with the most massive cores located
in filaments with the highestN H2. Additionally, we find that fil-
aments with high-n H,c cores or bound cores tend to be slightly
more perpendicular toB PoS, whereas filaments with low-n H,c
cores or unbound cores are slightly more parallel toB PoS. These
trends are stronger for cores in high-⟨p⟩GCC fields.
Article number, page 12 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
Fig. 9.Histograms of relative orientations for filaments hosting cores
in GCC fields withd>500 pc and⟨p⟩>5% for all cores (black),
nH,c ≤10 3.5 cm−3 cores (blue), andn H,c >10 3.5 cm−3 cores (red). The
uncertainties are shown in gray shaded areas.
Fig. 10.Histograms of relative orientations for filaments hosting cores
in all GCC fields according to an estimation of their evolutionary stage
and its reliability. The HRO for unreliable (0) starless cores is shown
in light blue, the HRO for reliable (1) starless cores is in dark blue, the
HRO for unreliable (0) protostellar cores is in light red, and the HRO
for reliable protostellar (1) cores is in dark red. The uncertainties are
shown in gray shaded areas.
The link between the evolutionary stage of cores and HROs
is harder to determine. Out of all the cores in the sample, 1604
cores have a characterization of their evolutionary stage, with
only 96 considered "reliable" by Montillaud et al. (2015), of
which 13 are starless and 83 are protostellar. Figure 10 shows the
HROs for filaments hosting cores in all GCC fields subdivided
according to their evolutionary stage (starless or protostellar) and
the reliability of the determination (unreliable or reliable). We
find that the HRO for filaments with starless cores flagged as
unreliable (0) displays a slight preference for more parallel rel-
ative orientations, withr ∥ =37.7% (see Table A.1). Conversely,
the HRO for filaments with protostellar cores flagged as unreli-
able (0) displays a slight preference for more perpendicular rel-
ative orientations, withr ⊥ =39.6% (see Table A.1). However,
the HRO for filaments with protostellar cores flagged as reli-
able (1) shows preferentially parallel relative orientations, with
r∥ =39.5%, slightly higher than in the unreliable (0) starless
case. We find this trend in almost every combination of parame-
ters including the evolutionary stage of cores. Finally, the num-
ber of reliable starless cores is too low to carry out this analysis.
Fig. 11.Histograms of|ψ ⋆
f −ψ c|for filaments hosting cores in all GCC
fields subdivided into three filamentW ⋆
b bins:W ⋆
b ≤0.2 pc (blue),
0.2 pc<W ⋆
b ≤0.5 pc (green), andW ⋆
b >0.5 pc (red). The uncertainties
are shown in gray shaded areas.
Fig. 12.Histogram of|ψ c −ψ B|for filaments hosting cores in all
GCC fields: for all cores (black),N H2 ≤10 21.5 cm−2 cores (blue), and
NH2 >10 21.5 cm−2 cores (red). The uncertainties are shown in gray
shaded areas.
5.3.2. HROs of|ψ ⋆
f −ψ c|and|ψ c −ψ B|
Here, we consider the position angles of cores, and analyze their
orientations relative to their host filaments, then their orienta-
tions relative toB PoS, and the dependence of these relative ori-
entations on physical properties (see Sect. 4).
Figure 11 shows histograms of|ψ ⋆
f −ψ c|for filaments host-
ing cores in all GCC fields subdivided into three filamentW ⋆
b
bins with thresholds at 0.2 pc and 0.5 pc, respectively. We find
that the core major axes are predominantly parallel to the par-
ent filaments. However, this trend is slightly less pronounced for
cores within large-W⋆
b filaments (see Table A.1), or for protostel-
lar cores flagged as reliable. These result are found for most of
the combinations of criteria used to sample filaments and cores.
Figure 12 shows histograms of|ψc −ψ B|for filaments hosting
cores in all GCC fields, as well as the HROs for filaments sub-
divided into twoN H2 bins with a threshold at 1021.5 cm−2. While
preferred orientations seem more random and are harder to iden-
tify, there is a very small preference for parallel orientations for
lowerN H2, while HROs are flatter for higherN H2. We find simi-
lar trends for most of the combinations of criteria used to sample
filaments and cores, with trends for parallel relative orientations
slightly more pronounced in high-⟨p⟩GCC fields.
In summary, the cores in our sample are mostly located in-
side high-N H2 filaments. Filaments with embedded cores have
Article number, page 13 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
histograms of|ψ ⋆
f −ψ B|similar to the HROs for high-N H2 fila-
ments from the entire sample. However, the trends are less pro-
nounced for filaments with embedded cores, with a few samples
having very low statistics. Cores tend to have their major axes
nearly parallel to their host filaments, and more randomly ori-
ented relative toB PoS, with a slight preference toward parallel
orientations. Protostellar cores seem to deviate from this trend,
but due to very low statistics and unreliable estimates, the results
for this criterion are inconclusive.
6. Projection effects
Projection effects must be taken into account in the study of rel-
ative orientations. Through observations, we do not have direct
access to LoS components, we only see what is projected onto
the PoS. The apparent shape and orientation of an object may
change drastically upon PoS projection depending on its inclina-
tion angle to the LoS,θ. Numerical simulations by Seifried et al.
(2020) showed that a transition in relative orientations from pref-
erentially parallel to perpendicular with increasingN H2 in 3D
does not always show up in 2D projected maps depending on the
chosen LoS. Hence, relative orientations in the 2D PoS are not
always representative of true relative orientations in 3D.
To quantify projection effects on relative orientations, we
took two complementary approaches. The first is purely analyt-
ical (Sect. 6.1), and the second is based on a simple toy model
(Sect. 6.2).
6.1. Analytical considerations
We considered a cartesian coordinate system (x,y,z) and a spher-
ical coordinate system (r, θ, ψ) with thez-axis along the LoS to-
ward the observer (see Fig. 1a). We let ˆef and ˆeB be unit vectors
along the local filament and the localB, respectively; (θ f, ψf)
and (θB, ψB) be the angular coordinates of ˆef and ˆeB, respectively;
andf f(θf, ψf) andf B(θB, ψB) be their respective distribution func-
tions. Here, for mathematical convenience, we do not restrict the
ranges ofψ f andψ B to [−90 ◦,90 ◦], as done in the rest of the
paper, but we allowed ˆef and ˆeB to cover all possible directions.
The relative orientation angle between ˆef and ˆeB projected
onto the PoS (see Fig. 1b) is simply
α=ψ f −ψ B ,(9)
whereas the angle between ˆef and ˆeB in 3D, calledϑ(see Fig. 1a),
is given by
cosϑ=sinθ f sinθ B cosα+cosθ f cosθ B ·(10)
Equation (10) shows that projection onto the PoS can make ˆe f
and ˆeB either "more parallel" or "more perpendicular" than in
3D.3 To find out which situation prevails, we can temporarily
assume, without loss of generality, that ˆe f and ˆeB point away
from the PoS (θ f, θB ∈[0 ◦,90 ◦]). Then the condition for ˆef and
ˆeB to look "more parallel" in projection than in 3D is simply
|cosα|>|cosϑ|, which is equivalent to
cosα > cosθ f cosθ B
1−sinθ f sinθ B
or cosα <− cosθ f cosθ B
1+sinθ f sinθ B
·
(11)
3 By ˆef and ˆeB being "more parallel" or "more perpendicular" in pro-
jection than in 3D, we just mean that the acute angle between their pro-
jected orientations is smaller or larger than the acute angle between their
orientations in 3D.
From this, we can already note two important points:
•If ˆef or ˆeB lies in the PoS (θf orθ B =90 ◦), ˆef and ˆeB always look
"more parallel" in projection than in 3D (except in the particular
caseα=±90 ◦, where ˆef and ˆeB remain perpendicular) .
•If ˆef and ˆeB differ only by their polar angles (θf ,θ B,ψ f =ψ B),
then|α|=0 ◦ <|ϑ|, whereas if ˆe f and ˆeB differ only by their
azimuthal angles (θf =θ B,ψ f ,ψ B), then|α|>|ϑ|. As a general
rule, large|θ f −θ B|and small|ψ f −ψ B|lead to|α|<|ϑ|, which
implies that ˆef and ˆeB look "more parallel" in projection than in
3D, whereas small|θ f −θ B|and large|ψ f −ψ B|lead to|α|>|ϑ|,
which implies that ˆef and ˆeB look "more perpendicular" ["more
parallel"] in projection than in 3D if|α|,|ϑ|<90 ◦ [|α|,|ϑ|>90 ◦].
The fraction of pairs (ˆef,ˆeB) that satisfy Eq. (11) is
f∥ =
Z π
2
0
dθf sinθ f
Z π
2
0
dθB sinθ B
× 1
π
 
arccos cosθ f cosθ B
1−sinθ f sinθ B
+arccos cosθ f cosθ B
1+sinθ f sinθ B
!
,
(12)
or, upon numerical integration, f ∥ ≃68.7 %. Hence, one can
see that projection onto the PoS is more likely to make ˆe f and
ˆeB "more parallel" than "more perpendicular." This is consistent
with the well-known fact that vectors that are (nearly) parallel in
3D remain (nearly) parallel in projection, whereas vectors that
are (nearly) perpendicular in 3D can take on any relative orien-
tation in projection. The distribution function ofαreads
fα(α)=
$
dθf dψf dθB sinθ f sinθ B ff(θf, ψf)f B(θB, ψB =ψ f−α)·
(13)
The distribution function ofϑcan be written in the convenient
form
fϑ(ϑ)=sinϑg(ϑ),(14)
which factors out the geometric factor sinϑarising from the dif-
ferential solid angle,dΩ =sinϑdϑdφ. Thus, the functiong(ϑ)
describes departures (alongϑ) from a purely isotropic 3D distri-
bution (for whichg(ϑ)= 1
2).
A first obvious conclusion, which is not always fully appre-
ciated, is the following: if ˆef and ˆeB have totally isotropic distri-
butions in 3D (f f(θf, ψf)=f B(θB, ψB)= 1
4π), thenαalso has a
totally isotropic distribution, i.e., a flat histogram (f α(α)= 1
2π).
This can be understood as the net result of two opposing trends.
On the one hand, the probability that two random vectors make
an angleϑin 3D increases as sinϑ(see Eq. (14)); in other words,
in 3D, more perpendicular is more likely. On the other hand, pro-
jection onto the PoS introduces a statistical trend toward "more
parallel" (see comment below Eq. (12)).
A second important conclusion can be obtained by consider-
ing the situation where the direction of ˆeB is uniform with, say,
θB =θ B0 andψ B =0 (the exact value ofψ B is irrelevant),
fB(θB, ψB)= 1
sinθ B0
δ(θB−θ B0)δ(ψ B),(15)
and ˆef has an isotropic distribution around ˆeB,
ff(θf, ψf)= 1
2π g(ϑ),(16)
with
R
dϑsinϑg(ϑ)=1. Inserting Eqs. (15) and (16) into
Eq. (13) leads to
fα(α)= 1
2π
Z
dθf sinθ f g(ϑ),(17)
Article number, page 14 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
whereϑis given by Eq. (10) withθ B =θ B0.
Next, we look into three representative cases. The first concerns
uniform distribution. If ˆef is uniformly distributed in 3D (g(ϑ)=
1
2), thenαis also uniformly distributed (flat histogram,f α(α)=
1
2π).
The second case is regarding preferentially parallel distribu-
tion. If ˆef tends to be more parallel than perpendicular to ˆeB in
3D, the parallel trend persists in the PoS, i.e., the histogram ofα
rises toward 0 ◦ and 180◦. This can be verified with the analyti-
cally tractable functiong(ϑ)= 3
2 cos2 ϑ, for which we obtained
fα(α)= 1
π
 
sin2 θB0 cos2 α+ 1
2 cos2 θB0
!
,(18)
and, upon averaging overθ B0, it changes to
⟨f α(α)⟩= 1
3π
 
2 cos2 α+ 1
2
!
·(19)
Equation (18) indicates that the trend toward parallel orientations
in the PoS is most pronounced (and in this case exactly equal to
the 3D trend) when the magnetic field lies in the PoS (θB0 =90 ◦),
while the trend disappears when the magnetic field is along the
LoS (θB0 =0 ◦ or 180◦).
The third case is preferentially perpendicular distribution.
Similarly, if ˆef tends to be more perpendicular than parallel to
ˆeB in 3D, the perpendicular trend persists in the PoS, i.e., the
histogram ofαrises toward±90 ◦. This can be verified with the
functiong(ϑ)= 3
4 sin2 ϑ, for which we obtained
fα(α)= 1
2π
 
sin2 θB0 sin2 α+ 1
2 sin2 θB0 +cos 2 θB0
!
,(20)
and, upon averaging overθ B0, it becomes
⟨f α(α)⟩= 1
3π

sin2 α+1

·(21)
Here, too, the perpendicular trend in the PoS is most pronounced
when the magnetic field lies in the PoS (θ B0 =90 ◦), and it dis-
appears when the magnetic field is along the LoS (θ B0 =0 ◦ or
180◦). There is, however, an important difference with the prefer-
entially parallel case: here, the perpendicular trend is always re-
duced by projection onto the PoS, even when the magnetic field
lies in the PoS; this is because, as mentioned above, projection
onto the PoS tends to make vectors "more parallel."
6.2. Toy model
To complement the analytical approach of Sect. 6.1, which is
necessarily limited, we developed a simple numerical toy model
that can handle any given distributions of ˆe f and ˆeB. In this
model, the local filaments and localBare represented by two
sets of vectors ˆef and ˆeB with angular coordinates drawn from
their respective distribution functionsf f(θf, ψf) andf B(θB, ψB).
The code first computes the 2D (PoS) and 3D relative orienta-
tion angles,αandϑ, respectively, using Eqs. (9) and (10). It then
builds the histograms ofαandϑ, folded over the range [0 ◦,90 ◦],
with≃0 ◦ indicating nearly parallel and≃90 ◦ nearly perpen-
dicular relative orientations. The number of counts in each bin
is divided by the bin size and by the total number of counts to
make the HROs more directly comparable to the corresponding
distribution functions (also folded over the range [0◦,90 ◦]).
In the following, the renormalized HROs corresponding to
the distribution functionsf α(α),f ϑ(ϑ), andg(ϑ)=f ϑ(ϑ)/sinϑ
(see Eq. (14)) are denoted ˆfα(α), ˆfϑ(ϑ), and ˆg(ϑ)= ˆfϑ(ϑ)/sinϑ,
respectively. The reason why we consider ˆg(ϑ) here is because it
isg(ϑ) rather thanf ϑ(ϑ) which truly indicates the parallel versus
perpendicular trends. For instance, in the case of fully isotropic
distributions,f α(α) andg(ϑ) are constant, whilef ϑ(ϑ)∝sinϑ
(see Sect. 6.1).
Figure 13 shows three sets of plots (labeled a, b and c), with
three configurations of magnetic fields and filaments each (la-
beled 1, 2 and 3). The left column shows the histograms of the
3D relative orientation, ˆfϑ(ϑ), and these HROs divided by sinϑ,
ˆg(ϑ), the center column shows the histograms of the 2D relative
orientation, ˆfα(α), and the right column shows a 3D view of the
orientations of filaments andBfollowing the distribution used in
the second configuration of each set of plots (labeled a2, b2 and
c2).
We first tested the different distributions considered in
Sect. 6.1, forθ B =θ B0 =45 ◦. The results are shown in Fig. 13a
for the "Uniform" (panels a1), "Preferentially parallel" (panels
a2), and "Preferentially perpendicular" (panels a3) distributions.
In the three cases of Fig. 13a, the analytical distribution func-
tionsf α(α),f ϑ(ϑ), andg(ϑ)=f ϑ(ϑ)/sinϑ, renormalized to the
reduced range [0 ◦,90 ◦], are over-plotted. The very good agree-
ment between the analytical functions and the simulated HROs
lends support to our numerical setup and confirms the trends
identified in Sect. 6.1.
We then explored a wide range of configurations and more
complex angular distributions that are not tractable analytically.
Here, we discuss a few cases which are representative of our con-
clusions. Figure 13b shows the results obtained for three simple
configurations whereB=B 0 (θB =θ B0) and filaments are uni-
formly distributed on a cone aroundB 0 with opening angleϑ 0
(ϑ=ϑ 0).
- In panels b1,B 0 lies in the PoS (θ B0 =90 ◦) and filaments are
distributed in a disk perpendicular toB 0 (ϑ0 =90 ◦); this disk is
therefore observed edge on. We see that all three HROs have the
exact same shape, characterized by a sharp peak at 90 ◦, which
means that relative orientations are unaffected by projection onto
the PoS.
- In panels b2 (θ B0 =45 ◦,ϑ 0 =90 ◦), ˆfα(α) (center panel) is
very different from both ˆfϑ(ϑ) and ˆg(ϑ) (left panel). Perpendic-
ular relative orientations are still favored in projection, but only
slightly so; all possible values forαare now observed. This can
be explained by the projection of bothBand filaments onto the
PoS (see comment below Eq. (12)). Interestingly, ˆfα(α) in panel
b2 has almost the same profile as ˆfα(α) in panel a3, although the
corresponding ˆg(ϑ) are completely different. Here, what appears
to govern the shape of ˆfα(α) is the inclination angle of the mag-
netic field to the LoS,θ B0.
- In panels b3 (θ B0 =90 ◦,ϑ 0 =45 ◦), ˆfα(α) (center panel)
displays the same peak atϑ 0 as ˆfϑ(ϑ) and ˆg(ϑ) (left panel),
and it also exhibits a long tail toward lower values ofα. This
long tail, which results from projection effects on filaments,
can be inferred from Eq. (10): withθ B =90 ◦ andϑ=45 ◦,
Eq. (10) becomes
√
2/2=sinθ f cosα, which, together with
θf ∈[45 ◦,135 ◦], implies|α| ∈[0 ◦,45 ◦].
Figure 13c shows the results obtained when repeating the
above three simulations in the more realistic situation where the
magnetic field possesses a turbulent component in addition to its
uniform component. More specifically,B=B 0 +δB, withB 0
uniform,δBisotropic, andδBfollowing a gaussian distribution
peaking atδB=0, with a standard deviationσ δB =B 0.
- In panels c1 (θ B0 =90 ◦,ϑ 0 =90 ◦), the sharp peaks at 90 ◦
appearing in panels b1 are smeared out by the inclusion ofδB,
Article number, page 15 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 13.Toy model of relative orientation distributions in nine different configurations ofθB andϑbuilt fromθ B0 andϑ 0 values, respectively, both
in 3D (left column) and 2D PoS projection (center column).Left column:Histograms ofϑ, ˆfϑ (thick, solid blue line), and corresponding HROs
divided by sinϑ, ˆg(thick, solid red line).Center column:Histograms ofα, ˆfα (thick solid red line).Right column:Three-dimensional views
of the orientations of filaments (red arrows) andB(blue arrows) following the distributions used in panelsa2,b2, andc2, respectively. The gray
shape corresponds to the sphere containing ˆef and ˆeB, and the ( ˆx, ˆy) plane represents the PoS.Panels a:Histograms of relative orientations for
the three representative cases from Section 6.1 withθ B =θ B0 =45 ◦ (uniform ina1, preferentially parallel ina2, and preferentially perpendicular
ina3) together with their respective analytical distribution functionsf α(α),f ϑ(ϑ), andg(ϑ)=f ϑ(ϑ)/sinϑ(thin dotted red and blue lines).Panels
b:Histograms of relative orientations forB=B 0, with varyingθ B0 andϑ 0.Panels c:Histograms of relative orientations forB=B 0 +δB, with
varyingθ B0 andϑ 0.
which makes it possible for filaments to have any orientation
relative toB, both in 3D and in projection. In this configuration
whereB 0 lies in the PoS, ˆfα(α) (center panel) is almost identical
to ˆg(ϑ) (left panel), which means that the distribution of relative
orientations is almost unaffected by projection.
- In panels c2 (θB0 =45 ◦,ϑ 0 =90 ◦), ˆfα(α) is significantly flatter
than ˆg(ϑ). As in panels b2, this is due to projection effects.
- In panels c3 (θ B0 =90 ◦,ϑ 0 =45 ◦), all three HROs peak atϑ 0,
as in panels b3, but the inclusion ofδBgives rise to strong tails
on both sides ofϑ 0. The tail of ˆfα(α) toward larger angles ("more
perpendicular") is similar to that of ˆg(ϑ), but the tail ofˆfα(α) to-
ward smaller angles ("more parallel") remains much higher than
Article number, page 16 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
that of ˆg(ϑ). In other words, projection onto the PoS statistically
tends to make filaments look "more parallel" to the magnetic
field than in 3D (see again comment below Eq. (12)).
When comparing panels of Fig. 13c to their respective counter-
parts in Fig. 13b, we find that the addition of a turbulent magnetic
field component increases the dispersion of bothϑandα, and
that projection effects tend to amplify this dispersion, thereby
weakening the existing trends, regardless of the preferred rela-
tive orientations.
Here, we summarize our conclusions from both analytical
(Sect. 6.1) and numerical (Sect. 6.2) approaches.
–If there are no trends in 3D, there will be no trends in 2D.
However, the absence of trends in 2D does not imply an ab-
sence of trends in 3D.
–The fact that PoS projection alone does not create trends if
there are none in 3D can be explained by two opposing ef-
fects: on the one hand, in 3D, any two vectors are more likely
to be closer to perpendicular than parallel; on the other hand,
PoS projection is more likely to make any two vectors look
"more parallel" than "more perpendicular."
–PoS projection tends to broaden HROs, leading to greater
dispersion inαthan inϑ, regardless of the preferred rela-
tive orientations, in agreement with Planck Collaboration Int.
XXXII (2016).
–As a general rule, projection effects depend on the distribu-
tion of 3D relative orientation angles,f ϑ(ϑ), and are stronger
when the considered vectors lie closer to the LoS. For a given
GCC field, the observed trends are representative of the real
3D trends if one vector, or preferentially both vectors are
close to the PoS.
–A statistical study is the best approach to recover the true
general 3D trends.
Hence, for our HRO analysis, it is advantageous to examine con-
figurations where filaments and/or the magnetic field are reason-
ably close to the PoS. This was already predicted by numerical
simulations (see, e.g., Seifried et al. 2020; Girichidis 2021). The
filaments that we observe are statistically unlikely to be very far
from the PoS, otherwise their true lengths would be unrealisti-
cally large, so we can expect rather weak projection effects on
the orientations of filaments. However, the same cannot be said
for the magnetic field. Estimating the magnetic field inclination
angle to the LoS,θ B, could help improve analyses of the relative
orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
7. Discussion
Following previous studies (Malinen et al. 2016; Carrière et al.
2022a,b), we combinedPlanckdust polarization maps at 7 ′ res-
olution withN H2 maps at 36′′ resolution inferred fromHerschel
dust emission observations of star-forming regions. Our aim in
this paper was to compare filament orientations toB PoS orienta-
tions at different scales (0.03 pc to a few parsecs). We used cri-
teria based on a variety of physical parameters inferred from our
data to divide our sample of filaments into different subsamples.
This separation enabled us to study the effects of each parameter
on the HROs, and to better investigate possible links between fil-
aments and magnetic fields. We both examined individual GCC
fields (Sect. 5.1) and performed a statistical analysis of the entire
set of GCC fields (Sects. 5.2 and 5.3). We now summarize our
main results (Sect. 7.1) and discuss some physical interpretation
(Sect. 7.2).
7.1. Summary of our main results
The results we obtained for the relative orientations between fil-
aments andB PoS in the GCC fields extend the general trends
observed in previous studies, while also revealing a variety of
behaviors. This is expected from the complexity of the ISM and
the variety of GCC fields in different Galactic environments with
different magnetic field properties.
Statistically, we find that low-N H2 filaments tend to be
roughly parallel toB PoS, whereas high-N H2 filaments tend to be
roughly perpendicular (top panel of Fig. 6), and the transition
occurs at (N H2)t ≈10 21.7 cm−2. Individually, this transition is
clearly identified in 40% of the GCC fields, and the correspond-
ing (NH2)t values lie in the range [0.8, 8]×10 21 cm−2, a range
that is consistent with results from previous studies 4: (N H2)t ≈
[2.5,25]×10 21 cm−2 (Planck Collaboration Int. XXXV 2016),
(NH2)t ≈0.8×10 21 cm−2 (Malinen et al. 2016), (NH2)t ≈0.6×
1021 cm−2 (Alina et al. 2019), (N H2)t ≃[1.1,1.4]×10 21 cm−2
(Carrière et al. 2022b), (N H2)t ≈[0.45,2.1]×10 21 cm−2 (Jiao
et al. 2024). However, exact values found for (NH2)t also depend
on the method used to estimate column densities (molecular lines
versus dust emission), the adopted dust model, and different di-
lution factors due to different angular resolutions or distances.
A novel aspect of our analysis is the impact of the most
significant filament bar width,W ⋆
b , on the above trends. Low-
NH2 filaments remain mostly parallel toB PoS regardless of their
W ⋆
b . In contrast, high-N H2 filaments show different behaviors
in the HROs depending on theirW ⋆
b : small-W ⋆
b filaments have
flat, slightly parallel, or slightly perpendicular HROs, whereas
large-W⋆
b filaments have flat, bimodal parallel-perpendicular, or
mostly perpendicular HROs. However, these general trends are
not systematically observed in all samples, with cases where fil-
aments tend to be more parallel toB PoS regardless of theirN H2
orW ⋆
b .
Additional criteria for sampling filaments, such as the phys-
ical parameters of the GCC fields introduced in Sect. 4.1, can
help us better characterize each observed GCC field, its Galac-
tic environment, its evolutionary stage, and their effects on fila-
ment relative orientations. We find correlations between some of
the parameters. For example, high-latitude fields tend to have
shorter distances and lower⟨N H2 ⟩, distant fields tend to have
higher⟨N H2⟩and lower latitudes, high-⟨N H2 ⟩fields tend to have
lower⟨p⟩(linked to confusion along the LoS), etc. Combining
the different criteria can help us better characterize the impact of
each parameter and find new trends that were previously harder
to identify.
We find that GCC fields with higher⟨N H2 ⟩are more likely
to have high-N H2 filaments, which tend to be more perpendic-
ular toB PoS, while GCC fields with lower⟨N H2 ⟩tend to have
low-NH2 filaments, which tend to be more parallel toB PoS. GCC
fields at higher latitudes, which tend to have lower⟨NH2 ⟩, tend to
have filaments mostly parallel toBPoS. We see similar results for
nearby fields, which have a higher fraction of high-latitude and
low-⟨NH2 ⟩fields. GCC fields at shorter distances or higher lati-
tudes, where we can expect less confusion along the LoS, tend
to have more pronounced trends in the HROs.
Likewise, GCC fields with higher⟨p⟩tend to have more pro-
nounced trends in the HROs regardless of the considered sam-
ple. The polarization fraction,p, depends on a number of fac-
tors, including the properties of dust grains, the grain alignment
efficiency (weaker in high-NH2 regions; Matthews et al. 2001;
Whittet et al. 2008), fluctuations in the orientation ofB PoS (both
4 Values are given with the assumption thatN H =2N H2.
Article number, page 17 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
across the beam and along the LoS; Planck Collaboration Int.
XIX 2015; Planck Collaboration Int. XX 2015; Clark 2018), and
most importantly the magnetic field inclination angle,θ B, aver-
aged along the LoS (Planck Collaboration Int. XX 2015). Our
results suggest that high⟨p⟩values are indicative of a magnetic
field close to the PoS, while low⟨p⟩values could correspond to a
magnetic field close to the LoS (see also King et al. 2018; Fissel
et al. 2019). Properly characterizing the different depolarizing
effects could help improve estimations ofθB based on⟨p⟩.
Aside from our statistical analysis, our individual analysis
presented in Sect. 5.1 led us to uncover similarities between the
observed regions. We identified various structures in molecular
clouds (see Fig. 4 and ID cards on Zenodo), such as isolated nar-
row filaments, medium-sized filaments which seem to connect
to wider structures, wide filaments, as well as narrow, high-N H2
structures inside wide filaments (crests or clumps), and how they
are intertwined. The smallest-W ⋆
b (≈0.03 pc) and lowest-N H2
(≈0.5×10 21 cm−2) filaments are either isolated or connected
on one end to wider filaments and may line up in striation pat-
terns (see, e.g., G82.65-2.00 or G163.82-8.44). These filaments
tend to be roughly perpendicular to neighboring large-W ⋆
b fila-
ments withN H2 ≳0.8×10 21 cm−2. In most GCC fields, the
striation patterns are roughly parallel toB PoS (also identified in
the Taurus molecular cloud; Goldsmith et al. 2008; Narayanan
et al. 2008; Palmeirim et al. 2013).
However, our individual analysis of the GCC fields also high-
lights the complexity of molecular cloud morphology. In some
GCC fields, we find that most filaments are aligned with each
other at all scales (see, e.g., G159, center column of Fig. 4). In
other GCC fields (see, e.g., G271, right column of Fig. 4), we
observe peculiar structures in bothHerschelandPlanckdata,
such as bow-shaped fronts, colliding filaments, sharp changes in
filament orB PoS orientations, entangledB PoS, etc. In these GCC
fields, we find that filaments are either mostly parallel toB PoS
(see, e.g., G159, center column of Fig. 4; G202.02+2.85; Alina
et al. 2022; Carrière et al. 2022b) or do not have any preferred
orientations relative toB PoS (see, e.g., G271, right column of
Fig. 4; G159.23-34.51).
As an additional part of our study, we used the catalog of cold
cores detected in the 116 GCC fields (Montillaud et al. 2015).
The catalog provides a few physical properties of the cores (e.g.,
mass, size, evolutionary stage, etc.) and of their surroundings
(e.g., background column densities). We used this catalog to fo-
cus our analysis on filaments with embedded cores, which we
subdivided according to the properties of the GCC fields, the fil-
aments, and the cores themselves. In agreement with André et al.
(2014), we find that most of the cores in the GCC catalog are lo-
cated within filaments, particularly within the densest filaments.
Furthermore, we find a positive correlation between⟨N H2 ⟩,
the fraction of high-N H2 pixels in filaments and the number of
cores in a GCC field. More evolved molecular clouds tend to
have formed more filaments and high-density structures, and
the presence of numerous cores can be linked to later stages of
cloud evolution. Hence, we used the filamentN H2, the presence
of cores and their estimated evolutionary stages provided in the
GCC catalog as different proxies to study the evolution of the
relative orientations between filaments andB PoS across multiple
stages of the star-forming process.
In our study, we do not estimate filamentN H2 contrasts, but
we can argue that high-N H2 filaments in low-⟨N H2 ⟩GCC fields
have a highN H2 contrast, while low-NH2 filaments in high-⟨NH2 ⟩
GCC fields have a lowN H2 contrast. In low-⟨N H2 ⟩GCC fields,
we find a transition from mostly parallel to mostly perpendicular
with increasingN H2. We find this transition for both filaments re-
gardless of the presence of a core, although the trends are slightly
less pronounced for filaments with embedded cores. Our results
for low-N H2 filaments are consistent with those of Alina et al.
(2019), who revealed that low-contrast filaments are mostly par-
allel toB PoS. However, we are able to identify additional trends
for high-N H2 filaments, which is probably due to our combin-
ingPlanckdata withHerscheldata at higher angular resolution,
a larger sample of filaments and cores, and different scales of
filaments.
We find that the HROs for filaments with embedded cores
are similar to the HROs for high-NH2 filaments (i.e., flat, bimodal
parallel-perpendicular or more perpendicular), but the trends are
somewhat less pronounced, in particular for cores within high-
NH2, small-W⋆
b filaments. These results suggest a weaker link be-
tween filaments with embedded cores andB PoS atPlanckscales.
We also find that our cores tend to have their major axes mostly
parallel to their parent filaments. This trend is less pronounced
for cores within large-W ⋆
b filaments or for reliable protostellar
cores. The latter trend suggests that cores are initially aligned
with their parent filaments, and may turn or deform as they
evolve (see Fig. 9 in Juvela et al. 2018; see also Sect. 7.2 for
more details). Lastly, cores slightly tend to have their major axes
parallel toB PoS, but the trend is even less pronounced. We do not
observe any trend for the sample of protostellar cores. These re-
sults point to an increased misalignment between more evolved
filaments and cores andB PoS atPlanckscales, possibly due to
other physical processes that are dominant at smaller scales.
Projection effects need to be taken into account in the study
of relative orientations. Observations do not give direct access to
the 3D structure of filaments and molecular clouds, but only to
their projections onto the PoS. We quantified projection effects
using two complementary approaches, the first one is analytical,
and the second one consists of simple numerical simulations. We
find that PoS projection has a few effects that are intertwined. In
fact, if there are no trends in 3D, there will be no trends in 2D.
However, the absence of trends in 2D does not imply an absence
of trends in 3D. This indicates that projection alone does not cre-
ate new trends. This contributes to the second effect, where any
dispersion in 3D relative orientations is increased by projection
onto the PoS, leading to broader HROs. These effects are am-
plified if either the filaments or the magnetic fields are nearly
parallel to the LoS. For a given GCC field, the observed trends
are only representative of the real 3D trends if one vector (rep-
resenting either filaments orB PoS), or preferentially both vectors
are close to the PoS. Our statistical study is the best approach to
recover the true general 3D trends.
Another possible impact on the study of relative orien-
tations comes from foreground/background contamination, or
more generally from confusion along the LoS due to multiple
cloud components and/or magnetic field orientations (see, e.g.,
Pelgrims et al. 2024; Angarita et al. 2025). This issue was ad-
dressed in previous studies, using different approaches to sepa-
rate magnetic field components along the LoS (see, e.g., Planck
Collaboration Int. XXXV 2016; Alina et al. 2019). More re-
cently, Ferrière et al. (2026) presented a new method to decom-
pose the polarized dust emission onto the contributions from sev-
eral clouds located at different distances along the LoS. They ap-
plied their method to one of the GCC fields, i.e., the G139 field,
for which they found that the LoS decomposition is critical to
obtain the correct magnetic field orientation in the target dense
molecular cloud. This case in point shows that LoS contamina-
tion may be an important issue in studies of individual molecular
clouds, where the foreground or background magnetic field can
Article number, page 18 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
have an ordered orientation at the cloud scale and induce an ap-
parent preferential relative orientation of filaments. The impact
of LoS contamination is strongly limited in our statistical analy-
sis, which mixes targets selected over a broad range of Galactic
locations. A more detailed discussion of this issue is beyond the
scope of the present paper.
7.2. Physical interpretation
Our main results on the different relations betweenNH2,W ⋆
b , and
preferred relative orientations between filaments andB PoS sup-
port the idea of a hierarchical process in filament formation in
which cloud-scale magnetic fields play an important role. Fila-
ments mostly arise from an interplay between turbulence, mag-
netic fields and self-gravity (for reviews see, e.g, André et al.
2014; Hacar et al. 2023; Pattle et al. 2023). 3D MHD simu-
lations show that these different factors dominate at different
scales. Cloud-scale motions are dominated by turbulence. Lo-
cal compressive motions would create cold gas condensations
(Padoan et al. 2001; Audit & Hennebelle 2005; Saury et al.
2014) and shear would stretch them together with the frozen-
in field lines (Hennebelle 2013), giving rise to elongated struc-
tures which tend to be parallel to the magnetic field. At later
stages, self-gravity takes the upper hand, and causes gas to con-
tract preferentially along field lines. The converging motions re-
sult in high-N H2 structures that tend to be perpendicular to the
magnetic field (Chen et al. 2016; Seifried et al. 2020).
The idea of a hierarchical process in filament formation in-
volving magnetic fields arises from previous observational stud-
ies: short and narrow, low-NH2 filaments tend to be roughly par-
allel toB PoS and roughly perpendicular to longer and wider fil-
aments (Sugitani et al. 2011), potentially feeding them (Arzou-
manian et al. 2013; Palmeirim et al. 2013; André et al. 2014;
Saajasto et al. 2017; Carrière et al. 2022b). This scenario is con-
sistent with predictions of numerical simulations (Balsara et al.
2001; Gómez & Vázquez-Semadeni 2014). The different rela-
tions betweenN H2,W ⋆
b , and preferred relative orientations in
most of our results support the idea that narrow filaments, which
tend to converge onto the local main filaments, could be inflows
along the magnetic field.
Soler & Hennebelle (2017) showed that a system in ideal-
MHD turbulence tends to evolve toward a configuration where
density structures are elongated either parallel or perpendicular
to the magnetic field. Additionally, it is only in the presence of
a relatively strong magnetic field (i.e., magnetic pressure greater
than thermal pressure) that they found that compressive motions
can produce a transition in the relative orientation between den-
sity structures and magnetic fields from mostly parallel at low
NH2 to mostly perpendicular at highN H2. The fact that we ob-
serve a transition in many GCC fields suggests that the magnetic
field in star-forming regions is generally strong (B≳6−10µG;
Li et al. 2013). The presence or absence of a transitionNH2 in our
study could be related not only to the strength of the magnetic
field, but also to the particular circumstances of the observed re-
gion, or to projection effects (as analyzed in Sect. 6; see also
Seifried et al. 2020).
The GCC fields with peculiar structures for which the rel-
ative orientations differ from the usual trends may suggest dif-
ferent 3D geometries or different histories to molecular cloud
evolution and filament formation. Since fields in the GCC sam-
ple were chosen to be representative of different Galactic envi-
ronments, they do not always show the trends found in previous
studies of local clouds (Planck Collaboration Int. XXXV 2016;
Fissel et al. 2019). First, the deviation from the usual trends can
be due to projection effects, as some of the GCC fields might
have a magnetic field roughly along the LoS, thereby making
trends harder to identify (see Sect. 6). Second, confusion due to
multiple clouds and/or magnetic field orientations along the LoS
may have more or less impact depending on the considered GCC
field. Third, some targets might be weakly-magnetized molec-
ular clouds, in which turbulence dominates over the magnetic
field,B PoS followsN H2 structures, and HROs show preferen-
tially parallel trends regardless of theN H2 andW ⋆
b of filaments
(Padoan et al. 2001; Soler et al. 2013; Soler & Hennebelle 2017).
Additionally, external events might drive shear and compression
and dictate the shape of molecular clouds, such as expanding
shells from supernova remnants (Kun et al. 2008), interstellar
radiation fields and stellar winds (Bally 2008), and colliding fil-
aments (Montillaud et al. 2019a,b). Subsequent studies of cloud
kinematics using molecular spectral data to have information on
the LoS velocity could provide new constraints on the dynam-
ics of structures (e.g., distinguishing between converging and di-
verging motions) to analyze HROs, and better understand molec-
ular cloud and filament evolution.
Observations suggest that the formation of dense cores oc-
curs in two steps. The first step is the formation of filaments,
which can already be observed in non-star-forming clouds (e.g.,
Polaris; Men’shchikov et al. 2010; André et al. 2014). The sec-
ond step is the fragmentation into dense cores of high-density fil-
aments which, through continuous accretion of matter, become
gravitationally unstable (André et al. 2010). This scenario is con-
sistent with results of numerical simulations (e.g., Inutsuka &
Miyama 1997). The dense cores appear elongated, with their ma-
jor axes roughly parallel to the parent filaments (Sect. 5.3.2; see
also Loren 1989a,b; Myers et al. 1991). However, in our study,
we find that this parallel alignment is less prominent for more
evolved cores. Additionally, we do not find any clear correla-
tion between the orientations of dense cores and the orienta-
tion ofB PoS atPlanckscales, consistent with results from Ward-
Thompson et al. (2023). Besides, both observations (Perry et al.
2025) and numerical simulations (Chen & Ostriker 2018) show
that magnetic fields at core scales are preferentially perpendic-
ular to the core major axes. These results, combined with our
own findings, lead us to propose the following evolutionary sce-
nario: as they further evolve under gravitational collapse, the
self-gravitating cores possibly rotate (collapsing cores tend to
spin up) and become increasingly misaligned with their parent
filaments and the cloud-scale magnetic field. The rotation drags
the core-scale magnetic field, which remains roughly perpendic-
ular to the major axes of the rotating cores. These results suggest
that magnetic fields are distorted at smaller scales during more
advanced stages of star formation.
Numerical simulations of MHD turbulence show that only
a very strong magnetic field can preserve its initial orienta-
tion across scales, from molecular cloud to protostellar disk
scale (Hull et al. 2017). Observations show that cloud-scale
magnetic field orientations are not necessarily inherited from
the large-scale Galactic magnetic field (e.g., Orion superbub-
ble; Soler et al. 2018; Soler 2019). Depending on the magnetic
field strength,B PoS orientations at core scales may or may not be
directly inferred from the cloud-scaleB PoS. Hence, cloud-scale
magnetic fields may play a lesser role at smaller scales, or other
physical processes such as gravity may dominate star formation
at core scales, which affects the orientations relative toBPoS (see,
e.g., Ibáñez-Mejía et al. 2022). Further statistical studies prob-
ing magnetic fields at higher angular resolution are necessary to
complete this picture.
Article number, page 19 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we applied our filament extraction method
FilDReaMSto the 116 fields of theHerschel-GCC program,
which was selected to ensure broad coverage of physical proper-
ties and environments. We examined the differences between the
filament orientation angles derived withFilDReaMSfromHer-
schelmaps at a resolution of 36 ′′ and the local PoS magnetic
field orientation angles inferred fromPlanckpolarization maps
at 7′ resolution, and we performed both an individual analysis of
each GCC field and a statistical analysis of the 116 GCC fields
together. The main goal of our statistical analysis was to inves-
tigate the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic
fields in star-forming regions and their possible dependence on
the evolutionary stage and on the Galactic environment. To this
end, we considered samples of filaments according to different
physical criteria and analyzed the relative orientations for each
sample.
We first summarize our key findings from our individual
analysis. In the individual GCC fields, we found general trends
where low-column density (N H2) filaments tend to be roughly
parallel toB PoS, whereas high-N H2 filaments tend to be roughly
perpendicular. The transition from parallel to perpendicular rel-
ative orientations can be clearly identified in roughly 40% of the
GCC fields. The changes in preferred orientations occur at tran-
sition column densities, (NH2)t, in the range [0.8,8]×10 21 cm−2.
However, about 40% of the GCC fields do not show this usual
trend. There is a variety of behaviors, such as a transition in
preferred orientations from perpendicular to parallel, filaments
remaining parallel at allN H2, and more complexN H2 orB PoS
morphologies. These may be due to different factors, which in-
clude projection effects possibly related to the magnetic field in-
clination to the LoS, confusion along the LoS, fluctuations in the
magnetic field orientation, and different strengths of the local
magnetic field.
Here, we summarize our key findings in our statistical anal-
ysis.
–Low-N H2 (NH2 ≤10 21.5 cm−2) filaments tend to be roughly
parallel toB PoS, whereas high-N H2 (NH2 >10 21.5 cm−2) fil-
aments tend to have flat, bimodal parallel-perpendicular, or
mostly perpendicular HROs. The bimodal trend can be ex-
plained either by the superposition of many GCC fields hav-
ing different trends or by peculiar fields with both parallel
and perpendicular trends.
–Low-N H2 filaments remain parallel at all scales. The trends
for high-NH2 filaments depend on the most significant width
of the model bar (W ⋆
b ). High-N H2, small-W ⋆
b filaments
have flat, slightly parallel, or slightly perpendicular HROs,
whereas high-NH2, large-W⋆
b filaments have flat, bimodal, or
mostly perpendicular HROs, depending on the considered
sample.
–In most samples, we find that a transition from mostly par-
allel to mostly perpendicular orientations occurs at (NH2)t ≈
1021.7 cm−2.
–Over 93% of cores from the GCC catalog are located within
the highest-N H2 filaments. For filaments with embedded
cores, we retrieved the same trends as for high-NH2 filaments,
but the trends are relatively less pronounced. The cores tend
to have their major axes mostly parallel to their parent fila-
ments, but this trend is relatively less pronounced for cores
within large-W⋆
b filaments or for protostellar cores.
–In high-⟨p⟩GCC fields, we find more pronounced trends,
where HROs show a clearer preference toward either parallel
or perpendicular geometries. Our results suggest that high
⟨p⟩values are indicative of a magnetic field closer to the PoS.
–The projection of 3D structures onto the PoS broadens the
observed HROs. Nonetheless, regardless of projection ef-
fects, trends in 2D HROs (preferentially parallel or perpen-
dicular) are, statistically, indicative of true preferences in the
3D relative orientations.
Some of the properties used in this statistical study are sub-
ject to limitations due to uncertainties in the estimated distances,
the models used, and hypotheses regarding the geometry of fil-
aments, cores, and magnetic fields. However, our results consis-
tently show that the transition in relative orientations occurs in
denser environments. We emphasize the importance of studying
the relative orientations at multiple scales, from wide filaments
down to narrow filaments and cores.
To improve our statistical analysis, we could more reliably
estimate the different parameters used in this study, include
other important physical parameters such as the magnetic field
strength and inclination angle, and apply the same method to
other observations or numerical simulations. A similar statistical
analysis, this time studying magnetic fields at higher resolution,
should provide a more complete picture of the impact of mag-
netic fields at different evolutionary stages and scales. Finally,
we could combine this method with molecular spectral data to
gain information on the LoS component. For this purpose, we
plan to apply the method developed by Ferrière et al. (2026) to
all the GCC fields. In this manner, we could better understand the
interplay between the different physical processes (such as tur-
bulence, magnetic fields, and gravity) in 3D, which would con-
tribute to a more complete theory of star formation.
Data availability
The results from our statistical analysis are
made available in electronic format on Zenodo
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20119755.
Acknowledgements.We extend our thanks to our referee for their careful reading
of our paper and for their constructive comments and suggestions. We acknowl-
edge useful discussions with Douglas J. Marshall, Yasuo Doi. This work was
supported by the Thematic Action "Physique et Chimie du Milieu Interstellaire"
(PCMI) of INSU Programme National "Astro", with contributions from CNRS
Physique & CNRS Chimie, CEA, and CNES. M.J. acknowledges the support of
the Research Council of Finland Grant No. 348342. D.A. acknowledges support
of the Faculty Development Competitive Research Grant Program of Nazarbayev
University No. 201223FD8821.Herschelis an ESA space observatory with sci-
ence instruments provided by European-led Principal Investigator consortia and
with important participation from NASA.Planck(http://www.esa.int/Planck) is
an ESA science mission with instruments and contributions directly funded by
ESA Member States, NASA, and Canada.
References
Alina, D., Montillaud, J., Hu, Y ., et al. 2022, A&A, 658, A90
Alina, D., Ristorcelli, I., Montier, L., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 485, 2825
André, P., Di Francesco, J., Ward-Thompson, D., et al. 2014, in Protostars and
Planets VI, ed. H. Beuther, R. S. Klessen, C. P. Dullemond, & T. Henning,
27–51
André, P., Men’shchikov, A., Bontemps, S., et al. 2010, A&A, 518, L102
Angarita, Y ., Versteeg, M. J. F., Haverkorn, M., et al. 2025, AJ, 170, 57
Arzoumanian, D., André, P., Könyves, V ., et al. 2019, A&A, 621, A42
Arzoumanian, D., André, P., Peretto, N., & Könyves, V . 2013, A&A, 553, A119
Audit, E. & Hennebelle, P. 2005, A&A, 433, 1
Bally, J. 2008, in Handbook of Star Forming Regions, V olume I, ed. B. Reipurth,
V ol. 4, 459
Balsara, D., Ward-Thompson, D., & Crutcher, R. M. 2001, MNRAS, 327, 715
Beckwith, S. V . W., Sargent, A. I., Chini, R. S., & Guesten, R. 1990, AJ, 99, 924
Carrière, J.-S., Ferrière, K., Ristorcelli, I., & Montier, L. 2022b, A&A, 668, A42
Article number, page 20 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
Carrière, J.-S., Montier, L., Ferrière, K., & Ristorcelli, I. 2022a, A&A, 668, A41
Chen, C.-Y ., King, P. K., & Li, Z.-Y . 2016, ApJ, 829, 84
Chen, C.-Y . & Ostriker, E. C. 2018, ApJ, 865, 34
Clark, S. E. 2018, ApJ, 857, L10
Clark, S. E., Peek, J. E. G., & Putman, M. E. 2014, ApJ, 789, 82
Cox, N. L. J., Arzoumanian, D., André, P., et al. 2016, A&A, 590, A110
Efron, B. 1979, The Annals of Statistics, 7, 1
Efron, B. & Tibshirani, R. J. 1993, An Introduction to the Bootstrap, Mono-
graphs on Statistics and Applied Probability No. 57 (Boca Raton, Florida,
USA: Chapman & Hall/CRC)
Ferrière, K., Montier, L., & Carrière, J.-S. 2026, A&A, 705, A26
Fissel, L. M., Ade, P. A. R., Angilè, F. E., et al. 2019, ApJ, 878, 110
Girichidis, P. 2021, MNRAS, 507, 5641
Goldsmith, P. F., Heyer, M., Narayanan, G., et al. 2008, ApJ, 680, 428
Gómez, G. C. & Vázquez-Semadeni, E. 2014, ApJ, 791, 124
Griffin, M. J., Abergel, A., Abreu, A., et al. 2010, A&A, 518, L3
Hacar, A., Clark, S. E., Heitsch, F., et al. 2023, in Astronomical Society of the
Pacific Conference Series, V ol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII, ed. S. Inut-
suka, Y . Aikawa, T. Muto, K. Tomida, & M. Tamura, 153
Hennebelle, P. 2013, A&A, 556, A153
Hennebelle, P. & Inutsuka, S.-i. 2019, Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sci-
ences, 6, 5
Hildebrand, R. H. 1983, QJRAS, 24, 267
Hull, C. L. H., Mocz, P., Burkhart, B., et al. 2017, ApJ, 842, L9
Ibáñez-Mejía, J. C., Mac Low, M.-M., & Klessen, R. S. 2022, ApJ, 925, 196
Inutsuka, S.-i. & Miyama, S. M. 1997, ApJ, 480, 681
Jiao, W., Wang, K., Xu, F., Wang, C., & Beuther, H. 2024, A&A, 686, A202
Jow, D. L., Hill, R., Scott, D., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 474, 1018
Juvela, M. 2016, A&A, 593, A58
Juvela, M., Malinen, J., Montillaud, J., et al. 2018, A&A, 614, A83
Juvela, M., Ristorcelli, I., Montier, L. A., et al. 2010, A&A, 518, L93
Juvela, M., Ristorcelli, I., Pagani, L., et al. 2012, A&A, 541, A12
King, P. K., Fissel, L. M., Chen, C.-Y ., & Li, Z.-Y . 2018, MNRAS, 474, 5122
Könyves, V ., André, P., Men’shchikov, A., et al. 2015, A&A, 584, A91
Kun, M., Kiss, Z. T., & Balog, Z. 2008, in Handbook of Star Forming Regions,
V olume I, ed. B. Reipurth, V ol. 4, 136
Li, H.-b., Fang, M., Henning, T., & Kainulainen, J. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 3707
Loren, R. B. 1989a, ApJ, 338, 902
Loren, R. B. 1989b, ApJ, 338, 925
Malinen, J., Montier, L., Montillaud, J., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 460, 1934
Matthews, B. C., Wilson, C. D., & Fiege, J. D. 2001, ApJ, 562, 400
Men’shchikov, A., André, P., Didelon, P., et al. 2010, A&A, 518, L103
Men’shchikov, A., André, P., Didelon, P., et al. 2012, A&A, 542, A81
Micelotta, E. R., Juvela, M., Padoan, P., et al. 2021, A&A, 647, A121
Montier, L., Plaszczynski, S., Levrier, F., et al. 2015a, A&A, 574, A135
Montier, L., Plaszczynski, S., Levrier, F., et al. 2015b, A&A, 574, A136
Montillaud, J., Juvela, M., Rivera-Ingraham, A., et al. 2015, A&A, 584, A92
Montillaud, J., Juvela, M., Vastel, C., et al. 2019a, A&A, 631, L1
Montillaud, J., Juvela, M., Vastel, C., et al. 2019b, A&A, 631, A3
Myers, P. C., Fuller, G. A., Goodman, A. A., & Benson, P. J. 1991, ApJ, 376,
561
Narayanan, G., Heyer, M. H., Brunt, C., et al. 2008, ApJS, 177, 341
Padoan, P., Goodman, A., Draine, B. T., et al. 2001, ApJ, 559, 1005
Palmeirim, P., André, P., Kirk, J., et al. 2013, A&A, 550, A38
Panopoulou, G. V ., Tassis, K., Goldsmith, P. F., & Heyer, M. H. 2014, MNRAS,
444, 2507
Pattle, K., Fissel, L., Tahani, M., Liu, T., & Ntormousi, E. 2023, in Astronomical
Society of the Pacific Conference Series, V ol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII,
ed. S. Inutsuka, Y . Aikawa, T. Muto, K. Tomida, & M. Tamura, 193
Pelgrims, V ., Mandarakas, N., Skalidis, R., et al. 2024, A&A, 684, A162
Perry, J. P., Pattle, K., Johnstone, D., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 536, 1736
Pilbratt, G. L., Riedinger, J. R., Passvogel, T., et al. 2010, A&A, 518, L1
Planck Collaboration III. 2020, A&A, 641, A3
Planck Collaboration Int. XIX. 2015, A&A, 576, A104
Planck Collaboration Int. XX. 2015, A&A, 576, A105
Planck Collaboration Int. XXXII. 2016, A&A, 586, A135
Planck Collaboration Int. XXXV. 2016, A&A, 586, A138
Planck Collaboration XI. 2020, A&A, 641, A11
Plaszczynski, S., Montier, L., Levrier, F., & Tristram, M. 2014, MNRAS, 439,
4048
Poglitsch, A., Waelkens, C., Geis, N., et al. 2010, A&A, 518, L2
Polychroni, D., Schisano, E., Elia, D., et al. 2013, ApJ, 777, L33
Saajasto, M., Juvela, M., Dobashi, K., et al. 2017, A&A, 608, A21
Saury, E., Miville-Deschênes, M. A., Hennebelle, P., Audit, E., & Schmidt, W.
2014, A&A, 567, A16
Schisano, E., Rygl, K. L. J., Molinari, S., et al. 2014, ApJ, 791, 27
Seifried, D., Walch, S., Weis, M., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 497, 4196
Soler, J. D. 2019, A&A, 629, A96
Soler, J. D., Bracco, A., & Pon, A. 2018, A&A, 609, L3
Soler, J. D. & Hennebelle, P. 2017, A&A, 607, A2
Soler, J.-D., Hennebelle, P., Martin, P. G., et al. 2013, ApJ, 774, 128
Sugitani, K., Nakamura, F., Watanabe, M., et al. 2011, ApJ, 734, 63
Ward-Thompson, D., Karoly, J., Pattle, K., et al. 2023, ApJ, 946, 62
Whittet, D. C. B., Hough, J. H., Lazarian, A., & Hoang, T. 2008, ApJ, 674, 304
Article number, page 21 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
Appendix A: Preferred alignment ratios
Appendix B: ID cards for G219, G159, G271, and
G92
In Section 5.1.1, we showed a summary of the main results
obtained when applyingFilDReaMSto the H 2 column density
maps of three GCC fields. The main results are presented in the
form of ID cards for each GCC field. In this appendix, we show
the ID cards for the GCC fields presented in Sect. 5.1.1 and in
Fig. 4, and the ID card for G92, discussed in Sect. 5.1.2. Fig. B.1
corresponds to the ID card for G219 (left column of Fig. 4),
Fig. B.2 corresponds to the ID card for G159 (middle column
of Fig. 4), Fig. B.3 corresponds to the ID card for G271 (right
column of Fig. 4), and Fig. B.4 corresponds to the ID card for
G92. ID cards for the 116HerschelGCC fields can be found on
Zenodo.
Appendix C: Additional figures for the physical
properties
We provide extra figures to illustrate the distributions of the
physical properties described in Sect. 4.
Appendix D: Additional HROs
We provide extra figures to illustrate the results presented in
Sect. 5.2.
Article number, page 22 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
Table A.1.Values of the ratiosr ∥,r int, andr ⊥ (Eq. (5)), andr ∥,r int, andr ⊥ (Eq. (6)), together with their uncertainties (derived as explained in
Sect. 3.3), for the samples presented in Sects. 5.2 and 5.3.
r∥ [%]r int [%]r ⊥ [%] r∥ [%]r int [%]r ⊥ [%]
Figure 5
all filaments 42.2±0.1130.8±0.1127±0.10 41.9±0.0731.7±0.0826.4±0.07
NH2 ≤10 21.5 cm−2 (NH2 ≤) 44.2±0.1130.8±0.1025±0.09 43.9±0.0931.9±0.0924.±0.08
NH2 >10 21.5 cm−2 (NH2 >) 35.3±0.0631±0.0633.7±0.06 35.6±0.1531.3±0.1633.1±0.15
W ⋆
b ≤0.2 pc (W ⋆
b ≤) 42.1±0.0732±0.0625.9±0.06 42.2±0.1432.6±0.1525.2±0.13
0.2 pc<W ⋆
b ≤0.5 pc (<W ⋆
b ≤) 42.3±0.0731.6±0.0726.1±0.06 42.4±0.1332.0±0.1425.6±0.12
W ⋆
b >0.5 pc (W ⋆
b >) 42.1±0.0829.4±0.0828.5±0.07 41.3±0.1131.0±0.1227.7±0.10
NH2 ≤,W ⋆
b ≤ 43.4±0.0631.6±0.0625.0±0.05 43.3±0.1532.4±0.1624.3±0.14
NH2 ≤,<W ⋆
b ≤ 43.6±0.0631±0.0625.4±0.05 43.6±0.1531.7±0.1624.7±0.14
NH2 ≤,W ⋆
b > 45.5±0.0729.8±0.0624.7±0.06 44.6±0.1431.6±0.1523.8±0.12
NH2 >,W ⋆
b ≤33±0.0234.6±0.0232.4±0.02 34.3±0.4134.0±0.4531.7±0.40
NH2 >,<W ⋆
b ≤ 37.6±0.0333.4±0.0329±0.03 38.0±0.2833.3±0.3028.7±0.26
NH2 >,W ⋆
b >34.5±0.0428.7±0.0436.8±0.04 34.6±0.1929.5±0.2135.9±0.19
Figure 7
NH2 ≤,⟨p⟩ ≤5 % 40.5±0.1433.7±0.1325.8±0.12 40.5±0.1334.1±0.1425.4±0.12
NH2 ≤,⟨p⟩>5 % 47.4±0.1828.4±0.1624.2±0.16 46.5±0.1130.1±0.1223.4±0.10
NH2 >,W ⋆
b >,⟨p⟩ ≤5 % 33.9±0.0830±0.0736.1±0.08 34.1±0.2129.9±0.2336.0±0.21
NH2 >,W ⋆
b >,⟨p⟩>5 % 39.1±0.0319.8±0.03 41.1±0.04 37.8±0.4527.3±0.5034.9±0.48
Figure 8
all filaments 41.6±0.4630±0.4328.4±0.42 40.2±0.2731.4±0.2828.4±0.25
NH2 ≤ 44.5±0.4329.7±0.4025.8±0.38 42.6±0.2931.2±0.3026.2±0.26
NH2 >21.7±0.1431.8±0.15 46.5±0.16 23.6±0.6632.6±0.80 43.8±0.78
NH2 >,W ⋆
b ≤0.5 pc 18.1±0.0732.4±0.09 49.5±0.09 19.5±1.2333.6±1.48 46.9±1.38
NH2 >,W ⋆
b >0.5 pc 23±0.1231.5±0.13 45.5±0.14 25.2±0.7732.2±0.94 42.6±0.91
Figure 9
all filaments w/cores 31.5±1.9829.3±1.92 39.2±2.05 32.0±1.0831.0±1.24 37.0±1.18
nH,c ≤10 3.5 cm−3 33.3±1.8330.1±1.7536.6±1.88 34.0±1.1831.9±1.3434.1±1.26
nH,c >10 3.5 cm−3 14.1±0.4925±0.61 60.9±0.70 15.0±2.2926.4±3.31 58.6±3.35
Figure 10
starless (0) 37.3±1.4332.6±1.4130.1±1.37 37.7±0.8333.0±0.9129.3±0.81
protostellar (0) 27.7±2.3132.6±2.35 39.7±2.55 28.8±1.4431.6±1.65 39.6±1.55
protostellar (1) 38.6±5.4730.1±5.1631.3±5.23 39.5±3.1032.9±3.3427.6±2.90
Figure 11
W ⋆
b ≤ 64.2±0.4120.5±0.3415.3±0.31 63.2±0.8422.7±0.8414.1±0.63
<W ⋆
b ≤ 55.8±0.4827.4±0.4316.8±0.36 56.8±0.8127.5±0.8315.7±0.64
W ⋆
b > 47.7±0.5529.7±0.4922.6±0.45 48.2±0.7529.6±0.7822.2±0.65
Figure 12
all filaments 36.0±0.7633.3±0.7730.7±0.74 35.9±0.4632.9±0.5131.2±0.45
NH2 ≤ 37.3±0.4733.6±0.4629.1±0.44 37.2±0.6133.0±0.6629.8±0.59
NH2 >34.2±0.6132.9±0.6132.9±0.59 33.8±0.7132.9±0.7833.3±0.71
Article number, page 23 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
Fig. B.1.ID card for theHerschelG219 field.First row: left -Herschel N H2 map withB PoS visualized using vectors with lengths proportional
to the polarization fraction;right -Herschel N H2 map with the FWHM ellipses of bound (blue) and unbound (cyan) cores from the GCC catalog.
Second row:absolute value of the relative orientations betweenB PoS and the smallest filaments(left), the most significant filaments(middle), or
the largest filaments(right)respectively.Third row:Two-dimensional histograms as a function ofN H2, of the relative orientations betweenB PoS
and the smallest filaments(left), the most significant filaments(middle), or the largest filaments(right)respectively.Last row: left -Histogram
ofN H2 of all pixels (black) and pixels belonging to filaments (red);middle -Same as Fig. 5a for filaments in G219;right -Same as the bottom
panel of Fig. 6 for filaments in G219.
Article number, page 24 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
Fig. B.2.ID card for G159.
Article number, page 25 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
Fig. B.3.ID card for G271.
Article number, page 26 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
Fig. B.4.ID card for G92.
Article number, page 27 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
Fig. C.1.Histograms of distance estimates of the GCC fields. The
dashed vertical line represents the threshold at 500 pc (see Sect. 4.1).
Fig. C.2.Histogram of absolute latitudes of the GCC fields. The dashed
vertical lines represent the thresholds at 5 ◦ and 10 ◦ respectively (see
Sect. 4.1).
Fig. C.3.Histogram of⟨N H2 ⟩of the GCC fields. The dashed vertical
lines represent the thresholds at 10 21, 1.5×10 21, 2×10 21 and 2.5×
1021 cm−2 respectively (see Sect. 4.1).
Fig. C.4.Histogram of⟨p⟩of the GCC fields. The dashed vertical line
represents the threshold at 5% (see Sect. 4.1).
Fig. C.5.Histogram ofθ B in the GCC fields. The dashed vertical lines
represent the thresholds at 30◦ and 60◦ respectively (see Sect. 4.1).
Fig. C.6.Histograms ofN H2 of filaments from all the GCC fields
(black), filaments from GCC fields with⟨NH2 ⟩ ≤1.5×10 21 cm−2 (blue)
and filaments from GCC fields with⟨NH2 ⟩>1.5×10 21 cm−2 (red). The
dashed vertical line represents the threshold at 1021.5 cm−2
Article number, page 28 of 30

J. Oers et al.: Statistical analysis of the relative orientations between filaments and magnetic fields.
Fig. C.7.Normalized histograms ofN H2 of all filaments (red) from the
GCC fields and filaments hosting cores (black) from the GCC catalog.
Fig. C.8.Histograms of core mass for all fields (black),d≤500 pc
fields (blue) andd>500 pc fields (red). The dashed vertical lines rep-
resent the thresholds at 0.5M ⊙ and 5M ⊙ (see Sect. 4.3).
Fig. C.9.Histogram ofn H of all cores from the GCC catalog. The
dashed vertical line represents the threshold at 103.5 cm−3 (see Sect. 4.3).
Fig. D.1.Values ofr ∥ andr ⊥ (defined in Eq. (6)) in 18N H2 bins, for
GCC fields withd≤500 pc.
Fig. D.2.Values ofr ∥ andr ⊥ (defined in Eq. (6)) in 18N H2 bins, for
GCC fields withd>500 pc.
Fig. D.3.Same HROs as Fig. 5a for GCC fields with |b| >10 ◦. The
uncertainties are shown in gray shaded areas.
Article number, page 29 of 30

A&A proofs:manuscript no. aa56702-25corr
Fig. D.4.Values ofr ∥ andr ⊥ (defined in Eq. (6)) in 18N H2 bins, for
GCC fields with⟨N H2 ⟩ ≤10 21 cm−2.
Fig. D.5.Values ofr ∥ andr ⊥ (defined in Eq. (6)) in 18N H2 bins, for
GCC fields with⟨N H2 ⟩>1.5×10 21 cm−2.
Fig. D.6.Values ofr ∥ andr ⊥ (defined in Eq. (6)) in 18N H2 bins, for
GCC fields with⟨N H2 ⟩>2.5×10 21 cm−2.
Article number, page 30 of 30