Title: Posterior sampling in the Age of Emulators
Authors: Andreas Nygaard, Luca Janken, Steen Hannestad, Thomas Tram
Published: 2026-06-03
Categories: astro-ph.IM, astro-ph.CO

Prepared for submission to JCAP
Posterior sampling in the Age of
Emulators
Andreas Nygaard, a Luca Janken, a Steen Hannestad, a and Thomas
Trama
aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Aarhus University, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark
E-mail: andreas@phys.au.dk, andreas.hansen@uzh.ch, luca.janken@post.au.dk,
steen@phys.au.dk, thomas.tram@phys.au.dk
Abstract.We investigate posterior sampling strategies for cosmological parameter infer-
ence using fully differentiable neural-network likelihood emulators, which provide both rapid
likelihood evaluations and automatic differentiation.
We compare Metropolis–Hastings (MH), the Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin Algorithm
(MALA), Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC), the No U-Turn Sampler (NUTS), and Affine In-
variant Ensemble Sampling (AIES) using likelihood emulators constructed with the CLiENT
framework. The methods are tested on emulators of both theΛCDM model and a sterile-
neutrino extension.
While NUTS generally converges in the fewest samples, its higher computational cost
reduces this advantage when performance is measured by wall time. As a result, MALA and
even standard MH remain highly competitive. We further find that whitening and covariance
adaptation substantially improve sampling efficiency.
The TensorFlow implementations developed for this work are released as the BEST
(Batched Emulator Sampling with TensorFlow) package, providing a general framework for
sampling arbitrary TensorFlow likelihood functions. The package is available through PyPI
asbest-inferenceand on GitHub/github.
arXiv:2606.04895v1  [astro-ph.IM]  3 Jun 2026

Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Sampling methods 2
2.1 Gradient-based sampling 2
2.2 Mass matrix or canonical transformation 3
2.3 Ensemble sampling 5
3 Sampler implementation 7
3.1 Unified sampling interface 7
3.2 Covariance adaptation and parameter space whitening 8
3.3 Computational implementation and performance 8
4 Comparison of sampling methods 9
4.1 Convergence metrics 10
4.2ΛCDM results 12
4.3 Sterile neutrino results 14
5 Conclusion 17
1 Introduction
Bayesian parameter inference is a cornerstone of modern cosmology, but its computational
cost is often dominated by repeated evaluations of theoretical prediction codes. Since these
calculations are typically expensive and rarely provide reliable derivatives of the likelihood,
cosmological analyses have historically relied on gradient-free sampling methods such as
Metropolis–Hastings [1, 2] (MH). Over time, this practical limitation has shaped both soft-
ware and methodology, making random-walk-based Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods the
standard approach for cosmological inference.
The situation is now beginning to change. A growing number of efforts aim to make
cosmological inference pipelines differentiable, thereby enabling the use of gradient-based
sampling algorithms. Recent examples include differentiable Boltzmann solvers such as
ABCMB [3] and broader efforts to construct differentiable inference pipelines. At the same
time, emulators have become increasingly common in cosmology, primarily as a means of
accelerating expensive theoretical calculations. Most existing emulators target intermediate
observables rather than the final likelihood [4–7]. While highly successful, such approaches
aregenerallylimitedbyspeedoftherelevantlikelihoodcodes, andtheavailabilityofgradients
hinges on the likelihoods being implemented in a compatible framework.
An alternative strategy is to emulate the likelihood directly. This approach has recently
been demonstrated with the CLiENT framework [8], which replaces the entire parameter-
to-likelihood pipeline with a neural-network surrogate. In addition to providing likelihood
evaluations that are orders of magnitude faster than the original pipeline, such emulators
are naturally differentiable and can be evaluated efficiently in large batches. Related ideas
have also been explored with Gaussian-process likelihood emulators, for example in GPry [9],
– 1 –

although such approaches become increasingly challenging to scale as the dimensionality of
the parameter space grows.
The emergence of differentiable likelihood emulators raises a natural question: how
much do gradients actually help for posterior sampling? For many years, the lack of gradients
has encouraged the view that gradient-based samplers would dramatically outperform tradi-
tional methods if only derivatives were available. Indeed, algorithms such as the Metropolis-
Adjusted Langevin Algorithm [10] (MALA), Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [11] (HMC), and the
No U-Turn Sampler [12] (NUTS) are known to generate samples with substantially lower au-
tocorrelation than conventional random-walk samplers. However, they also require additional
computations per sample. When likelihood evaluations themselves become extremely inex-
pensive, the balance between sample quality and sample throughput may be quite different
from the regime in which these algorithms were originally developed and analysed.
In this paper, we investigate posterior sampling in this new emulator-driven setting.
Using fully differentiable neural-network likelihood emulators constructed with the CLiENT
framework, we compare MH, MALA, HMC, NUTS, and Affine Invariant Ensemble Sam-
pling [13] (AIES) on bothΛCDM and sterile-neutrino likelihoods. Rather than focusing
solely on the number of likelihood evaluations or effective sample sizes, we assess perfor-
mance using the practical quantity of greatest interest to end users: the wall-clock time
required to obtain converged posterior constraints.
The paper is organised as follows. In section 2 we review the sampling methods consid-
ered in this work, and in section 3 we discuss their implementation. Section 4 describes the
numerical implementation, convergence diagnostics, and performance metrics, and presents
the comparison of the different samplers. Finally, we summarise our findings in section 5.
2 Sampling methods
We employ several different MCMC methods in order to test their capabilities and how well
they can exploit the computational benefits of a neural network emulator. Both the auto-
differentiation and vectorisation of the emulator enable more efficient methods compared to
those used in standard cosmological parameter inference.
2.1 Gradient-based sampling
While traditional MCMC methods have optimal acceptance rates between 0.2 and 0.4 [14],
the acceptance rate of gradient-based MCMC methods are typically above 0.65, with some
variants even having an acceptance rate close to 1 [15]. The most widely used class of
gradient-based samplers are Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) samplers which explores the
parameter space using Hamiltonian dynamsinics. This is achieved by treating the likelihood
landscape as an energy landscape and sampling points along the trajectories of particles
moving according to the equations of motion defined by the Hamiltonian of the system:
H(x,p) =U(x) + 1
2 p⊤M−1p,(2.1)
where the first term,U(x) =−log (π(x)), is the potential energy (the energy landscape)
related to the probability density,π(x), while the second term is the kinetic energy of the
particles with a symmetric and positive definite mass matrix,M. Each step proposes a
long trajectory based on the gradients and the momentum variables sampled from the mass
matrix, which makes the sampling very efficient since it explores regions of high probability in
– 2 –

an almost deterministic way. The only stochasticity in the sampling comes from resampling
of the momentum variables and numerical errors in the leap-frog integrator.
There are numerous variants of HMC and one that is often used is the No U-Turn
Sampler (NUTS), which automatically controls the number of leap-frog steps. It does so, as
the name implies, by making sure the trajectories do not perform a u-turn. A binary tree
is built for both forward and backwards moving trajectories and the leap-frog integrator is
halted as soon as the u-turn criterion is fulfilled, i.e., the momentum of either the forward or
backwards moving particle begins to point to the other particle. The next MCMC point is
then sampled uniformly from all valid points (preserving detailed balance) in the trajectory
in the binary tree, and the process repeats from that new point.
Besides variants of HMC, there are various other types of gradient-based MCMC meth-
ods to choose from. A different approach is the Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin Algorithm
(MALA) utilising Langevin dynamics for sampling. The proposal can be derived from the
Langevin equation,
md2x
dt2 =−λdx
dt−∇U(x) +η(t),(2.2)
where thexis the position of a particle with massm,λis the damping coefficient,U(x)is the
potential, andη(t)is a Gaussian white-noise process. MALA corresponds to the overdamped
limit,m→0, where inertia disappears and we are left with Brownian motion and drift
due to the gradients. The potential is the same as for HMC,U(x) =−log (π(x)), and the
noise term can be rescaled to a multivariate normal distribution. Discretising this differential
equation thus yields the proposal
xn+1 =x n +ϵ∇log (π(xn)) +
√
2ϵξn,(2.3)
whereξn∼N(0,1), andϵis the step size. This proposal corresponds to a normal distribution
with meanµ=x n +ϵ∇log (π(xn))and covarianceΣ = 2ϵ1, thus shifting the proposal
distribution in the direction of the gradients compared to the standard Metropolis–Hastings
proposal.
2.2 Mass matrix or canonical transformation
Gradient-basedMCMCmethodsthatarevariantsofHMCtypicallyallrequireamassmatrix,
M, as shown in equation (2.1) in order to work efficiently. In the TensorFlow implementation
of HMC1, however, there is no option for providing a mass matrix to the sampler. This means
that the mass matrix of the system is essentially the identity, and the momentum components
along each parameter direction are thus similar in magnitude since the momentum is drawn
fromN(0,M). This is not ideal when parameters have different scales due to the step size
being dominated by the parameters with the smallest scales, leading to very suboptimal
sampling in parameters of larger scales. In order to accommodate this, we can transform the
parameters to a whitened parameter space using the Cholesky decomposition of the posterior
covariance matrix,Σ[16]:
Σ =LL ⊤,(2.4)
x=µ+Lz,(2.5)
whereLis the lower triangular matrix obtained from the Cholesky decomposition,µis
the posterior mean, which we want to subtract from the position coordinate to center the
1Defined in the TensorFlow-Probability package.
– 3 –

distribution around the origin, andzis the transformed position vector in the whitened
parameter space. In order to ensure the properties of the Hamiltonian system, we want
the transformation to be canonical [17]. This requires preserving the canonical symplectic
2-form,ω= dx⋀ dp, with the corresponding transformation of the momentum space:
p=
(
L⊤
)−1
q,(2.6)
whereqis the transformed momentum vector. These transformations ensure the preservation
of the phase-space volume [18, 19], and since the mass matrix is roughly the inverse of the
posterior covariance, i.e.,M= Σ −1[20], the transformations also result in the mass matrix
in the whitened space being exactly the identity:
p⊤M−1p=q ⊤L−1Σ
(
L⊤
)−1
q=q ⊤L−1LL⊤
(
L⊤
)−1
q=q ⊤1q.(2.7)
The Hamiltonian in the whitened space is then
˜H(z,q) = ˜U(z) + 1
2 q⊤1q,(2.8)
with ˜U(z) =U(µ+Lz)being the potential energy in the whitened space.
We now need to modify the probability function used in the sampling as well. The
probability mass is invariant under reparameterisation, which means that
∫
A
πx(x)dx=
∫
T −1(A)
πz(z)dz,(2.9)
whereT:R n→Rn is the affine transformation defined byT(z) =µ+Lz,π x(x)is the
probability density in the correlated parameter space, andπz(z)is the same for the whitened
parameter space. We can transform the RHS of equation (2.9) to the whitened space using
the determinant of the Jacobian of the transformation [21], i.e.,|det(JT )|=|det(L)|,
∫
A
πx(x)dx=
∫
T −1(A)
πx (T(z))|det(L)|dx.(2.10)
Comparing the RHSs of equations (2.9) and (2.10), shows that the probability density,πz,
in the whitened space is related to the probability density,πx, in the correlated space as
πz(z) =πx (T(z))|det(L)|.(2.11)
The logarithm of the probability density (which is what we actually want to sample from) is
then
log (πz(z)) = log (πx (T(z))) + log (|det(L)|),(2.12)
where the last term is just a constant defined by the transformation. Omitting the constant
does not change the sampling procedure, but we would then need to account for it when
transforming back to the correlated parameter space. By including it in the function we
are sampling from, we ensure that the resulting distribution transforms neatly back to the
correlated space using only the transformationT. Sampling in a whitened parameter space
can be beneficial in other types of sampling besides HMC variants as well, simply because
very pronounced covariances in high dimensionality are difficult to sample, and we will use
this strategy for all our samplings2. The procedure for sampling in the whitened space is
summed up in Algorithm 1.
2We will not use whitening for the Affine Invariant Ensemble Sampler, since whitening is an affine trans-
formation.
– 4 –

Σ =posterior covariance matrix
µ=posterior mean vector
log_prob=logarithm of probability density function
L=CholeskyDecomposition(Σ)
deflog_prob_whitened(z):
x=µ+MatrixMultiplication(L,z)
log_det=sum(log(Diagonal(L)))
returnlog_prob(x)+log_det
chain=Do_HMC(π=log_prob_whitened,
start_position=[0,0,...,0])
chain=µ+MatrixMultiplication(L,chain)
transformed probability
density
sampling with HMC
transform back
Algorithm 1:Pseudo-code sampling in whitened space. The probability density function
is transformed using equation(2.12), and the resulting probability density function in the
whitened space is used for the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo sampling.
2.3 Ensemble sampling
Another great attribute of neural networks is the very efficient parallelisation through vec-
torised calls to the networks. As shown in Figure 1, evaluating the emulator for up to 100
points simultaneously does not affect the evaluation time significantly. We can thus utilise
ensemble sampling methods very efficiently.
There are various sampling methods that can exploit the favourable scaling of vectorised
calls to the neural network. Simply using vectorisation to run multiple independent chains in
parallel without much extra cost is certainly a possibility, but for standard MCMC methods,
such as Metropolis-Hastings, having a large number of chains is not usually beneficial due to
the high autocorrelation of the chains, i.e., a larger number of chains do not necessarily lead
to faster convergence. For HMC, one can absolutely use multiple chains as well, even though
it and its variants are already quite efficient with only a single chain. Running multiple chains
is rarely needed, but vectorisation allows for many simultaneous chains at essentially no extra
cost, which makes the sampling much faster. The MALA implementation in TensorFlow is,
likewise, very optimised for multiple chains. For this method, running a large number of
chains (50-100) results in much faster convergence of the posterior distribution, so the chains
do not need to be as long as those of some of the other methods.
Even though they can utilise vectorised calls to the emulator, these methods are not
ensemble methods. The individual walkers or particles simulated in ensemble methods are
generally not independent since they exchange information in order to update their posi-
tion. A widely used class of ensemble sampling methods are the Affine Invariant Ensemble
Samplers (AIES), which rely on a large number of walkers exploring the parameter space
– 5 –

10 20 30 40 50 102 103 104 105
Batch size
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
Time [s]
CPU (95% CI)
GPU (95% CI)
Figure 1:Mean evaluation time of the neural network emulator as a function of batch
size on both CPU (14-core Apple M4 Pro) and GPU (NVIDIA Tesla V100). On the CPU,
evaluation time increases only slightly for batch sizes of up to 100, which allows for parallel
calls with almost no extra costs for low batch sizes. On the GPU, however, the evaluation
time remains constant for batch sizes as high as104, thus making vectorised parallelisation
much more efficient. The vertical dashed line marks the transition from a linear axis to a
logarithmic axis on the plot.
simultaneously and exchanging information. As the name implies, the sampling process of
these methods is invariant to affine transformation such as a Cholesky transformation to
whitened space. This means that they perform well without being given any prior informa-
tion about the correlations and length scales of the parameters. The standard AIES method
exchanges information between pairs of walkers and update their position with a so-called
stretch move[13]:
xi
n+1 =x j
n +z(x i
n−xj
n),(2.13)
whereiandjrefer to a pair of walkers andzis drawn from a distribution with density
g(z)∝



1√z ifx∈
[1
a,a
]
,
0 otherwise.
(2.14)
The parametera>1is a hyperparameter that is usually set toa= 2[22]. In practice, this
means drawing a numberufrom a uniform distribution between 0 and 1, and transforming
it by equating it with the cumulative distribution function ofg(z). The correctly distributed
value ofzis thus
z= 1
a (u(a−1) + 1)2 .(2.15)
Other variants of AIES differ in theirmoves, i.e., how the positions of the walkers
are updated. Different moves can be well suited for different scenarios depending on the
dimensionality and geometry of the probability surface. The Differential Evolution (DE)
– 6 –

move draws inspiration from genetic algorithms and uses information from two walkers to
update the position of a third walker. This move takes the form
xi
n+1 =x i
n +γ(xj
n−xk
n),(2.16)
wherei,j, andkrefer to the three walkers used for the move andγ= (1 +η)2.38/√2ndim.
η∼ N(0,σγ)is normally distributed withσ γas the standard deviation controlling the
randomness of the move.
3 Sampler implementation
To complement the TensorFlow-based emulator framework, we provide a unified sampling
library, BEST (BatchedEmulatorSampling withTensorFlow), which implements a set
of scalable MCMC methods designed for GPU execution and emulator-based likelihoods.
The package is built to interface directly with any differentiable TensorFlow likelihood
function and is distributed as a standalone Python package installable viapip install
best-inferenceand also available on GitHub3. While originally developed in conjunction
with the CLiENT framework, BEST is fully agnostic to emulator architecture and can be
used with any TensorFlow-compatible log-likelihood.
3.1 Unified sampling interface
All samplers are exposed through a single high-level interface implemented in theSampler
class, which manages initialisation of walkers, boundary handling, and covariance adaptation.
The sampler is initialised as
sampler = best.Sampler(log_prob_fn, bounds=(lower, upper))
wherelog_prob_fndefines the target log-probability andboundsoptionally specify a hyper-
rectangular support of the parameter space. When bounds are provided, the likelihood is
automatically extended with a smooth exponential penalty outside the domain, ensuring
that walkers are discouraged from leaving the physically relevant region while preserving
differentiability.
Sampling is performed through a unified call,
results = sampler.sample(method="hmc", n_steps=..., n_chains=...)
wheremethodselects between MH, AIES, HMC, NUTS, and MALA. The interface further
supports flexible burn-in schedules, multiple initialisation strategies of the walker positions
(uniform, repeated, or Gaussian), and optional covariance matrix updates during burn-in.
The returned object contains both samples and diagnostics:
results.samples
results.acceptance_rate
results.evaluations
with optional fields for burn-in trajectories and covariance estimates when adaptive phases
are enabled.
3Available at:https://github.com/AndreasNygaard/best-inference.git
– 7 –

CPU + GE CPU + JIT GPU + GE GPU + JIT
MH608 (153) 1,287 (207) 864 (973) 8,688 (2,932)
MALA131 (29) 344 (84) 277 (286) 3,534 (1,028)
HMC76 (7) 167 (22) 123 (129) 1,856 (294)
NUTS8 (0.8) 36 (3.7) 13 (9) 153 (46)
AIES836 (168) 1,030 (188) 806 (947) 8,238 (2,901)
Table 1:Sampling speeds (steps per second) across different hardware and execution modes.
CPU corresponds to a 14-core Apple M4 Pro, and GPU corresponds to an NVIDIA Tesla
V100. GE denotes standard TensorFlow graph execution, while JIT refers to XLA-compiled
execution. Values are reported for 20 (1,000) chains.
3.2 Covariance adaptation and parameter space whitening
For MH, HMC, NUTS, and MALA, BEST performs automatic covariance estimation during
burn-in. After each burn-in iteration, an empirical covariance matrix is computed from the
ensemble of walkers and used to construct a whitening transformation (as in Algorithm 1) of
the parameter space. This improves isotropy of the target distribution and reduces autocor-
relation times in highly anisotropic posteriors.
To ensure numerical stability, the covariance estimate is regularised via Cholesky fac-
torisation, enforcing positive definiteness before reuse. The affine-invariant ensemble sampler
is excluded from this procedure due to its invariance under affine transformations.
Initial walker configurations can be drawn from either uniform distributions over the
parameter bounds, replicated initial states, or Gaussian perturbations around a central point.
The Gaussian initialisation is implemented using a hypersphere-based sampler, ensuring con-
sistent scaling across dimensions.
3.3 Computational implementation and performance
The sampling kernels are implemented in TensorFlow and TensorFlow-Probability, with mod-
ifications enabling full compatibility with graph execution and XLA just-in-time (JIT) compi-
lation. While TensorFlow-Probability provides native implementations of MH, HMC, NUTS,
and MALA, their default Python control flow and loop structure prevents efficient compila-
tion. To remedy this, we wrap these kernels in a custom JIT-compatible driver that enables
execution entirely within the TensorFlow computation graph.
Although publicly available implementations of AIES TensorFlow do exist [5], these are
most often not optimised for graph execution like the ones implemented in the TensorFlow-
Probability package. We therefore provide a custom implementation of AIES, based on the
stretch-move update rule, designed specifically for vectorised GPU execution. This imple-
mentation achieves approximately10 4 steps per second (for all walkers combined) on an
NVIDIA Tesla V100 under JIT compilation.
The custom driver allows for very fast sampling with all of the methods with speeds
ranging from∼102 steps per second for NUTS to∼104 steps per second for AIES and MH.
NUTS is the most advanced algorithm and it also utilises a large binary tree of leap-frog
steps (requiring gradient computations), so this of course samples slower than gradient-free
algorithms.
– 8 –

103 104
Samples per chain
0.03
0.04
0.1
1
Sliced Wasserstein distance
Burn-in
AIES
MH
HMC
NUTS
MALA
1000 chains
500 chains
100 chains
20 chains
Noise level
Figure 2:Sliced Wasserstein distance as a function of samples per chain for each MCMC
method and different numbers of chains when sampling with theΛCDM emulator. The grey
region represents burn-in consisting of three iterations, except for AIES which uses a single
extended burn-in phase.
The speeds of the different samplers are reported in Table 1 for different hardware
and compilation settings. Using the GPU with standard TensorFlow graph execution but
without JIT compilation yields similar speeds for 20 chains and 1,000 chains, as suggested
by Figure 1. However, enabling JIT compilation introduces a clearer dependence on batch
size, resulting in lower throughput for a smaller number of chains. This is likely because
XLA generates fused kernels that more efficiently utilise the GPU compute resources even
for smaller workloads, whereas standard graph execution relies more heavily on large batch
dimensions to achieve high GPU occupancy. As a result, JIT compilation improves overall
sampling performance on the GPU, while also making the scaling behaviour with respect
to the number of chains more apparent. This demonstrates that large-scale vectorisation
on GPUs provides a practical speedup in terms of effective sampling efficiency, even when
wall-clock scaling saturates.
4 Comparison of sampling methods
For this paper, we will compare the performances of five different MCMC sampling methods:
•Metropolis-Hastings (MH)
•Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA)
•Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC)
•No U-Turn Sampler (NUTS)
•Affine Invariant Ensemble Sampling (AIES)
– 9 –

Each method is tested on both theΛCDM model as well as a sterile neutrino extension with
two additional parameters,Neff,s andm s. A likelihood emulator for both models was created
using the CLiENT framework [8] and the following data sets:
•Planck 2018 high-ℓTTTEEE, low-ℓTT+EE, and lensing [23, 24].
•Baryon Acoustic Oscillations (BAO) measurements from BOSS DR12 [25], the main
galaxy sample of BOSS DR7 [26] and 6dFGS [27].
This results in a 27-dimensional parameter space (including nuisance parameters) for the
ΛCDM model and a 29-dimensional space for the sterile neutrino extension model.
As mentioned in section 2.2, some of the MCMC methods require a decent covariance
matrix for more optimal sampling, so all samplings are initialised with a burn-in loop where
the covariance matrix and the best-fit point are iteratively updated based on short chains.
The initial covariance matrix is diagonal with scales proportional to the dimensions of the
bounding box of the emulator. AIES does not need a covariance matrix, although one can be
used to initialise the walkers more optimally. However, to not impose additional information,
we instead initialise the walkers uniformly in the bounding box. We also do not use a burn-in
loop for AIES, but rather a single burn-in run of significant length, where the last positions
of the walkers are used as initial positions in the final run. This effectively corresponds to a
higher number of steps where the first part is discarded.
4.1 Convergence metrics
To test the convergence of the MCMC methods, we use three different metrics; the Gelman-
Rubin type convergence statistic [28], the credible metric introduced in Ref. [8], and the sliced
Wasserstein distance [29].
The Gelman-Rubin convergence statistic,R, measures the discrepancy between
the variance of chain means and the typical within-chain variance. When all chains are
perfectly mixed, this statistic should approach 1 from above, and usingR−1instead yields
a metric that tends toward zero when the chains reach a fully mixed steady-state. In the
multivariate case, the metric can be computed from the covariance,B, of the chain means,
and the mean,W, of chain covariances. Inspired by the implementation in Cobaya [30],
we can eliminate scale dependence, by scaling these matrices using the diagonalB, i.e.,
di =√Bii:
D= diag(d),
˜B=D −1BD−1,(4.1)
˜W=D −1WD−1.
The metric is then the maximum absolute eigenvalue of the matrix˜W−1˜B:
R−1 = max
i
|λi|,forλi∈eig
(
˜W−1˜B
)
.(4.2)
This metric is close to the multivariate potential scale reduction factor (MPSRF) introduced
in Ref. [31], except for the diagonal normalisation. This metric, however, only measures how
well the MCMC sampling has converged to a steady state. It does not measure how similar
the resulting posterior is to the “ground truth”. For this, we need the other metrics.
– 10 –

The credible metricfor thei th parameterθi and credible levelαis defined as
∆ CMα
i =
|θα+
i −θα+
i,0|+|θα−
i −θα−
i,0|
θα+
i,0 −θα−
i,0
,(4.3)
where+(−) refers to upper (lower) credible limits and the subscript 0 refers to the true
credible levels. The metric we will be using is the maximum value of the credible metric
across all parameters, i.e.∆ CMα = maxi(∆ CMα
i )forα={68%,95%}. The credible metric
thus measures how similar the obtained credible limits are to the true limits, but it has a few
drawbacks. One of them is that the metric is scale dependent, but this can be alleviated by
whitening the chains prior to the computation (the true limits should of course be whitened
using the same covariance). Another problem is that the denominator of the metric, i.e., the
width of the credible interval, is dependent on the credible levelα. If the relative error is the
same for two credible levels, a 95% level will thus result in a smaller value of the metric than
one would obtain with a 68% level. This cannot as easily be circumvented so we effectively
treat different credible levels as separate metrics. The credible metric is also only sensitive
to information from the marginalised 1D posteriors, so possible differences in correlations
would not be probed by this.
The Wasserstein distance, also known as the optimal transport distance, measures
the minimum cost required to transport probability mass from one distribution in order to
transform it into another. As such, it captures the full multidimensional geometry and corre-
lations of the posterior distribution. The exact computation of the d-dimensional Wasserstein
distance involves constructing a pairwise cost matrix and solving an optimal transport prob-
lem, typically formulated as a linear program. While constructing the cost matrix scales as
O(dnm), wherenandmare the number of samples in the two distributions being compared,
solving the transport problem itself scales substantially worse and quickly becomes compu-
tationally infeasible for more than a few thousand samples due to both runtime and memory
requirements. Because of this limitation, we instead employ thesliced Wasserstein distance,
which averages 1-dimensional Wasserstein distances over many random projections through
parameter space. The 1-dimensional Wasserstein distance is significantly cheaper to compute
since, for empirical distributions, it reduces to sorting the projected samples and computing
their mean absolute difference, avoiding the need for linear programming entirely. Although
approximate, the sliced Wasserstein distance still captures multidimensional structure and
correlations provided that a sufficiently large number of projections is used. The same set
of 500 projection directions is reused for all computations to ensure that equivalent features
and correlations of the posterior are probed consistently across all samplers.
The latter two metrics require a comparison with a “ground truth” which in our case
will be a very long Metropolis-Hastings sampling of 200,000 steps and 100 walkers, where we
only keep the last 100,000 points for the comparisons. We use the emulator to obtain this
reference run since its accuracy has already been established in Ref. [8]. The stochasticity of
the sliced Wasserstein distance and the fact that a finite MCMC sampling will be used as the
“ground truth” make both the sliced Wasserstein distance and the credible metric approach
a noise floor instead of exactly zero. These noise floors can be estimated by computing the
metrics for an MCMC sampling similar to the reference run (same number of walkers and
steps). This should yield metric values that are as good as we can realistically obtain.
– 11 –

10−2
10−1
100
101
R-1
AIES
MH
HMC
NUTS
MALA
10−2
10−1
100
101
maxi
(
∆CM
i
)
68% credible level
95% credible level
103 104
Samples per chain
0.03
0.04
0.1
1
Sliced Wasserstein distance
Burn-in
CM(68%) noise level
CM(95%) noise level
Wasserstein noise level
Figure 3:All metrics as a function of samples per chain for every MCMC method using the
ΛCDM emulator and 1,000 chains. The grey region refers to the burn-in period consisting
of three updates of the covariance matrix before the final sampling, except for AIES which
only has a single longer burn-in iteration. Noise levels obtained from independent reference
runs are also depicted for the credible metric and the sliced Wasserstein distance.
4.2ΛCDM results
Figure 3 likewise shows the convergence for all the MCMC methods but for all three metrics
as a function of samples per chain and only showing the results for the samplings with
1,000 chains. Also shown are the expected noise levels for the credible metric and the sliced
Wasserstein distance estimated from a second independent reference run. The general trend
is that NUTS converges fastest (in terms of samples per chain) followed by HMC, MALA,
and lastly MH and AIES. The gradient-based samplers, unsurprisingly, thus seem to be most
– 12 –

10−2
10−1
100
101
R-1
AIES
MH
HMC
NUTS
MALA
10−2
10−1
maxi
(
∆CM
i
)
68% credible level
95% credible level
10−2 10−1 100 101
Wall time (seconds)
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.1
Sliced Wasserstein distance
CM(68%) noise level
CM(95%) noise level
Wasserstein noise level
Figure 4:All metrics as a function of wall time for every MCMC method using theΛCDM
emulatorand1,000chains. Onlythefinalsamplingsaredepictedandthenoiselevelsobtained
from independent reference runs are depicted for the credible metric and the Wasserstein
distance.R−1for NUTS can not be computed before around 0.05 seconds of sampling due
to the slow sampling speed.
efficient in exploring the parameter space in the least amount of steps. Notably, NUTS
(and to some extent also HMC) seems to settle on a good covariance matrix already after
a single burn-in iteration, whereas MALA and MH benefit from having all three iterations.
Especially in the credible metric and the sliced Wasserstein distance, we see significant drops
in the metric value after each burn-in iteration. One might think that increasing the number
of burn-in iterations would result in a better initialisation of MH, MALA, and AIES, allowing
them to match the level of NUTS and HMC in the beginning of the final sampling, but this
is not the case. We have verified the covariance matrices obtained by each method (except
– 13 –

for AIES that does not use the covariance matrix) after the burn-in period is very close to
optimal, and initialising the methods with a covariance matrix computed from the reference
run results in roughly the same initial metric values.
Since likelihood evaluations are no longer the dominant computational cost, wall time
provides a more practically relevant comparison between samplers than convergence mea-
sured solely in terms of samples or likelihood evaluations. When taking the sampling speeds
reported in table 1 into account, the conclusion changes. Figure 4 shows the same metrics
but as a function of wall time instead (and without the burn-in phase). In terms of wall time,
MALA now seems to be the fastest converging, closely followed by HMC, MH, and lastly,
NUTS and AIES. Due to the complexity of NUTS and the resulting much slower speed, its
convergence is very similar to that of AIES which was the slowest in terms of samples per
chain. In fact, all the methods seem to converge very similarly in terms of wall time, so the
most significant difference between running AIES or NUTS for 10 seconds is the amount of
points sampled. The incredible sampling speeds of AIES and regular MH make them a viable
alternative to more advanced approaches at the cost of having a significantly larger sample
size due to their high autocorrelation lengths.
4.3 Sterile neutrino results
When sampling using the sterile neutrino extension emulator, we again initialise with three
burn-in iterations (except for AIES having only 1) and sample 1,000 chains simultaneously.
Due to this likelihood having two additional and highly non-Gaussian dimensions, the sam-
pling and covariance estimation is more difficult. To accommodate this, the burn-in period
has been increased in order to obtain good covariance matrices. In particular, the conver-
gence of MALA is very sensitive to how well the covariance is estimated during burn-in for
this specific likelihood. Using the same burn-in settings as forΛCDM yields great results
for all the other methods, but it was insufficient for MALA. We have nonetheless extended
the burn-in periods of all other samplers to three iterations of 3,000 steps (of which the first
1,000 steps are used for step size adaptation and afterwards discarded) except for AIES still
having only a single burn-in iteration but now of 20,000 steps.
For MALA we have tested multiple burn-in configurations, and aside from increasing
the number of burn-in iterations and the number of burn-in steps within each iteration,
we can attempt to accommodate the sampling problems that arise due to the two extension
parameters. The initial step size (in whitened space) is by default the same for all parameters,
but due to the large plateaus of the extension parameters, it would be reasonable to increase
the step size for these two dimensions alone4. We have varied the number of burn-in iterations
(3 or 5) as well as modified the initial step sizes of the extension parameters (increased by
a factor of 10 compared to the rest of the parameters) while keeping the number of burn-in
steps in each burn-in iteration fixed to 6,000 steps (of which the first 1,000 steps are used
for step size adaptation and afterwards discarded). Figure 5 depicts the sliced Wasserstein
distances for the four different configurations; 3 burn-in iterations and default step sizes, 5
burn-in iterations and default step sizes, 3 burn-in iterations and increased step sizes for
the extension parameters, and 5 burn-in iterations and increased step sizes for the extension
parameters. The number of burn-in iterations matter much more than modifying the step size
and based on tests of varying the number of burn-in steps when a fixed number (3) of burn-in
iterations, a smaller number of iterations cannot be made to work by simply increasing the
4Aggressively increasing the step size for all parameters leads to suboptimal sampling and might result in
very low acceptance rates for this likelihood.
– 14 –

103 104
Samples per chain
0.03
0.1
1
Sliced Wasserstein distance
Burn-in
10−2 10−1 100 101
Wall time (seconds)
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.1
Sliced Wasserstein distance
3 iterations, normal step size
5 iterations, normal step size
3 iterations, modiﬁed step size
5 iterations, modiﬁed step size
Figure 5:Sliced Wasserstein distance as a function of samples per chain (top) and wall time
(bottom) for different burn-in configurations of MALA sampling with the sterile neutrino
extension emulator. The dashed (solid) vertical lines in the top figure depicts 5 (3) burn-in
iterations. Results are shown for the default step size configuration, where all dimensions
(in whitened space) are sampled with the same step size, as well as for a modified step size
where the sterile neutrino extension parameters are sampled with a 10 times larger step size.
number of steps within them. It is well known that MALA does not sample optimally for
likelihoods like this where the gradient is not informative everywhere and the geometry varies
much across the parameter space [32]. Despite modifying the step sizes not having a major
impact on the convergence, we include the results of the test with 5 burn-in iterations and a
modified step size for the extension parameters in the following figures comparing with the
results of the other MCMC methods.
Figure 6 shows the three metrics as a function of samples per chain. The burn-in periods
are depicted here as well, and the 5 burn-in iterations of the MALA sampling are indicated
by vertical dashed lines. The first iteration of MALA did not result in a sample with non-zero
variance for all parameters, soR−1could not be computed for that iteration. When allowing
MALA to initialise with a good covariance matrix, we see roughly the same convergences as
forΛCDM. NUTS converges the fastest in terms of samples per chain and also this time, it
seems to be well initialised even after a single burn-in iteration. The same is true for HMC
even though it performs slightly worse compared to NUTS.
– 15 –

10−2
10−1
100
101
R-1
AIES
MH
HMC
NUTS
MALA
10−2
10−1
100
101
maxi
(
∆CM
i
)
68% credible level
95% credible level
103 104
Samples per chain
0.03
0.1
1
Sliced Wasserstein distance
Burn-in
CM(68%) noise level
CM(95%) noise level
Wasserstein noise level
Figure 6:All metrics as a function of samples per chain for every MCMC method using the
sterile neutrino extension emulator. The grey region refers to the burn-in period consisting of
three updates of the covariance matrix before the final sampling, except for AIES which only
has a single longer burn-in iteration. Noise levels obtained from independent reference runs
are also depicted for the credible metric and the sliced Wasserstein distance. The vertical
dashed lines depicts the 5 burn-in iterations of MALA necessary to obtain a good covariance
matrix for this model.
Turning to Figure 7, it is again very clear that the slow sampling speed of NUTS
completely negates the efficiency of its advanced algorithm in terms of wall time. Also for
this likelihood it converges slower than the other methods, but does so, however, with fewer
points. Due to their very high sampling speeds, MH and MALA converge very fast, but in
turn, collects many more samples with larger autocorrelation length. In terms of wall time
AIES converges similarly to HMC for this likelihood, but AIES will also collect many more
– 16 –

10−1
100
101
R-1
AIES
MH
HMC
NUTS
MALA
10−2
10−1
maxi
(
∆CM
i
)
68% credible level
95% credible level
10−2 10−1 100 101
Wall time (seconds)
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.1
Sliced Wasserstein distance
CM(68%) noise level
CM(95%) noise level
Wasserstein noise level
Figure 7:All metrics as a function of wall time for every MCMC method using the ster-
ile neutrino extension emulator. Only the final samplings are depicted and the noise levels
obtained from independent reference runs are depicted for the credible metric and the Wasser-
stein distance.R−1for NUTS can not be computed before around 0.05 seconds of sampling
due to the slow sampling speed.
samples in order to match HMC’s convergence.
5 Conclusion
The increasing use of neural-network emulators for cosmological inference changes some of
the practical considerations involved in posterior sampling. In conventional analyses, where
likelihood evaluations are computationally expensive, sampling efficiency is often assessed
primarily in terms of the number of likelihood evaluations required to reach convergence. In
– 17 –

the emulator setting considered here, likelihood evaluations become sufficiently inexpensive
that performance in terms of wall time and hardware utilisation also become important
factors. We have compared five MCMC methods (MH, MALA, HMC, NUTS, and AIES)
using differentiable likelihood emulators implemented in TensorFlow. By combining graph
execution, JIT compilation, and GPU acceleration, all methods achieve sampling speeds that
are substantially higher than those typically encountered in traditional cosmological inference
pipelines.
When convergence is considered as a function of samples per chain, the gradient-based
samplers perform best. NUTS generally requires the fewest samples to reach convergence,
followed by HMC and MALA. This is consistent with the use of gradient information to
guide exploration of parameter space and reduce random-walk behaviour. However, these
gains in sample efficiency are partially offset by the additional computational cost of the more
sophisticated algorithms. When convergence is instead considered as a function of wall time,
thedifferencesbetweenthemethodsbecomeconsiderablysmaller. Inthiscomparison, MALA
oftenprovidesafavourablebalancebetweencomputationalcostandsamplingefficiency, while
the high throughput of MH allows it to remain competitive despite its comparatively poor
sample efficiency. NUTS remains the most efficient method in terms of samples required
for convergence, but its lower sampling speed reduces this advantage when measured in wall
time.
A second observation is the usefulness of large-scale vectorisation. Running hundreds
or thousands of chains simultaneously leads to faster convergence for all methods consid-
ered here, while the associated increase in wall time remains relatively modest on modern
GPUs. This makes highly parallel sampling an attractive option when using emulator-based
likelihoods.
Our results also illustrate some limitations of gradient-based approaches. While HMC
and NUTS perform robustly for both likelihoods considered in this work, MALA becomes
more sensitive to covariance estimation and burn-in for the sterile neutrino extension. The
strongly non-Gaussian structure of this posterior appears to reduce the effectiveness of local
gradient information and makes covariance adaptation more challenging. Nevertheless, once
supplied with a sufficiently accurate covariance estimate or allowed enough burn-in iterations,
MALA again performs competitively.
Overall, no single sampler is optimal in all situations. NUTS is the most sample-
efficient method considered in this work, whereas MALA often performs favourably when
convergence is measured in wall time. MH and AIES remain viable alternatives due to their
simplicity and their ability to exploit vectorised likelihood evaluations efficiently. The choice
of sampler therefore depends both on the properties of the posterior distribution and on the
computational environment in which the sampling is performed. More generally, these results
indicate that emulator-based cosmological inference shifts part of the focus from minimising
likelihood evaluations to balancing sample efficiency, computational overhead, and parallel
performance. In this setting, methods that would traditionally be regarded as inefficient can
remain competitive when combined with highly parallel likelihood evaluations on modern
hardware.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge computing resources from the Centre for Scientific Computing Aarhus
(CSCAA). A.N. was supported by the Carlsberg Foundation, grant CF24-1944.
– 18 –

References
[1] N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller, and E. Teller, “Equation of
State Calculations by Fast Computing Machines,”Journal of Chemical Physics21(1953)
no. 6, 1087–1092.
[2] W. K. Hastings, “Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their applications,”
Biometrika57(1970) no. 1, 97–109,
http://biomet.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/57/1/97.pdf.
http://biomet.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/57/1/97.
[3] Z. Zhou, C. Giovanetti, and H. Liu, “ABCMB: A Python+JAX Package for the Cosmic
Microwave Background Power Spectrum,”arXiv:2602.15104 [astro-ph.CO].
[4] A. Nygaard, E. B. Holm, S. Hannestad, and T. Tram, “CONNECT: a neural network based
framework for emulating cosmological observables and cosmological parameter inference,”
JCAP05(2023) 025,arXiv:2205.15726 [astro-ph.IM].
[5] A. Spurio Mancini, D. Piras, J. Alsing, B. Joachimi, and M. P. Hobson, “CosmoPower:
emulating cosmological power spectra for accelerated Bayesian inference from next-generation
surveys,”Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.511(2022) no. 2, 1771–1788,arXiv:2106.03846
[astro-ph.CO].
[6] S. Günther, L. Balkenhol, C. Fidler, A. R. Khalife, J. Lesgourgues, M. R. Mosbech, and R. K.
Sharma, “OLÉ — Online Learning Emulation in cosmology,”JCAP09(2025) 059,
arXiv:2503.13183 [astro-ph.CO].
[7] M. Bonici, F. Bianchini, and J. Ruiz-Zapatero, “Capse.jl: efficient and auto-differentiable CMB
power spectra emulation,”arXiv:2307.14339 [astro-ph.CO].
[8] L. Janken, S. Hannestad, T. Tram, and A. Nygaard, “CLiENT: A new tool for emulating
cosmological likelihoods using deep neural networks,”arXiv:2512.17509 [astro-ph.CO].
[9] J. E. Gammal, N. Schöneberg, J. Torrado, and C. Fidler, “Fast and robust Bayesian Inference
using Gaussian Processes with GPry,”arXiv:2211.02045 [astro-ph.CO].
[10] G. O. Roberts and J. S. Rosenthal, “Optimal Scaling of Discrete Approximations to Langevin
Diffusions,”Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology60(1998)
no. 1, 255–268,
https://academic.oup.com/jrsssb/article-pdf/60/1/255/49589077/jrsssb_60_1_255.pdf.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9868.00123.
[11] S. Duane, A. D. Kennedy, B. J. Pendleton, and D. Roweth, “Hybrid Monte Carlo,”Phys. Lett.
B195(1987) 216–222.
[12] M. D. Hoffman and A. Gelman, “The No-U-Turn Sampler: Adaptively Setting Path Lengths in
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo,”arXiv e-prints(2011) ,arXiv:1111.4246 [stat.CO].
[13] J. Goodman and J. Weare, “Ensemble samplers with affine invariance,”Communications in
Applied Mathematics and Computational Science5(2010) no. 1, 65 – 80.
https://doi.org/10.2140/camcos.2010.5.65.
[14] A. Gelman, G. O. Roberts, and W. R. Gilks, “Efficient Metropolis Jumping Rules,” in
Bayesian Statistics 5, J. M. Bernardo, J. O. Berger, A. P. Dawid, and A. F. M. Smith, eds.,
pp. 599–608. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1996.
[15] I. Romero and M. Ortiz, “The energy-stepping Monte Carlo method: an exactly
symmetry-preserving, a Hamiltonian Monte Carlo method with a 100% acceptance ratio,”
arXiv:2312.07215 [math-ph].https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07215.
[16] R. Neal, “MCMC Using Hamiltonian Dynamics,”.
– 19 –

[17] J. H. Tran and T. S. Kleppe, “Tuning diagonal scale matrices for HMC,”arXiv:2403.07495
[stat.CO].https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07495.
[18] V. I. Arnold,Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, vol. 60 ofGraduate Texts in
Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York, 2 ed., 1989.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-2063-1. Chapter 9: Canonical Formalism.
[19] H. Goldstein,Classical Mechanics. Addison-Wesley, 1980.
[20] M. Betancourt, “A Conceptual Introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo,”arXiv:1701.02434
[stat.ME].
[21] T. M. Apostol,Calculus, Volume 2: Multi-Variable Calculus and Linear Algebra with
Applications to Differential Equations and Probability. Wiley, 2 ed., 1969. Chapter 11: Multiple
Intergrals.
[22] D. Foreman-Mackey, D. W. Hogg, D. Lang, and J. Goodman, “emcee: The MCMC Hammer,”
Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac.125(2013) 306–312,arXiv:1202.3665 [astro-ph.IM].
[23]PlanckCollaboration, N. Aghanimet al., “Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters,”
Astron. Astrophys.641(2020) A6,arXiv:1807.06209 [astro-ph.CO]. [Erratum:
Astron.Astrophys. 652, C4 (2021)].
[24]PlanckCollaboration, N. Aghanimet al., “Planck 2018 results. V. CMB power spectra and
likelihoods,”Astron. Astrophys.641(2020) A5,arXiv:1907.12875 [astro-ph.CO].
[25]BOSSCollaboration, S. Alamet al., “The clustering of galaxies in the completed SDSS-III
Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey: cosmological analysis of the DR12 galaxy sample,”
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.470(2017) no. 3, 2617–2652,arXiv:1607.03155 [astro-ph.CO].
[26] A. J. Ross, L. Samushia, C. Howlett, W. J. Percival, A. Burden, and M. Manera, “The
clustering of the SDSS DR7 main Galaxy sample – I. A 4 per cent distance measure at
z= 0.15,”Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.449(2015) no. 1, 835–847,arXiv:1409.3242
[astro-ph.CO].
[27] F. Beutler, C. Blake, M. Colless, D. H. Jones, L. Staveley-Smith, L. Campbell, Q. Parker,
W. Saunders, and F. Watson, “The 6dF Galaxy Survey: Baryon Acoustic Oscillations and the
Local Hubble Constant,”Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.416(2011) 3017–3032,
arXiv:1106.3366 [astro-ph.CO].
[28] A. Gelman and D. B. Rubin, “Inference from Iterative Simulation Using Multiple Sequences,”
Statistical Science7(1992) no. 4, 457 – 472.https://doi.org/10.1214/ss/1177011136.
[29] S. Kolouri, K. Nadjahi, U. Simsekli, R. Badeau, and G. K. Rohde, “Generalized Sliced
Wasserstein Distances,”arXiv:1902.00434 [cs.LG].https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.00434.
[30] J. Torrado and A. Lewis, “Cobaya: Code for Bayesian Analysis of hierarchical physical
models,”JCAP05(2021) 057,arXiv:2005.05290 [astro-ph.IM].
[31] S. P. Brooks and A. Gelman, “General Methods for Monitoring Convergence of Iterative
Simulations,”Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics7(1998) no. 4, 434–455,
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/10618600.1998.10474787.
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10618600.1998.10474787.
[32] M. Biron-Lattes, N. Surjanovic, S. Syed, T. Campbell, and A. Bouchard-Cote, “autoMALA:
Locally adaptive Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm,” inProceedings of The 27th
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, S. Dasgupta, S. Mandt, and
Y. Li, eds., vol. 238 ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4600–4608. PMLR,
02–04 May, 2024.https://proceedings.mlr.press/v238/biron-lattes24a.html.
– 20 –