Title: Minor Ions as a Diagnostic of Solar Wind Heating: Inverted Mass-to-Charge Scaling in Imbalanced Turbulence
Authors: Michael F. Zhang, Evan L. Yerger, Matthew W. Kunz, Jonathan Squire
Published: 2026-06-04
Categories: astro-ph.SR, physics.plasm-ph, physics.space-ph

Draft version June 5, 2026
Typeset using LATEXtwocolumnstyle in AASTeX631
Minor Ions as a Diagnostic of Solar Wind Heating:
Inverted Mass-to-Charge Scaling in Imbalanced T urbulence
Michael F. Zhang
 ,1, 2, 3 Evan L. Yerger
 ,4 Matthew W. Kunz
 ,2, 3 and Jonathan Squire
 1
1Physics Department, University of Otago, 730 Cumberland St, Dunedin 9016, New Zealand
2Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Peyton Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
3Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, PO Box 451, Princeton, NJ 08543, USA
4Space Science Center and Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH 03824, USA
ABSTRACT
Alfv´ enic turbulence is thought to be vital to powering the solar wind and corona, yet has eluded
a comprehensive understanding of the kinetic processes by which it dissipates. Minor ions serve as
sensitive tracers of these processes, showing extreme perpendicular temperatures relative to the lo-
cal magnetic field and, perplexingly, mass-weighted temperature trends that sometimes correlate, but
sometimes anticorrelate, with mass-to-charge ratio,A i/Zi. We use a combination of quasilinear theory
and 3D hybrid-kinetic particle-in-cell simulations to explain these features and predict further corre-
lations with other properties of the turbulence in the fast solar wind. When Alfv´ enic turbulence is
imbalanced, its cascade to ion-Larmor scales is throttled by the helicity barrier. This barrier ulti-
mately leads to high-frequency proton-cyclotron waves (PCWs), both oblique and parallel, the latter
of which produce very flat electric-energy spectra (E E ∼k −η
∥ withη <2) over the range of scales
that are cyclotron resonant with minor ions. While steeper spectra lead to a positive correlation of
heating withA i/Zi, the shallower spectra cause the dependence to invert, withQ i ∝Q pAi(Ai/Zi)η−2.
This result is corroborated by a set of six simulations of both balanced and imbalanced turbulence,
spanningβ p0 ={1,0.3,1/16}, which demonstrate minor-ion heating rates following the power-law
scaling (A i/Zi)a. We show that minor-ion heating is strongest and most perpendicular in imbal-
anced turbulence at lowerβ p0, with extreme temperature ratiosT ⊥O5+ /T⊥p ≈40 and anisotropic
T⊥O5+ /T∥O5+ ∼10 atβ p0 = 1/16, in agreement with low-coronal observations of extreme temperature
ratios and anisotropies. Future minor-ion measurements should test whether intervals in which minor-
ion thermal speeds decrease with increasing mass-to-charge ratio are associated with a history of large
cross helicity, enhanced power in parallel PCWs, and a steep transition-range spectrum.
Keywords:Solar wind (1534); Solar coronal heating (1989); Space plasmas (1544); Interplanetary
turbulence (830); Plasma astrophysics (1261)
1.INTRODUCTION
Both the solar corona and the solar wind require sub-
stantial heating far above the surface of the Sun. Al-
though the mechanisms responsible for this heating re-
main uncertain, the required energy likely originates
from Alfv´ enic turbulence, which observations suggest is
energetically sufficient to power the fast wind (McIntosh
et al. 2011; Halekas et al. 2023; Rivera et al. 2024). In
the weakly collisional solar wind, particle species need
not remain in thermal equilibrium; thus, the dissipation
of turbulent energy—and its partition between species
and between directions parallel and perpendicular to the
E-mail for correspondence: mzhang@otago.ac.nz
local magnetic field—is central to determining fast-wind
properties (Verscharen et al. 2019). Minor ions are espe-
cially sensitive probes of this physics. Their wide range
of masses and charge states makes their thermodynamic
properties stringent tests of theories for turbulent dis-
sipation and wave–particle interactions in collisionless
plasmas (Bochsler 2007; von Steiger et al. 2000; Bochsler
et al. 1985). They trace these processes throughout
the inner heliosphere, down to coronal heights where
charge states freeze in and ion species thermally decou-
ple (Bame et al. 1974; Ko et al. 1997).
Minor ions also exhibit several striking observational
signatures. Their temperatures often greatly exceed pro-
ton temperatures, especially perpendicular to the lo-
cal magnetic-field direction. Remote UVCS observa-
tions of coronal holes, for example, infer perpendicu-
arXiv:2606.06340v1  [astro-ph.SR]  4 Jun 2026

2Zhang et al.
lar O 5+ temperatures more than 40 times higher than
proton temperatures,T ⊥O5+ /T⊥p ≳40, together with
magnetic-field-biased temperature anisotropies as large
asT ⊥O5+ /T∥O5+ ∼10 (Kohl et al. 2006; Cranmer et al.
2008; Cranmer 2009). More recently, Solar Orbiter
measurements beyond 0.3 au find O 6+ temperatures
exceeding proton temperatures by more than a factor
of 30,T O6+ /Tp ≳30 (Rivera et al. 2025). Likewise,
near-Sun in-situ measurements from Parker Solar Probe
find alpha temperatures 6−16 times those of protons
(Mostafavi et al. 2024), with preferentially perpendicu-
lar heating resulting inT ⊥α/T∥α ∼3 (Mostafavi et al.
2025).
Even more puzzling is the observed dependence of
minor-ion temperatures on mass-to-charge ratio,A i/Zi,
whereA i andZ i are the ion-to-proton mass and charge
ratios,
Ai
.= mi
mp
, Z i
.= qi
qp
.(1a, b)
Depending on the range ofA i/Zi considered, minor-ion
temperatures can correlate positively or negatively with
Ai/Zi. Fig. 1 shows an example of negatively corre-
lated temperatures in collisionally young solar wind at
1 au (Tracy et al. 2016). Similar features are also ob-
served in polar coronal holes (Landi & Cranmer 2009).
When minor-ion temperatures decrease withA i/Zi, as
forA i/Zi ∈[2.2,3] in Fig. 1, we refer to the scaling as
“inverted.” The goal of this paper is to explain how
such correlations can arise and change with the prop-
erties of the turbulence, thereby advancing the broader
use of minor ions as detailed diagnostics of coronal and
solar-wind heating.
We show that these correlations, together with the
other key features of minor-ion observations discussed
above, arise naturally from heating by Alfv´ enic tur-
bulence when cross helicity—the energy imbalance be-
tween outward- and inward-propagating fluctuations in
the solar wind—is taken into account. To explain in-
vertedA i/Zi trends in particular, we develop a phe-
nomenology, rooted in quasilinear theory, in which the
dominant heating channel changes as ion velocity dis-
tribution functions (VDFs) approach saturation and
parallel proton-cyclotron waves (PCWs) emerge self-
consistently. The resulting competition between oblique
Alfv´ enic fluctuations and coherent parallel PCWs deter-
mines whether heating increases or decreases with mass-
to-charge ratio,A i/Zi. We test these predictions against
3D hybrid-kinetic simulations of minor-ion heating in
both balanced and imbalanced turbulence.
This focus on turbulence imbalance reflects its key
role, alongside the ratio of thermal to magnetic pressure
(plasma betaβ), in controlling the dissipation of solar-
wind turbulence. In balanced Alfv´ enic turbulence, the
cascade is highly anisotropic with respect to the back-
ground magnetic field and low frequency (Matthaeus
et al. 1990; Goldreich & Sridhar 1995; Horbury et al.
2008; Chen 2016). Standard theories for turbulent dis-
He2+
C6+
C4+
C5+
N5+
O6+
O7+
Ne8+
Si8+
Fe9+
Fe10+
2 3 4 5 6
Ai/Zi
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Ti/(AiTp)
Figure 1.Minor-ion to proton temperature ratios, normal-
ized by the ion-to-proton mass ratioA i, plotted against ion-
to-proton mass-to-charge ratioA i/Zi. Data correspond to
ACE/SWICSmeasurements at 1 au for a collisionally young
solar-wind interval, adapted from fig. 3 of Tracy et al. (2016).
sipation in balanced turbulence therefore favor the per-
pendicular heating of ions by non-resonant stochastic
heating (Chandran et al. 2010a; Chandran 2010), rather
than by cyclotron-resonant heating (Isenberg & Holl-
weg 1983; Hollweg 1999; Cranmer 2002). In imbal-
anced turbulence, however, the “helicity barrier” ef-
fect (Meyrand et al. 2021) throttles the cascade energy
flux, allowing only the subdominant balanced portion
of the cascade to reach perpendicular scalesk −1
⊥ that
are smaller than the proton Larmor radiusρ p. As a
result, the dominantly imbalanced fluctuations in the
inertial range grow in amplitude. This in turn de-
creases the nonlinear turnover time, resulting in smaller
parallel scales and therefore higher-frequency fluctua-
tions. Hybrid-kinetic simulations show that this evo-
lution promotes cyclotron-resonant heating of protons
(Squire et al. 2022) and, even more strongly, minor ions
(Zhang et al. 2025).
Vital to our phenomenology is the distinction be-
tween heating by the oblique fluctuations that com-
prise the majority of the turbulent cascade and heat-
ing facilitated by coherent, circularly polarized, parallel-
propagating PCWs. The latter have been conjectured
to arise through a process known as “quasilinear focus-
ing” (Chandran et al. 2010b; Isenberg & Vasquez 2011).
During this process, protons, which compose the bulk
of the plasma, are anisotropically heated via cyclotron
resonance when there are high-frequency, oblique fluc-
tuations in the cascade. The resulting non-Maxwellian
proton VDF then becomes unstable to the emission

Inverted minor-ion heating in imbalanced turbulence3
of parallel PCWs, leading to a transfer of energy
from oblique cyclotron-frequency fluctuations to parallel
PCWs. Hybrid-kinetic simulations of imbalanced tur-
bulence have self-consistently demonstrated quasilinear
focusing; in this case, the helicity barrier leads to an in-
crease in the frequencies of oblique, inertial-range fluctu-
ations, which then perpendicularly heat the proton VDF
to such an extent that it becomes unstable to the emis-
sion of parallel PCWs (Squire et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2025). Consistent with predictions for turbulence gov-
erned by the helicity barrier, parallel PCWs in the solar
wind are commonly observed to correlate with cross he-
licity (Bowen et al. 2024; Panchal et al. 2025). When
these high-frequency parallel PCWs control the heating
of minor ions, our theory predicts preferential heating of
ion species having smaller mass-to-charge ratios,A i/Zi,
or equivalently larger gyrofrequencies. Thus, quasilin-
ear focusing in imbalanced turbulence provides a self-
consistent mechanism for the inverted scalings of minor-
ion thermal speeds with mass-to-charge ratio that are
observed in the solar wind, including those shown in
Fig. 1.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
In§2, we present the quasilinear theory underlying our
phenomenology, first reviewing quasilinear diffusion and
focusing before deriving a predicted scaling law for how
minor-ion heating rates should depend on ion mass and
charge in§2.2. In§3, we introduce the numerical model
that we use to solve the hybrid-kinetic equations to drive
balanced and imbalanced turbulence. We also describe
the six simulations analyzed in this work: four new
simulations with initial proton plasma beta parameters
βp0 = 1 andβ p0 = 1/16, each with six minor-ion species,
together with two prior simulations atβ p0 = 0.3 from
Zhang et al. (2025). In§4.1, we describe the time evolu-
tion of the turbulence and ion kinetics, including the de-
velopment of the helicity barrier, the growth of parallel
PCWs through quasilinear focusing, and the resulting
minor-ion temperatures and temperature anisotropies.
In§4.2, we show how parallel PCWs can invert the de-
pendence of minor-ion heating rates on mass-to-charge
ratio, reproducing the negative correlations sometimes
seen in solar-wind and coronal-hole data. We then use
the agreement between the simulations and quasilinear
theory to prescribe how proton and minor-ion heating by
Alfv´ enic turbulence depend onβp0, the normalized cross
helicityσ c that quantifies the turbulence imbalance, and
the masses and charges of different ion species.
2.THEORY
In this section, we use quasilinear theory to develop
a predictive model for how minor-ion heating depends
on the ion-to-proton mass ratio,A i, and charge ratio,
Zi, defined in Eq. (1a, b). Quasilinear theory describes
how a spectrum of linear waves heat each plasma species
through resonant wave–particle interactions (Isenberg &
Hollweg 1983; Isenberg 1984). The application to tur-
bulence is discussed in Johnston & Squire (2025), where
they provide evidence that quasilinear theory provides
an accurate description of ion heating in imbalanced tur-
bulence, because nonlinear broadening of the frequency
spectrum by wave–wave interactions decreases with in-
creasing imbalance.
The slow evolution of a spatially averaged, gyrotropic
ion VDF,f i0(t, w∥, w⊥), due to fluctuations obeying a
linear dispersion relation,ω k =ω(k), is given by (Ken-
nel & Engelmann 1966)
∂fi0
∂t = lim
V→∞
∞X
n=−∞
πq 2
i
m2
i
Z dk
V
× 1
w⊥
G

w⊥δ(ωk −k ∥w∥ −nΩ i)
ψn,k
2
Gfi0

,
(2)
wherew ∥ andw ⊥ are peculiar velocities in the plasma
frame in the directions parallel and perpendicular to the
local magnetic field;Vis an integration volume; Ω i =
ΩpZi/Ai is the gyrofrequency of ion speciesi; andω k =
k∥vph,k is the real frequency of a mode with wave vector
kand phase speedv ph,k.ψ n,k is a weighting function of
general wave polarizations, and is given by
ψn,k = 1√
2[E−
k eiϕJn+1(λi) +E +
k e−iϕJn−1(λi)]
+ w∥
w⊥
E∥,kJn(λi),(3)
whereλ i
.=k ⊥w⊥/Ωi,ϕis the azimuthal angle ink
space, J n is the Bessel function of the first kind, and
Ek is the Fourier-transformed electric field with cir-
cularly polarized (perpendicular) components given by
E±
k
.= (Ey,k ±iEz,k)/
√
2 (Chandran et al. 2010b; Kennel
& Engelmann 1966). Equation (2) is a diffusion equa-
tion in velocity space, with the two applications of the
operator
G .=

1− w∥
vph,k
 ∂
∂w⊥
+ w⊥
vph,k
∂
∂w∥
(4)
leading to drag and diffusion in velocity space.
Only resonant particles, whose parallel velocities sat-
isfy the resonance condition
ωk −k ∥w∥ −nΩ i = 0,(5)
interact with the waves. Diffusion acts to minimize
velocity-space gradients untilG[f i0] = 0, flattening the
VDF along resonant contours in velocity space whose
shapes are defined by the level sets of any function
Ξ(w⊥, w∥) along whichG[Ξ] = 0. One determines
Ξ(w⊥, w∥) by integratingG= 0 inw ⊥ andw ∥ and us-
ing the resonance condition (5) to relatek ∥ tow ∥ (or
vice versa). For the cyclotron resonancen= 1, this pro-
vides the relation (Rowlands et al. 1966; Gendrin 1968;

4Zhang et al.
Isenberg & Lee 1996)
w2
∥ +w 2
⊥ −2
Z
dw∥ vph,k(k∥(w∥)) = const.(6)
These level sets definescattering contoursthat represent
conservation of energy in the wave frame at any given
k∥. Viewed in velocity space, the instantaneous radius of
curvature for a level set at a givenw∥(k∥) depends on the
phase speed of the resonant wave. Resonance with faster
waves increases this radius, and therefore decreases the
curvature in velocity space, leading to scattering con-
tours that are steeper inw ⊥.
To compute scattering contours that de-
scribe cyclotron-resonant ion heating by oblique
Alfv´ en/PCWs, we adopt the cold plasma dispersion
relation fork ⊥ ≫k ∥ (Stix 1992; Isenberg 2012),
ωk∥,O = Ωp
k∥dp
p
1 + (k∥dp)2 ,(7)
where the subscript “O” denotes oblique waves, andd p
is the proton inertial length. A cold-plasma dispersion
relation should be a reasonable approximation for suffi-
ciently low proton beta. In the limitk ∥dp ≪1, Eq. (7)
reduces toω k∥,O ≃k ∥vA, describing non-dispersive,
oblique Alfv´ en waves, whose linear physics accurately
describes most of the inertial-range fluctuations in a
strong, Alfv´ enic cascade. We also consider parallel
PCWs,k ⊥ = 0, whose cold-plasma dispersion relation
is (Stix 1992; Hollweg & Isenberg 2002)
ωk∥,P = Ωp
2 (k∥dp)2
q
1 + 4(k∥dp)−2 −1

,(8)
where the subscript “P” denotes parallel waves. The
top panel of Fig. 2 shows the oblique and parallel PCW
dispersion relations,ω k∥,O andω k∥,P, as black and red
curves, respectively. Their intersections with the dot-
ted lines, Ω i − |k ∥|w∥, give the resonant wavenumbers
k∥,res(w∥) satisfying Eq. (5) forn= 1 and different ion
species. Writing the dimensionless parallel wavenumber
as ¯k∥
.=k ∥dp, Eqs. (5)–(8) give the scattering contours
w2
⊥
v2
A
+ Zi
Ai
¯k−2
∥
 Zi
Ai
+
2¯k3
∥q
1 + ¯k2
∥

= const (9)
w2
⊥
v2
A
+ Zi
Ai
 Zi
Ai
¯k−2
∥ −ln
h
1 +
q
1 + 4¯k−2
∥
i
= const,
(10)
for oblique and parallel PCWs, respectively (e.g.; Isen-
berg & Lee 1996; Isenberg et al. 2001; Isenberg 2004;
Isenberg & Vasquez 2011).
In the bottom panel of Fig. 2, we plot scatter-
ing contours for protons (purple), alphas (green), and
O5+ (orange) resonant with oblique (solid) and par-
allel (dashed) PCWs. Quasilinear diffusion flattens
|k∥|dp
ω
ω k∥, O
ω k∥, P
k⋆
∥, cr k⋆
∥, P
0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5
ΩO5+
Ωα
Ωp
−0. 6−0. 4−0. 2 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 60
0. 2
0. 4
0. 6
0. 8
1
1. 2
w∥/v A
w⊥ /v A
Figure 2.Top panel: Dispersion relations for oblique
PCWs,ω k∥,O (black), and parallel PCWs,ω k∥,P (red), plot-
ted as functions of|k ∥|, withk ∥ <0 in our convention.
Dotted lines show Ω i − |k ∥|w∥ for protons (purple), alphas
(green), and O 5+ (orange); their intersections withω k∥ give
the resonant wavenumbersk∥,res satisfying Eq. (5) for oblique
or parallel waves. Horizontal dotted lines correspond to
w∥ = 0; the diagonal proton line corresponds tow ∥ =v th,p0
forβ p0 = 1/16, givingv th,p0 = 0.25v A; and the diagonal
alpha and O 5+ lines indicatew ∥,min <0 for resonance with
oblique or parallel PCWs.k ⋆
∥,cr andk ⋆
∥,P denote the inter-
sections of the diagonal proton line withω k∥,O andω k∥,P,
respectively, and are described in§2.1. Bottom panel: Scat-
tering contours in velocity space for protons (purple), alphas
(green), and O 5+ (orange) that are resonant with oblique
(solid) or parallel (dashed) PCWs. For each species,w ∥,min
for resonance with either wave mode is marked by circles
at the ends of the contours that start fromw ∥ = +v A; the
correspondingk ∥,res(w∥,min) values are marked by circles in
the top panel. Non-dispersiveω=k ∥vA contours (dotted)
and constant-energy contours (black, solid) are semicircles
centered on thew ∥-axis at−v A and 0, respectively. Colored
shaded regions are semicircles of radiusv th,i0 =
p
βp0/mi at
βp0 = 1/16, proportional to the extent of the initial thermal
core of each species.

Inverted minor-ion heating in imbalanced turbulence5
ion VDFs along these contours. When the VDF de-
creases along a scattering contour in the direction of in-
creasing kinetic energy, diffusion carries particles across
constant-energy shells (black solid semicircles) toward
largerw 2 =w 2
∥ +w 2
⊥, thereby heating the resonant
ions. The non-dispersive Alfv´ en-wave limit,ω=k ∥vA
fork ∥dp ≪1, is shown by the dotted contours. This
limit becomes a poorer approximation at larger reso-
nant|k ∥|, where the waves are more dispersive. For a
fixed resonantw ∥, ions with smaller mass-to-charge ra-
tio,A i/Zi, resonate with waves at larger|k ∥|; for any
given species, the resonant|k ∥|also increases asw ∥ be-
comes more negative. At these larger|k ∥|, dispersion
reduces the phase speeds of both oblique and parallel
PCWs, making their scattering contours shallower inw⊥
than the non-dispersive contours. Yerger et al. (2026)
prove that, for a given resonantw ∥, parallel PCWs
have lower phase speeds than the corresponding oblique
PCWs,ω k∥,res,O,O/k∥,res,O > ω k∥,res,P,P/k∥,res,P. Parallel
PCWs therefore possess even shallower contours than
oblique PCWs, as per the dashed lines in Fig. 2. Like-
wise, the contours become progressively shallower from
O5+ to alphas to protons, reflecting the smallerA i/Zi
and larger resonant|k ∥|of the lighter, more rapidly gy-
rating ions.
For Alfv´ enic fluctuations propagating antiparallel to
the local magnetic field,k ∥ <0 (as for the Elsasser field
z+ in our convention; see Eq. (26)), there also exists
a minimum parallel velocity,w ∥,min ≤0, below which
no cyclotron (n= 1) resonance occurs. For protons,
w∥,min = 0, because the maximum PCW frequency is
the proton gyrofrequency, Ωp. For minor ions, Ω i <Ω p,
sow ∥,min is set by the steepest positive-slope dotted line
in the top panel of Fig. 2 that still intersectsω k∥, which
occurs where the line is tangent to the dispersion rela-
tion, as indicated by the circles. Analytically, this con-
dition isv g,k =w ∥,min(k∥,res), wherev g,k =∂ω k/∂k∥
is the wave’s parallel group speed. Thus,w ∥,min marks
the endpoint of the scattering contours, shown by col-
ored circles at the ends of the alpha and O 5+ contours
in the bottom panel of Fig. 2. Ions with larger mass-
to-charge ratio,A i/Zi, have smaller gyrofrequency and
larger|w ∥,min|, so their contours extend farther into
w∥ <0, as seen by comparing the O 5+ contours (or-
ange) with the alpha contours (green). Heating there-
fore occurs over a broader range ofw ∥ for ions with
largerA i/Zi.
2.1.Quasilinear focusing
Efficient cyclotron-resonant perpendicular heating of
bulk protons by Alfv´ enic turbulence can drive an in-
stability that re-emits the damped energy as parallel
PCWs, a process termedquasilinear focusing(Chandran
et al. 2010b; Isenberg & Vasquez 2011). When resonant
processes dominate, quasilinear diffusion (2) flattens ini-
tially Maxwellian ion VDFs along the resonant scatter-
ing contours of the oblique Alfv´ en/PCW fluctuations.
The resulting proton VDF develops velocity-space gradi-
ents along the shallower parallel-PCW contours (bottom
panel of Fig. 2), causing diffusion toward lower kinetic
energy. This process damps oblique PCW energy and
re-emits, or “focuses”, it into parallel PCWs.
Strong Alfv´ enic turbulence is expected to satisfy scale-
by-scale critical balance between the linear propagation
time and the nonlinear cascade time, such thatk ∥vA ∼
k⊥δu⊥ (Goldreich & Sridhar 1995; Boldyrev 2006; Mal-
let et al. 2015). As fluctuation amplitudes decrease to-
ward smaller scales, critical balance implies that fluctua-
tions become increasingly anisotropic,k ∥/k⊥ ∼δu ⊥/vA.
Thus, the fluctuation power available at the largek ∥ re-
quired by the resonance condition (5) to resonantly heat
the bulk of the proton VDF decreases rapidly. In en-
ergetically balanced turbulence, nonlinear interactions
between counter-propagating fluctuations further pro-
duce a broad temporal frequency spectrum, rather than
a narrow spectrum concentrated near a wave disper-
sion relation (Johnston & Squire 2025). Thus, resonant
proton-cyclotron heating is weak in balanced Alfv´ enic
turbulence, and quasilinear focusing through cyclotron
resonance is not expected.
Because energetically imbalanced turbulence has a
narrower frequency spectrum, resonant proton-cyclotron
heating is enhanced when the cross helicityσ c ̸= 0. Ad-
ditionally, in imbalanced turbulence, the “helicity bar-
rier” disallows a constant-flux cascade through to sub-
proton-Larmor scales,k ⊥ρp ≳1, instead allowing only
the balanced portion of the energy flux to reach smaller,
kinetic scales (Meyrand et al. 2021). This “barrier”
produces a steep transition range in thek ⊥ spectrum,
where the fluctuation energy rapidly decreases until
only the smaller balanced component remains. Consis-
tent with this prediction, solar-wind observations show
that steeper transition-range spectra are associated with
larger cross helicity (McIntyre et al. 2025). We denote
the start of this transition range byk ⋆
⊥, whose scaling
with imbalance is predicted by the helicity barrier to
satisfyk ⋆
⊥ρp ∼(1−σ c)1/4 (Meyrand et al. 2021; Squire
et al. 2023; Adkins et al. 2025).
Suppose initially that fluctuation amplitudes are weak
enough that, before the transition range, the largestk ∥
with non-negligible power resonates only with protons
far in the tail of the VDF,|w ∥| ≫v th,p. Then cyclotron-
resonant proton heating is initially insufficient to dis-
sipate the cascade flux, while the helicity barrier pre-
vents most of that flux from accessing electron-heating
channels at yet smaller scales. The dominantly imbal-
anced inertial-range fluctuations therefore grow in am-
plitude, increasing their parallel wavenumber through
critical balance,k ∥/k⊥ ∼δu ⊥/vA ∼δB ⊥/B0. Once
sufficient fluctuation power reaches parallel scales res-
onant with the thermal bulk of the proton VDF, the
fluctuations saturate through proton-cyclotron-resonant
heating, flattening the proton VDF along oblique con-
tours up tow ∥ ≈0. We define the critical parallel

6Zhang et al.
wavenumber for this saturation as the oblique-PCW
resonant wavenumber for protons withw ∥ =v th,p,
k⋆
∥,cr
.=k ∥,res,O(w∥ =v th,p), marked forβ p0 = 1/16 in
the top panel of Fig. 2. This dissipation of oblique fluc-
tuations enables strong quasilinear focusing, re-emitting
energy into parallel PCWs concentrated near a coreso-
nant scale, which we define ask ⋆
∥,P and also mark in
Fig. 2.
Quasilinear diffusion by a given wave population
weakens as the ion VDF flattens along that population’s
scattering contours; in the limitGf i0 = 0, the VDF is
flat along those contours and that wave population no
longer heats the ions. Consider a near-saturated state
in which the energetically dominant oblique PCWs have
already flattened the minor-ion VDFs along oblique-
PCW contours, so thatG Ofi0 is small. Here,G O and
GP denote the operatorGevaluated along oblique- and
parallel-PCW scattering contours, respectively. Be-
cause parallel-PCW contours are generally shallower
than oblique-PCW contours in a cold plasma, as shown
in Fig. 2, the same VDF can retain much larger gradients
along the parallel-PCW contours,|G Pfi0| ≫ |G Ofi0|.
Diffusion along these shallower contours proceeds to-
ward lower kinetic energy and emits parallel PCWs,
but it also moves particles across otherwise nearly sat-
urated oblique-PCW contours. The energetically domi-
nant oblique cascade can then rapidly flatten the VDF
again along oblique contours at higher kinetic energy,
producing a net enhancement of minor-ion heating. This
cross-contour diffusive process is analogous to that de-
scribed by Chandran et al. (2010b) for protons (see
also Isenberg & Vasquez 2011). When quasilinear fo-
cusing generates parallel PCWs of sufficient amplitude,
this cross-contour process becomes the bottleneck for en-
hanced heating, shifting the species-dependent heating
from being controlled by the oblique-PCW spectrum to
being controlled by the parallel-PCW spectrum.
2.2.A scaling theory for quasilinear heating of minor
ions
To determine how minor-ion heating is predicted to
depend on mass and charge, we take the second velocity
moment of Eq. (2). We evaluate the integral overk ∥
usingδ[h(x)] = P
j δ(x−x j)/|h′(xj)|, wherex j are the
roots ofh(x), and then integrate by parts in velocity.
This gives the mass-normalized quasilinear heating rate
Qi
mi
.=
Z
dr
Z
dw 1
2 w2 ∂fi0
∂t
=− π2q2
i
m2
i
∞X
n=−∞
Z ∞
−∞
dw∥
Z
dw⊥
w⊥
|vg,k∥,res −w ∥| In(k∥,res)Gk∥,res fi0,(11)
where
R
dw⊥{. . .}=
R ∞
0 w⊥dw⊥{. . .},k ∥,res(w∥) is
determined by the resonance condition (5), and
In(k∥) .=
R
dk⊥
ψn,k
2
. In writing (11), we have ne-
glected thek ⊥ dependence of the dispersion relation,
takingω k =ω(k ∥), and the group speed to bev g,k∥ =
∂ωk∥ /∂k∥.
From Eq. (11), the quasilinear heating rate depends
on ion mass and charge not only explicitly through
theq 2
i /m2
i coefficient, but also implicitly through
k∥,res(Ωi, w∥) via Eq. (5). The relative contribution of
a givenk ∥,res(Ωi, w∥) to the integral overw ∥ depends
on both the electric-field power,I n[k∥,res(w∥)], and the
degree to which the ion VDF has been flattened along
the relevant scattering contour,G k∥,res(w∥)fi0(w∥, w⊥).
The latter is generally difficult to estimate heuristically.
However, in two regimes relevant to our hybrid-kinetic
simulations, we argue thatG k∥,res fi0 does not contribute
to the leading-order mass–charge dependence ofQ i.
This allows us to estimate the
R
dw⊥{. . .}integral in
Eq. (11). These regimes are:
1. In the first regime, relevant to the initial stages of
heating, all minor ions are nearly isothermal with
one another and have approximately Maxwellian
VDFs. At low plasma beta, and especially for
heavier ions, the scattering contours over the re-
gion of velocity space occupied by the slow ion
cores are nearly vertical (bottom panel of Fig. 2),
corresponding to nearly pure perpendicular heat-
ing. Moreover,G, as given in Eq. (4), is dom-
inated by∂/∂w ⊥ when|w| ≪v ph,k∥. Thus,
Gk∥,res(w∥)fi0 ∼f i0/vth,⊥i, and so
Z
dw⊥ w⊥Gk∥,res fi0 ∼f i0(w∥) (12)
is independent of both mass and charge.
2. In the second regime, relevant to late times in
our numerical simulations, minor-ion VDFs are
nearly flattened along resonant scattering con-
tours. Apart from their extent intow ∥ <0 and
modest dispersive effects, these contours are qual-
itatively similar in velocity space between minor-
ion species (Fig. 2). The minor-ion VDFs there-
fore occupy similar regions of velocity space at late
times, largely independent of ion mass. To lead-
ing order, differences in thermal speed are then
small, and minor-ion temperatures become ap-
proximately mass proportional. If, in this near-
saturated state, gradients off i0 along the contours
are approximately uniform between species, or de-
pend only weakly onv th,i, then
Z
dw⊥ w⊥Gk∥,res fi0 ∼f i0(w∥)v th,⊥i.(13)
Because the thermal speeds of the minor-ion
species are similar in this regime, this term con-
tributes negligibly to the leading-order mass–
charge dependence ofQ i.

Inverted minor-ion heating in imbalanced turbulence7
To evaluate the
R
dw∥{. . .}integral, we must specify
bothk ∥,res(Ωi, w∥) and the power in the relevant wave
mode. In general,k ∥,res must be found by solving the
resonance condition (5) numerically for eachw ∥. For a
rough comparison between minor-ion species, we instead
evaluate the terms in Eq. (11) atw ∥ = 0, where the
VDFs are most populous. We maintain this assumption
for our phenomenological predictions throughout the re-
mainder of this article. At this velocity,
k∥,res(Ωi, w∥ = 0) = Ωi
vph,k∥,res
,(14)
corresponding to the intersections marked by triangles
in the top panel of Fig. 2. This approximation is best for
cold ion VDFs with small thermal speeds,v th,i ≪v A,
and therefore applies most directly at low plasma beta
and, initially, to heavier minor-ion species. It does not
apply to protons, for whichw ∥,min = 0; asw ∥ →0,
the resonant wavenumber diverges,k ∥,res → ∞, and the
available wave power vanishes.
For cyclotron-resonant (n= 1) heating of ions with
w∥ = 0 andw ⊥ >0, the polarization functionψ 1,k
in Eq. (3) contains only perpendicular components of
the electric field. We therefore approximateI 1(k∥)
as the one-dimensionalk ∥ spectrum of perpendicu-
lar electric-field energy in the relevant wave mode,
EE⊥(k∥) =E Ey(k∥) +E Ez(k∥), normalized such thatR
dk∥ EE⊥(k∥) =
R
dk∥dk⊥ EE⊥(k∥, k⊥) is the electric
energy density of the mode. Assuming that this spec-
trum obeys a power-law scaling over the relevant reso-
nant range, we write
I1(k∥)∼ E E⊥(k∥)∼k −η
∥ ,(15)
where we introduce the spectral exponentη. In general,
the spectra associated with parallel and oblique PCWs
can have different slopes ink ∥; when the wave mode is
known, we denote these explicitly byη P andη O, respec-
tively.
Substituting the wave-power scaling (15) into
Eq. (11), and using the dependence ofk ∥,res on the
minor-ion cyclotron frequency, we find that the heating
rate should scale with ion mass and charge as
Qi ∝A i
 Ai
Zi
η−2 vη
ph,k∥,res
vg,k∥,res
.(16)
In the non-dispersive limit,v ph andv g are both equal to
vA and independent ofk ∥, such thatQ i ∝A i(Ai/Zi)η−2.
Thus, a conservative-flux cascade of non-dispersive
Alfv´ enic fluctuations, for whichη= 2, predicts only
mass-proportional minor-ion heating. If the electric-
field spectrum of the relevant wave mode is steeper (shal-
lower) thanη= 2, the heating rate becomes an increas-
ing (decreasing) function of mass-to-charge ratio.
The relevant wave modes in the two regimes of interest
are: in both regimes, oblique Alfv´ en/PCWs that occupy
most of the inertial-range cascade; and, in the second
regime, coherent parallel-propagating PCWs that allow
diffusion across saturated oblique contours when suffi-
ciently energetic. Atk ∥,res(Ωi, w∥ = 0), their respective
phase speeds, from Eqs. (7) and (8), and group speeds
scale with minor-ion parameters as
vph,k∥,res,O =v A
 
1− Z 2
i
A2
i
!1/2
,(17)
vph,k∥,res,P =v A

1− Zi
Ai
1/2
,(18)
vg,k∥,res,O =v A
 
1− Z 2
i
A2
i
!3/2
,(19)
vg,k∥,res,P =v A

1− Zi
Ai
3/2
1− 1
2
Zi
Ai
−1
.(20)
Substituting these expressions into Eq. (16) gives the
dispersive heating-rate scalings for each mode
Qi,O ∝A i
 Ai
Zi
ηO−2 
1− Z 2
i
A2
i
!(ηO−3)/2
,(21)
Qi,P ∝A i
 Ai
Zi
ηP−2
1− Zi
Ai
(ηP−3)/2
1− 1
2
Zi
Ai

.
(22)
Ions with smaller gyrofrequencies resonate with fluctu-
ations at smallerk ∥, where both oblique and parallel
PCWs are less dispersive andv ph is closer tov A. The
departure of Eqs. (21) and (22) from the non-dispersive
scalingQ i ∝A i(Ai/Zi)η−2 is therefore smaller for ions
with larger mass-to-charge ratio. Similarly, because
parallel PCWs have slower phase speeds than oblique
PCWs at a givenk ∥, dispersive corrections are larger
for parallel PCWs.
To use this theory in practice, we first identify the
wave population that contributes most to the heating
and measure its electric-field spectrum over the range of
k∥ resonant with minor ions atw ∥ = 0. The local spec-
tral slope,E E ∼k −η
∥ , then predicts the leading-order
mass–charge exponent,a≃η−2, with dispersive cor-
rections given by Eqs. (21) and (22). For imbalanced
turbulence, the relevant wave population follows from
the stage of the evolution. At early times, before quasi-
linear focusing is strong, the resonant fluctuation energy
resides primarily in oblique Alfv´ en/PCW fluctuations
in the turbulent cascade. These fluctuations heat the
initially Maxwellian ion cores, with a mass–charge de-
pendence given by Eq. (21). At late times, after the
ion VDFs have become nearly saturated along oblique
scattering contours, quasilinear focusing generates non-
negligible energy in coherent parallel PCWs. These par-
allel PCWs, concentrated neark ⋆
∥,P, facilitate further
heating through cross-contour diffusion, leading to the

8Zhang et al.
mass–charge dependence in Eq. (22). Differences in the
k∥ electric-field spectra,E E⊥(k∥), of oblique and paral-
lel PCWs therefore produce different power-law scalings
of heating rate with mass-to-charge ratio. For parallel
PCWs, this scaling can invert when their energy peaks
above the resonant wavenumbers of some minor ions,
k⋆
∥,P > k ∥,res, producing a sufficiently shallow effective
spectrum,η <2, over the resonant range.
3.SIMULATION
We test our theoretical predictions for ion heating us-
ing a suite of numerical simulations of driven Alfv´ enic
turbulence similar to that found in the solar wind. These
simulations follow a local, comoving patch of solar wind
in a triply periodic domain that is elongated along a
mean magnetic field,B 0. The initial state is homoge-
neous, with background proton densityn p0, and con-
sists of bulk protons (i= p), electrons, and trace-
abundance minor-ion species in thermal equilibrium,
Tp0 =T e0 =T i0. This initial temperature equilibrium is
motivated by a parcel of plasma originating deep in the
corona, where the ion species are assumed to collision-
ally decouple att= 0, as the plasma is also subjected to
forcing by fluctuations near the box scale. For simplic-
ity, we neglect solar-wind expansion and acceleration,
assuming that the corresponding background-evolution
timescales are very long compared to the characteris-
tic linear and nonlinear timescales of the turbulence.
These choices make the simulations controlled local ex-
periments rather than self-consistent models for an ex-
panding plasma in a solar-wind flux tube. By varying
βp0 andσ c, which change throughout the solar wind and
with heliocentric distance, we use these local simulations
to probe ion heating under conditions representative of
different solar-wind regions.
Our model equations and numerical approach are
identical to those described in Zhang et al. (2025).
Namely, we adopt a hybrid-kinetic approach (Byers
et al. 1978; Hewett & Nielson 1978), which affords a suf-
ficiently large separation of scales while retaining finite-
Larmor-radius effects and allowing for high-frequency
fluctuations. The system of multi-ion hybrid-kinetic
equations is given by
∂fi
∂t +v· ∇f i + qi
mi

E+ v
c ×B

· ∂fi
∂v
=− qi
mi
EU
ext · ∂fi
∂v ,(23)
1
c
∂B
∂t +∇ ×E=−∇ ×E B
ext −η 4∇4B,(24)
E=−
P
i ΛiqiniuiP
i Λiqinic ×B+ (∇ ×B)×B
4πP
i Λiqini
(25)
− Te
e
∇P
i ΛiqiniP
i Λiqini
,
whereq i =Z ieandm i =A imp are the charge and mass
of ion speciesiexpressed in terms of the proton charge
(e) and proton mass (m p),cis the speed of light,Eis
the electric field, andBis the magnetic field. The pa-
rameter Λ i equals unity foractiveion species and zero
forpassiveion species. In all simulations presented, only
protons are active. The external electric fieldsE B
ext and
EU
ext inject turbulent energy into the system and are
described later in this section. Because Eq. (25) im-
plies that the magnetic field is frozen into the electron
fluid, we include hyper-resistive dissipation,−η 4∇4B,
in Eq. (24) to dissipate magnetic energy at scales far
smaller than those at which ion heating dominantly oc-
curs. We therefore ascribe the energy that is dissipated
by hyper-resistivity to be a proxy for electron heating
(the feedback to the isothermal electron temperature is
neglected).
We solve Eqs. (23)–(25) usingPegasus++(Kunz et al.
2014; Arzamasskiy et al. 2023), a massively parallel,
highly optimized, particle-in-cell code that, following
Zhang et al. (2025), allows for multiple ion species. The
plasma occupies a Cartesian, triply periodic, elongated
box, with (280) 2 ×1680 cells. This box spans a domain
of physical sizeL 2
⊥ ×L ∥ = (28πρp0)2 ×168πρ p0, so that
L∥ = 6L⊥, whereL ⊥ andL ∥ are the box sizes perpen-
dicular and parallel toB 0, respectively. These parame-
ters imply a maximum resolved perpendicular wavenum-
ber ofk ⊥ρp0 = 10, minimum parallel and perpendicular
wavenumbers ofk ∥,minρp0 ≈0.01 andk ⊥,minρp0 ≈0.07,
and an Alfv´ en crossing timeτA =L ∥/vA ≈528β 1/2
p0 Ω−1
p .
The termsE U
ext and∇ ×E B
ext in Eqs. (23) and (24)
drive Alfv´ enically polarized fluctuations inu⊥ andB ⊥
at the outer scale of the box, as a proxy for the effect
of larger, unresolved scales in the true solar wind. It is
useful to express the fluctuations in terms of the Elsasser
fields,
z± .=u ⊥ ± B⊥
(4πmpnp0)1/2
.=u ⊥ ±b ⊥,(26)
which describe Alfv´ enic perturbations perpendicular
(“⊥”) to the guide field that propagate in the∓ ˆbdi-
rection, where ˆb=B/|B|. We quantify the energy im-
balance between the Elsasser fields using the normalized
cross helicity,
σc
.= ⟨|z+|2⟩ − ⟨|z −|2⟩
⟨|z+|2⟩+⟨|z −|2⟩ = 2⟨u⊥ ·b ⊥⟩
⟨|u⊥|2⟩+⟨|b ⊥|2⟩ ,(27)
where⟨ · ⟩denotes a box average.
The magnitudes ofE U
ext and∇ ×E B
ext are deter-
mined by specifying the rates at which energyεand
cross helicityε H are injected into the Elsasser fields
z±. At each timestep, the spatial profiles ofE U
ext(t,r)
and∇ ×E B
ext(t,r) are sums of Fourier modes with
wavenumbersk j satisfying 2π/L j ≤k j ≤4π/L j, where
Lj is the box length in directionj∈ {x, y, z}. Each

Inverted minor-ion heating in imbalanced turbulence9
mode is divergence-free and oriented perpendicular to
B0. The Fourier coefficients of these modes evolve in
time via an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process with correla-
tion timeτ corr, with mode energy normalized byk −2.
They are normalized such that⟨m pnp0Ω−1
p |F ±|2⟩=
ε±, whereε ± = (ε±ε H)/2 are the desired energy
injection rates into each of the Elsasser fields, and
F ± .=q pEU
ext/mp ±c∇ ×E B
ext/(4πmpnp0)1/2. Because
the forcing is time correlated, the actual injection of
energy (ε inj = P
± mpnp0⟨z± ·F ±⟩/2) and imbalance
(εH
inj/εinj) can vary in time, and are generally not equal
to the specified values ofεandε H.1
We perform six simulations that together form a pa-
rameter study of minor-ion heating under conditions rel-
evant to different regions of the solar corona and solar
wind. Each simulation is characterized by a value of
βp0 ∈ {1,0.3,1/16}and drives turbulence with either
εH /ε∈ {0,0.9}. We chooseε≈(2×10 −5)mpv2
A0Ωp/2V
so that, if outer-scale fluctuations are critically balanced
with correlation scales comparable to the elongated box,
δB⊥/B0 ≈L ⊥/L∥, then fluctuations atk ⊥ρp0 ≈1
have spectral anisotropies comparable to turbulent ed-
dies measured at similar scales in the solar wind (Chen
2016). Driving turbulence at low plasma beta is more
difficult because of the reduced scale separation between
the forcing scales and the ion-inertial length. To com-
pensate, we increaseεto≈(6.3×10 −5)mpv2
A0Ωp/2V
for the runs atβ p0 = 1/16. In general,ε inj varies on
the order of the forcing correlation timescale,τ corr. De-
creasingτ corr reduces this temporal variation, butτ corr
cannot be made too small without directly driving fluc-
tuations near ion gyrofrequencies. To balance these re-
quirements, we chooseτ corr =τ A/2 for the two simu-
lations atβ p0 = 1/16. Because the higher-beta simu-
lations already have greater separation between forcing
and ion-gyroscale frequencies, corresponding to larger
τAΩp, we instead chooseτ corr =τ A/4 for those runs to
further limit temporal variations inε inj. In all simula-
tions, we useN ppc = 1000 proton macroparticles per cell
to alleviate concerns of electric-field noise and numeri-
cal cooling (Squire et al. 2022). To isolate the effects of
imbalance andβ p0 on ion heating from our choices of
minor-ion species and abundances, we treat all minor-
ion species passively, Λ i = 0 fori̸= p. Because these
passive minor ions do not feed back and thereby do not
contribute electromagnetic noise, we are able to use far
fewer particles per cell for each minor-ion species. We
useN ppc = 64 for minor ions in theβ p0 = 0.3 imbal-
anced run andN ppc = 27 per minor-ion species in the
1 Given the qualitative agreement in the development of the he-
licity barrier and subsequent proton cyclotron heating between
ourβ p0 = 0.3 imbalanced simulation (Zhang et al. 2025) and a
previous simulation using a different forcing method that held
εinj andε H
inj fixed (Squire et al. 2022), we expect our conclusions
to be robust to the details of the forcing.
other simulations. Peculiar velocitywis defined with re-
spect to the bulk proton flow,u p =n −1
p
R
dr vfp, such
thatw=v−u p.
For most simulations, in addition to bulk protons (p),
we include alpha particles (α, He2+); quintuply and sex-
tuply ionized oxygen, O 5+ and O6+; quintuply and sex-
tuply ionized carbon, C5+ and C6+; and nonuply ionized
magnesium, Mg 9+. The exceptions are theβ p0 = 0.3
imbalanced run, which includes onlyαand O 5+, and
theβ p0 = 0.3 balanced run, which includes Fe 9+ in-
stead of Mg 9+ (because of its relatively large Larmor
scale, Fe 9+ suffers from direct heating by the forcing
and so should be treated cautiously). These minor-ion
species are chosen for their presence in the solar wind
(Bochsler 2000; Tracy et al. 2016), and to allow compar-
isons between ions that share the same mass, charge, or
mass-to-charge ratio. The species O 6+ is the third-most
abundant ion and the focus of recent minor-ion tempera-
ture measurements from Solar Orbiter (Livi et al. 2023;
Rivera et al. 2025). Although less abundant, O 5+ is
observable in remote-sensingUVCSobservations of the
extended solar corona, where it exhibits extreme heating
(Kohl et al. 2006). Alphas, the second-most abundant
ion species in the solar wind with fractional abundances
of∼1%−10%, are well diagnosed (Kasper et al. 2007;
Marsch 2012; Verscharen et al. 2019). Ongoing PSP
measurements probe their temperature and temperature
anisotropy in near-Sun regions where minor-ion heating
is expected to be strongest (Mostafavi et al. 2025, 2024).
Their abundance and high kinetic-energy content (Wang
et al. 2025) make the passive treatment of alphas less
justified. However, a linear analysis of theβ p0 = 0.3
imbalanced run suggests that their active feedback on
heating would be minimal (Zhang et al. 2025).
4.RESULTS
We now present our results. Section 4.1 focuses on
the time evolution of turbulence and minor-ion heating
in the simulations, while§4.2 compares the mass–charge
dependence of measured minor-ion heating with the the-
oretical predictions of§2. Throughout this section, we
present results from the balanced and imbalanced sim-
ulations together, so that their qualitatively different
evolution can be contrasted for each diagnostic.
4.1.Time evolution of turbulence and minor-ion
kinetics
4.1.1.Reduced quantities
The time evolution of the fluctuation amplitudes,
z±
rms
.=⟨|z ±|2⟩1/2, and turbulence imbalance,σ c, is
shown in the left column of Fig. 3. In the simulations
with balanced driving, the fluctuation amplitudes satu-
rate within a few turnover times, by 2τA. This evolution
differs starkly from the runs with imbalanced driving. In

10Zhang et al.
T able 1.Properties of the six simulations time averaged from whenz +
rms saturates.
Columns report the initial proton beta, input values ofε H/ε, cross helicity, magnetic-
fluctuation amplitude, measured energy injection rateε inj,rms in units ofm pv2
A0Ωp/2V,
1−ε inj,H,rms/εinj,rms, and the measured electron heatingQ e/Vε inj,rms. Theβ p0 = 1/16
balanced simulation has a lower late-time total dissipation, (Qp +Q e)/Vε inj,rms ≈0.47,
than the other runs, for which (Qp+Qe)/Vε inj,rms ≈1. This reflects the short saturated
interval available for time averaging, since this run was evolved only tot= 3.8τ A.
βp0 εH/ε|σ c|δB rms/B0 εinj,rms 1−ε inj,H,rms/εinj,rms Qe/Vε inj,rms
1 0.9 0.97 0.52 9.3×10 −5 0.05 0.12
1 0 0.23 0.33 2.0×10 −4 N/A 0.60
0.3 0.9 0.98 0.33 5.9×10 −5 0.08 0.07
0.3 0 0.024 0.19 8.5×10 −5 N/A 0.60
1/16 0.9 0.93 0.15 3.2×10 −5 0.05 0.07
1/16 0 0.21 0.15 1.7×10 −4 N/A 0.20
,
1 − σc
imbalanced
z+
rms/vAz−
rms/vA
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10−2
10−1
100
t/τA
,
1 − σc
balanced
z+
rms/vAz−
rms/vA
0 5 10 150
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10−2
10−1
100
∆i
.= T⊥ i/T∥i − 1
0
5
10
15
t/τA
∆i
.= T⊥ i/T∥i − 1
i =
0 5 10 15
0
5
10
15 p
α
O5+
O6+
C6+
C5+
Mg9+
Fe9+
(T⊥ i/T⊥ i0)/Ai
10−1
100
β = 1
β = 0.3
β = 1/16
t/τA
(T⊥ i/T⊥ i0)/Ai
0 5 10 15
10−1
100
Figure 3.Left panel shows time evolution ofz ±
rms in red/blue andσ c in yellow (right axis). Middle and right panels show
mass-normalized temperatures and temperature anisotropies, respectively, of protons and minor ions as indicated by colors on
legend, throughout the imbalanced (top) and balanced (bottom) simulations atβ= 1 (solid),β= 0.3 (dotted), andβ= 1/16
(dashed).

Inverted minor-ion heating in imbalanced turbulence11
those runs, only the subdominant fluctuation amplitude,
z−
rms, saturates by 2τA. The dominant fluctuation ampli-
tude,z +
rms, continues to grow and saturates later. This
evolution is consistent with the helicity barrier, which
allows only the balanced portion of the cascade flux,
≈2ε−
inj, to reach small scales,k ⊥ρp ≳1, and dissipate
through hyper-resistivity. Consequently,z −
rms saturates
quickly, whilez +
rms, which carries the dominant imbal-
anced portion of the cascade, continues to grow because
it cannot dissipate efficiently through small scales. It
saturates later only at larger amplitudes, when ion heat-
ing becomes sufficient to regulate the cascade.
The late-time values ofσ c,δB rms/B0,ε inj,rms,
1−ε inj,H,rms/εinj,rms, andQ e/Vε inj,rms for all six runs
are summarized in Table 1. Despite the lower values of
εinj,rms in the runs with imbalanced driving, the mag-
netic fluctuation amplitudesδB rms/B0 are comparable
to or larger than the amplitudes in the corresponding
balanced runs. The theory describing the helicity bar-
rier predicts that only the balanced portion of the in-
jected energy proceeds to scales satisfyingk ⊥ρp ≫1,
where it is ultimately dissipated as electron heating, so
thatQ e/Vε inj ≈1−ε inj,H/εinj. The measured values
of 1−ε inj,H/εinj are consistent, particularly at lower
beta, with the late-time-averaged electron heating rates
Qe/Vε inj in Table 1. These heating rates are inferred by
subtracting the proton heating and the rate of change
of bulk-field energy fromε inj. In the runs with balanced
driving,ε H/ε= 0, for which we force onlyu ⊥, slight
energy imbalances develop forβ p0 = 1 andβ p0 = 1/16.
Nevertheless, no signatures of a helicity barrier are seen
in these balanced-driving simulations, leading to de-
creased proton-to-electron heating ratios relative to the
imbalanced runs, as given in Table 2. In balanced tur-
bulence, the enhanced proton heating atβ p0 = 1/16
compared to the higher-beta runs arises from stronger
stochastic heating (Chandran et al. 2010a; Cerri et al.
2021), which is absent in gyrokinetic theories that pre-
dict the opposite trend with beta (Kawazura et al. 2019;
Schekochihin et al. 2019).
The evolution of minor-ion temperatures and tem-
perature anisotropies is shown in the middle and right
columns of Fig. 3. Both quantities grow most strongly
in imbalanced turbulence and at lowβ p0. The ions are
initially isothermal with one another, so heavier ions
begin with lower mass-normalized temperatures. In all
simulations, minor-ion temperatures approach approxi-
mate mass proportionality with one another, with ad-
ditional weaker dependence on both mass and charge.
In theβ p0 = 1/16 imbalanced simulation, where heat-
ing is strongest, minor-ion temperatures surpass mass-
proportionality relative to the bulk protons, reaching
T⊥O5+ /T⊥p ≈39 andT ⊥α/T⊥p ≈7.8 by the end of
the simulation, compared withA O5+ = 16 andA α =
4. For heavy ions (those withA i >4), tempera-
ture anisotropies become extreme, withT ⊥i/T∥i ≳10,
whileT ⊥α/T∥α ≲8. Atβ p0 = 1/16, the imbalanced
simulation reproduces the extreme O 5+ temperatures,
T⊥O5+ /T⊥p ≳40, and anisotropies,T ⊥O5+ /T∥O5+ ∼10,
inferred from remote-sensing measurements of coronal
holes (Kohl et al. 2006; Cranmer et al. 2008). Likewise,
the alpha-to-proton temperature ratio and perpendicu-
lar anisotropy are consistent with near-Sun solar wind
measurements (Mostafavi et al. 2024, 2025).
4.1.2.Development of small parallel scales and PCWs
A key element of our quasilinear theory of minor-ion
heating is the magnetic power spectrum, shown ink ∥-
k⊥ space in Fig. 4. These spectra are computed us-
ing the field-line-following method described by Squire
et al. (2022). As anticipated from the helicity barrier
and reflected in Fig. 3, inertial-range power builds up
with time because the dominant imbalanced portion of
the cascade flux cannot proceed tok ⊥ρp0 ≳1. This
buildup is visible in Fig. 4 as enhanced power at higher
k∥ in the imbalanced simulations (middle and bottom
rows) relative to the saturated balanced simulations (top
row), even at intermediate times,t≈7τ A. Across the
columns of Fig. 4, decreasingβ p0 shifts the power at
fixedk ⊥ρp0 to higherk ∥dp0. This trend is reflected by
the upward shift of the white dotted lines, which pro-
vide guides to the flow of peak fluctuation power below
thek ∥ ∝k 2/3
⊥ critical-balance curve. In the imbalanced
simulations, the enhanced fluctuation power at highk ∥
promotes cyclotron-resonant ion heating and produces
the strongest temperature growth seen in Fig. 3.
Another feature of the imbalanced spectra in Fig. 4 is
the appearance of parallel PCWs, indicated by red ar-
rows, which arise from quasilinear focusing (§2.1). These
parallel PCWs grow earlier and at lowerk∥dp0 for higher
βp0. Although quasilinear theory predicts that the par-
allel scales of the parallel PCWs and the oblique PCWs
atk ⋆
⊥ differ (k ⋆
∥,P andk ⋆
∥,cr, respectively) (Yerger et al.
2026), the difference is small enough in our simulations
to be unmeasurable at late times. At higherβ p0, the
resonance condition for protons withw ∥ ∼v th,p is sat-
isfied at lowerk ∥. As a result, a larger fraction of the
turbulent cascade flux can be quasilinearly focused into
parallel PCWs earlier in the evolution. If these PCWs
influence minor-ion heating through the mechanism de-
scribed in§2.1, their effect should be stronger at higher
βp0, where they reach larger amplitudes and their lower
k⋆
∥,Pdp0 resonates with a larger fraction of the minor-ion
population.
4.1.3.Anisotropy of non-Maxwellian VDFs
Cyclotron-resonant heating by oblique PCWs is the
dominant ion-heating mechanism in the imbalanced sim-
ulations. Quasilinear theory accurately predicts the re-
sulting evolution towards highly asymmetric, non-bi-
Maxwellian ion VDFs. The ion VDFs are plotted in
gyrotropic peculiar-velocity space (w ∥, w⊥) in Fig. 5,
with the axes normalized to the initial thermal speed

12Zhang et al.
β = 1
balanced
t = 7τA,3.3τA
10−1
100
k∥dp
β = 0.3 β = 1/16
parallel
imbalanced
t = 7τA
k⋆
∥,cr
k∥ ∝ k
2/3
⊥
10−1
100
k∥dp
imbalanced
t = 13τA
10−1 100 10110−1
100
k⊥ ρp0
k∥dp
10−1 100 101
k⊥ ρp0
10−1 100 101
k⊥ ρp0
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
EB⊥
PCWs
Figure 4.Spectra of perpendicular magnetic-field fluctuations,E B⊥ =E By +E Bz, in (k ⊥, k∥) space, with logarithmic contours
and color bar in units ofm p0np0v2
A0/2, for theβ= 1 (left column),β= 0.3 (middle column), andβ= 1/16 (right column)
imbalanced simulations at intermediate stages of the evolution (t= 7τ A) (middle row) and saturationt= 13τ A (bottom row).
Equivalent spectra for the balanced simulations are shown at saturation in the top row (t= 7τ A, forβ= 1 andβ= 0.3, and
t= 3.3τ A, forβ= 1/16). White dotted lines, plotted visually, show an approximate flow of peak energy, i.e., the top edge of the
critical-balance cone under which energy cascades to smaller scales; the black dotted lines markk ⊥ρp0 = 1 andk ∥dp0 = 1. The
presence of parallel proton-cyclotron waves (PCWs) is visible from the enhanced power at largerk ∥ and smallk ⊥ at later times
in the imbalanced simulations, and is also explicitly labeled at intermediate time forβ= 1. The purple dotted lines indicate
k⋆
∥,crdp. The colored dashed lines show equal area angular bins ink ⊥-k∥ as described in the text.
of each ion species, (w ∥/vth,i0, w⊥/vth,i0); different axis
ranges are chosen to show the final VDF structure more
clearly. All VDFs flatten along oblique-PCW scattering
contours (black dashed lines) and across Landau reso-
nances (vertical purple dashed lines), with the minor-
ion VDFs flattening along oblique-PCW contours that
extend intow ∥ <0 up tow ∥,min. The mechanism of
quasilinear focusing, described in§2.1, is illustrated by
the red, dashed curves that trace the parallel-PCW scat-
tering contours; these contours are shallower than both
the oblique-PCW contours and the isocontours of the
quasilinearly saturated ion VDFs. Throughout most of
velocity space, the VDF gradients are oriented such that
diffusion along the parallel-PCW contours cools the ions;
for the active bulk protons, Λ p = 1, this diffusion also
emits parallel PCWs. This diffusion facilitates further
heating by moving particles across saturated oblique-
PCW contours onto contours residing at higher kinetic
energies.
Many features of the time evolution ofT ⊥i and ∆i =
T⊥i/T∥i −1 in Fig. 3, including their dependence on
Zi andA i, can be understood from the contour shapes
in Figs. 2 and 5. During the early stages of heavy-ion
heating, the scattering contours are nearly vertical inw⊥
relative to the initial VDFs, before curving toward the
−w∥ direction. The initial thermal speeds determine the
size of the initially isothermal Maxwellian VDFs relative
to the velocity-space scale over which the contours begin
to curve. This is apparent in Fig. 2, where the axes are
normalized tov A and the shaded regions, of approximate
size|w ∥|< v th,i, indicate the dense initial VDF core
of each species. Although the O 5+ scattering contours
are only slightly steeper than the alpha contours, they
extend roughly twice as far inw ⊥ before curving relative

Inverted minor-ion heating in imbalanced turbulence13
β = 1
−vA0
i = p
−5 0 5
0
2
4
6
8
w∥/vth,p0
w⊥ /vth,p0
i = α
−10 −5 0 5 10
0
5
10
w∥/vth,α0
w⊥ /vth,α0
i = O 5+
−20 −10 0 10
0
10
20
w∥/vth,O5+0
w⊥ /vth,O5+0
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
⟨fi⟩β = 0.3
−5 0 5
w∥/vth,p0
−10 −5 0 5 10
w∥/vth,α0
−20 −10 0 10
w∥/vth,O5+0
β = 1/16
−5 0 5
w∥/vth,p0
−10 −5 0 5 10
w∥/vth,α0
−20 −10 0 10 20
w∥/vth,O5+0
Figure 5.Imbalanced simulation VDFs,f i(w∥, w⊥), in peculiar velocity (w ∥, w⊥) of protons (top row), alphas (middle row),
and O5+ (bottom row) att= 13τ A forβ p0 = 1 (left column),β p0 = 0.3 (middle column), andβ p0 = 1/16 (right column), with
logarithmic color bar and contours. The axes are scaled to the initial thermal speeds of each respective species,v th,i0, andw ∥
is taken with respect to the bulk plasma (proton) flow. The kinetic-Alfv´ en-wave Landau resonance is indicated by the vertical
purple dashed line. For each species, the black and red dashed lines trace then= 1 cyclotron-resonant scattering contours for
oblique and parallel PCWs, respectively, propagating in the− ˆbdirection.
to the slower O5+ thermal core. Because heavier ions are
initially slower,v th,i0 ∝A −1/2
i , their smaller VDFs are
stretched farther inw ⊥ before flattening inw ∥. The
early-time peak temperature anisotropies in Fig. 3 are
therefore organized primarily by ion mass.
At late times, quasilinearly saturated ion VDFs adopt
the shapes of their resonant scattering contours, which
then determine the temperature anisotropy of each
species. As discussed in§2 and shown in Fig. 2, minor
ions with larger mass-to-charge ratios have scattering
contours that are steeper inw ⊥, but extend significantly
further intow ∥ <0. Because the interspecies differences
in the extent of the contours, set byw ∥,min, dominate
over differences in contour steepness, the late-time tem-
perature anisotropies in Fig. 3 correlate with decreasing
ion mass-to-charge ratio. This contrasts with the early-
time anisotropies, which depend primarily on ion mass.
The temperature-anisotropy trends predicted by this
discussion are clearest for heavy ions in the imbalanced
βp0 = 1/16 simulation, whose initial VDFs occupy
smaller regions of velocity space and are fully covered
by the scattering contours. For example, the early-
time peaks favor larger ion mass, with max(∆ Mg9+)>
max(∆O6+), whereas the late-time anisotropies depend
mainly on mass-to-charge ratio and increase asAi/Zi de-
creases, as seen from ∆ C6+ >∆ C5+ and ∆O6+ >∆ O5+.
Alphas are lighter and have larger initial thermal speeds,
so their initial VDFs are larger relative to the scattering
contours, leaving a substantial portion atw ∥ < w ∥,min
out of resonance. Consequently, alphas do not develop
an early peak in temperature anisotropy, and, at late
times, do not reach anisotropies as large as those of
C6+, despite having the same gyrofrequency. At higher
βp0, faster ion thermal speeds make the initial ion VDFs
broader relative to the scattering contours and place
more particles withw ∥ <0 out of resonance. Together
with increased Landau damping, which exacerbates the
non-bi-Maxwellian curvature intow ∥ <0, this reduces
ion temperature anisotropies at higher plasma beta.
Overall, the evolution of ion temperature anisotropy can
be understood from the shapes of the scattering contours
relative to the initial ion VDFs: peak anisotropies are
organized primarily by ion mass, saturated anisotropies

14Zhang et al.
are organized primarily by mass-to-charge ratio, and
anisotropies are generally larger at lowerβ p0.
The VDFs in simulations of balanced turbulence (not
shown) do not indicate quasilinear flattening along res-
onant contours and exhibit little asymmetry inw ∥.
This lack of quasilinear flattening is expected because
nonlinear frequency broadening is stronger in balanced
turbulence, making resonant-heating phenomenologies
less applicable (Johnston & Squire 2025). Instead, the
reduced distributions,f i(w⊥), are flat-topped for all
ion species in balanced turbulence (e.g., theβ p0 =
0.3 balanced simulation in the bottom panel of fig-
ure 7 of Zhang et al. 2025), consistent with predic-
tions for stochastic heating (Klein & Chandran 2016).
Regardless, wave–particle interactions, including Lan-
dau damping, which in imbalanced turbulence produce
w∥ asymmetries and drifts, instead contribute primar-
ily to increasing the parallel temperature when co- and
counter-propagating fluctuations are balanced. The
weaker temperature anisotropies seen in Fig. 3 for the
balanced-driving simulations are therefore expected.
4.2.Mass-charge dependence of minor-ion heating
The broad set of minor-ion species in our simulations
provides detailed empirical constraints on the mass–
charge dependence of ion heating. Although the minor-
ion temperatures in Fig. 3 are approximately mass pro-
portional, additional dependencies on mass and charge
accumulate over the heating history. For direct com-
parison with the quasilinear theory in§2.2, we use the
non-dispersive limit of Eq. (16), which predicts a sim-
ple power-law dependence of minor-ion heating rates on
mass-to-charge ratio,Q i ∝A i(Ai/Zi)apred. The predic-
tion isa pred =η−2, whereE E⊥ ∼k −η
∥ is the perpendic-
ular electric-field energy spectrum ink ∥ of the resonant
wave mode. We calculate heating rates in the simu-
lations from the rate of change of the box-integrated
temperature of each species,
Q⊥i
.= d
dt
Z
dr
Z
dw 1
2 miw2
⊥fi,(28)
Q∥i
.= d
dt
Z
dr
Z
dw 1
2 miw2
∥fi,(29)
withQ i =Q ⊥i +Q ∥i. We infer the time-dependent
power-law indexa(t) describing the dependence of the
heating rate on mass-to-charge ratio by least-squares
regression of the linear relationship, log(Q i(t)/Ai) =
a(t) log(Ai/Zi)+logK(t), withK(t) the constant of pro-
portionality of the power law. At each time, the fit uses
only the instantaneous minor-ion heating rates.
Fig. 6 demonstrates that the minor-ion heating rates
in our simulations are fit extremely well by empirical
power-laws in ion mass-to-charge ratio. The first two
rows of the figure show the heating rate of each species,
normalized by the box volume, the late-time-averaged
energy injection rate, and the fitted mass–charge depen-
dence,A i(Ai/Zi)a(t), with the color of the lines indicat-
ing the species type. With this fit and normalization,
the minor-ion heating rates collapse onto one another.
The black lines show the fitted proportionality constant,
K(t), which measures the efficiency of minor-ion heating
relative to the energy injection rate after removing the
mass–charge dependence.
For passive minor ions,Q i(t)/(Vε inj) andK(t) can
exceed unity. This occurs, for example, in the imbal-
anced simulations shown in the top panel of Fig. 6,
where⟨K⟩ t ≳1−1.5 by saturation. Because our mi-
nor ions are passive and do not remove energy from the
electromagnetic fields, these heating rates measure how
rapidly the temperature of each species changes, rather
than the fraction of cascade energy absorbed by that
species. The large values ofK(t) reflect two effects in
imbalanced turbulence: (i) enhanced ion heating rela-
tive to electron heating, corresponding to largerQ p/Qe,
and (ii) enhanced minor-ion heating relative to proton
heating, corresponding to largerQ i/Qp. Both effects
arise naturally from the helicity barrier, as follows.
(i)Enhancement ofQ p/Qe.Because of the helicity
barrier, only the subdominant balanced portion
of the cascade flux reaches small scales and heats
electrons (§4.1 and Table 1). In saturation, the
dominant imbalanced portion must instead dis-
sipate through ion heating. This is apparent in
Fig. 6: the purple lines, corresponding to proton
heating, compose a larger fraction ofε inj in the im-
balanced runs in the top row than in the balanced
runs in the middle row. The saturated proton-to-
electron heating ratios, given for each simulation
in Table 2, are larger by factors of≈6−30 when
the driving is imbalanced.
(ii)Enhancement ofQ i/Qp.This enhancement arises
from both wave dispersion and the helicity bar-
rier, because protons resonate with fluctuations
at particularly highk ∥, where the power falls off
steeply. The fluctuation power that heats the
core of the proton distribution,w ∥ ≲v th,p, lies
atk ∥ > k ⋆
∥,cr, with its local maximum near the
transition-range cutoff atk ⋆
⊥ρp ∼1. Atk ⊥ > k ⋆
⊥,
the fluctuation power rapidly decreases through
the transition range as a consequence of the he-
licity barrier. By contrast, thek ∥ < k ⋆
∥,cr fluc-
tuations that resonate strongly with minor ions
have maximum power atk ⊥ well within the in-
ertial range. After integrating overk ⊥, thek ∥
spectrum steepens ask ∥ approaches and exceeds
k⋆
∥,cr, because an increasing fraction of the con-
tributing power comes from fluctuations near or
beyond the transition-range cutoff. Thus, protons
sample a steeper, lower-power portion ofE E⊥(k∥)
than the minor ions, whose heating is controlled
by the shallowerE E⊥ ∼k −η
∥ scaling over their

Inverted minor-ion heating in imbalanced turbulence15
T able 2.Late-time heating ratios,Q p/Qe andK/Q p,
for the six simulations, averaged over the saturated
state. Empirical power-law indices are given for the
fits att= 7τ A (a7τA), the end of each simulation
(aend), and at times for each simulation whereais
maximized (amax).
βp0 εH/ε Q p/Qe K/Qp amax a7τA aend
1 0.9 4.81 1.80 1.8 0 -0.6
1 0 0.71 0.90 1 0.1 0
0.3 0.9 12.9 1.70 1.8 1 -0.4
0.3 0 0.47 1.00 1.3 0.75 0.7
1/16 0.9 10.2 1.66 1.6 0.6 0.5
1/16 0 1.37 1.27 1.9 N/A 0.75
resonant range. Dispersive effects, described by
Eq. (21), further strengthen this distinction for
protons: asw ∥ →0, protons resonate with fluctu-
ations atk ∥,res(Ωp, w∥ = 0)→ ∞, where the power
vanishes. Thus, beyond the expected mass–charge
dependence, minor ions are heated more strongly
than protons, withK/Q p ≈1.7 in imbalanced tur-
bulence compared toK/Q p ∼1 in balanced tur-
bulence, as summarized in Table 2.
We now focus on the empirical mass–charge scalings
described by the fitted power-law indicesa(t, σ c, βp0) in
the bottom panel of Fig. 6, and assess whether the pre-
diction of quasilinear theory forabased on the slope
of the electric-field spectrum is accurate. In all simula-
tions, a strong dependence of the formQ i ∼A i(Ai/Zi)a,
with 1< a <2, emerges at early times,∼1−2τ A, after
the turbulent cascade develops. Thereafter, the power
law weakens andadecreases in time. For balanced tur-
bulence, the power-law index saturates ata≈0.75 in
the lower-beta simulations,β p0 = 0.3 andβ p0 = 1/16,
and reachesa≈0, corresponding to mass-proportional
heating, atβ p0 = 1. For imbalanced turbulence, the
power-law index saturates only forβ p0 = 1/16, reach-
inga≈0.5, but continues to decrease into negative
values forβ p0 = 0.3 andβ p0 = 1. The gray shading
in Fig. 6 marks the corresponding “inverted” regime,
a <0, in which the heating-rate scaling decreases with
Ai/Zi. This inversion occurs earlier forβ p0 = 1, after
t≈7τ A, than forβ p0 = 0.3, wherea <0 aftert≈12τ A.
The early-time peak values,a max, and final values,a end,
are summarized in Table 2.
To compare these empirically inferred power laws with
the non-dispersive quasilinear prediction,a pred =η−2
forE E⊥ ∼k −η
∥ , we compute the power spectra of per-
pendicular electric-field fluctuations,E E⊥ =E Ey +E Ez.
Qi/(VεinjAi(Ai/Zi)a)
imbalanced
10−2
10−1
100
K
Qi/(VεinjAi(Ai/Zi)a)
balanced
10−2
10−1
100
i =
p
α
O5+
O6+
C6+
C5+
Mg9+
Fe9+
“inverted”, a < 0
a(balanced)a(imbalanced)
0 5 10 15
−2
−1
0
1
2
t/τA
,
β = 1
β = 0.3
β = 1/16
Figure 6.Top and middle: Total heating rates for each
ion species (different colors; see legend), normalized by the
box volume, time-averaged energy injection, and the time-
dependent fits from the bottom panel, in the imbalanced
(top) and balanced (middle) simulations. The thinner black
lines show the fitted values of the constant of proportionality,
K. Because the fitted power laws collapse the minor-ion
heating rates, many of the colored curves lie nearly on top
of one another and are not individually visible. Bottom:
Time evolution of the power-law index,a, obtained by fitting
quantities proportional to (Ai/Zi)a for the imbalanced (blue)
and balanced (red) simulations atβ p0 = 1 (solid),β p0 = 0.3
(dotted), andβ p0 = 1/16 (dashed). The fitted quantities are
the heating rates normalized by averaged energy injection,
volume, and ion mass. The shaded region marksa <0,
corresponding to an inverted dependence of heating rate on
mass-to-charge ratio.

16Zhang et al.
EE(k∥) k2
∥d2
p
β = 1
t = 2τA E ∝ k− 3.8
∥
10− 5
10− 4
10− 3
β = 0.3
E ∝ k− 3.8
∥
k∥,res,O,α
k∥,res,O,O5+
β = 1/16
E ∝ k− 3.6
∥
EE(k∥) k2
∥d2
p
t = 7τA
E ∝ k− 2
∥
10− 5
10− 4
10− 3
E ∝ k− 3
∥
E ∝ k− 2.6
∥
k∥dp
EE(k∥) k2
∥d2
p
t = 13τA
E ∝ k− 1.4
∥
10− 2 10− 1 100
10− 5
10− 4
10− 3
k∥dp
E ∝ k− 1.6
∥
10− 1 100
k∥dp
E ∝ k− 2.5
∥
10− 1 100
 0◦
24.2◦
57.2◦
69.8◦
75.7◦
79.9◦
83.9◦
90◦
θ
Figure 7.Electric power spectra ink ∥,E E⊥ (black, solid), att= 2τ A (top row),t= 7τ A (middle row), andt= 13τ A (bottom
row) for the imbalanced simulations withβ p0 = 1 (left column),β p0 = 0.3 (middle column), andβ p0 = 1/16 (right column).
The spectra are computed from the spectra in (k ⊥, k∥) space in Fig. 4 by removing KAWs through a cutoff atk ⊥ρp0 =π/2 and
integrating ink ⊥. Different colors correspond to spectra evaluated over different equal-area bins in (k ⊥, k∥) specified by their
central obliquity, tanθ=k ⊥/k∥. Values ofk ∥, for which Alfv´ en waves are resonant with O5+ and alphas that havew ∥ = 0, are
indicated by the vertical, grey dash-dotted lines. Guidelines for various spectral slopes needed such that the measured values
ofa(t) in Fig. 6 (given at each time in Table 2) agree with the nondispersive prediction (a(t) =η−2 withE E⊥ ∼k −η
∥ ) are
shown by black dash-dotted lines. Gray shading marks panels with appreciable power in the lowest-obliquity bin; these are the
snapshots for which the heating-rate scaling withA i/Zi in Fig. 6 is inverted,a <0.
As for Fig. 4, we first computeE E⊥ in (k ⊥, k∥) space
and then integrate overk ⊥ to obtainE E⊥(k∥). For the
imbalanced simulations, the resultingE E⊥(k∥) spectra
are plotted as black lines in Fig. 7 at three different
times. The spectra are compensated byk 2
∥, so that
a horizontal spectrum corresponds toE E⊥ ∼k −2
∥ , the
conservative-flux-cascade scaling for which our quasilin-
ear theory predictsa= 0. As discussed in§2,G k∥,res,i fi
determines whether oblique or parallel PCWs dominate
the heating, while the electric-field spectrum of the dom-
inant waves determines the mass–charge scaling. To
separate contributions from modes with different obliq-
uities, tanθ=k ⊥/k∥, we divide (k ⊥, k∥) space into
equal-area bins inθ, whose right edges are indicated
by the colored dashed lines in Fig. 4. Because we expect
heating to be dominated by inertial-range fluctuations
rather than by kinetic Alfv´ en waves (KAWs), we inte-
grateE E⊥(k⊥, k∥) overk ⊥ within each bin only up to
a cutoff atk ⊥ρp0 =π/2. The resulting binned spec-
tra,E E⊥(k∥), are shown by the colored lines in Fig. 7. 2
At later times, parallel PCWs appear as a bump in the
k∥-spectra of the lowest-obliquity bins neark ⋆
∥,P ≈k ⋆
∥,cr.
We now compare the empirically fitted power-law in-
dices from Fig. 6,a(t), with the phenomenology of§2.2
for imbalanced turbulence. We consider three repre-
sentative stages: early times,t= 2τ A, corresponding
toa max; intermediate times,t= 7τ A, corresponding to
a7τA; and late times,t= 13τ A, corresponding toa end. In
each panel of Fig. 7, the black dash-dotted line shows the
2 The steepness of the early-time spectra in the top row of Fig. 7 is
sensitive to the cutoff ink ⊥ρp0. Including a longer kinetic range
flattens the spectra because of the contribution from KAWs. This
effect is less prominent at later times, as in the middle and bottom
rows of Fig. 7, because the helicity barrier causes inertial-range
fluctuations to grow and dominate in amplitude over the KAWs
below the steep transition range atk ⊥ρp0 ≳1.

Inverted minor-ion heating in imbalanced turbulence17
spectral slopek −[a(t)+2]
∥ required for the non-dispersive
quasilinear prediction,a pred =η−2, to match the fitted
a(t). The relevant values ofa(t) are taken from Fig. 6
and summarized in Table 2. Because our quasilinear pre-
dictions compare minor-ion heating rates atw ∥ = 0, the
relevant spectral range ink ∥ is bounded by the vertical
dash-dotted gray lines in Fig. 7. These lines mark the
resonantk ∥,res(w∥ = 0) range for O 5+ and alphas, the
minor ions with the largest and smallest mass-to-charge
ratios, respectively, for resonance with oblique PCWs.
We organize the comparison into three phases of heat-
ing: (i) initial heating, represented bya max; (ii) near-
saturated oblique-PCW heating, represented bya 7τA for
βp0 ={0.3,1/16}and bya end forβ p0 = 1/16; and (iii)
parallel-PCW-facilitated heating, represented bya 7τA
forβ p0 = 1 and bya end forβ p0 ={1,0.3}.
(i) At early times,t= 2τ A, the spectra in the top row
of Fig. 7 correspond to the initial-heating regime
described in§2.2. In this regime, the quasilinear
prediction assumes that all minor-ion VDFs are far
from saturation, so that their velocity-space gra-
dients scale with the initial thermal speeds of each
species. Over the resonant ranges ink ∥, the spec-
tral slopes are steeper than at later times and steep
enough to produce the strong early-time scalings,
amax ≈1.6−1.8. Because the dispersive correction
in Eq. (21) scales asη−3, spectra withη >3, as
in this early stage, further favor heating of ions
with largerA i/Zi and thereby relax the required
spectral steepness. The choice ofw ∥,res, thek ⊥
cutoff applied to the spectra, and this dispersive
correction can modify the resonantk ∥ range, mea-
sured spectral steepness, and the required slope,
improving agreement between the theory and em-
pirical scalings. This is particularly relevant for
theβ p0 = 1/16 case in the early-time stage.
(ii) At intermediate and late times, the second regime
of§2.2 applies: ion VDFs are nearly quasi-
linearly flattened along oblique-PCW scattering
contours, so their velocity-space gradients along
those contours are similar between species. When
the energy in parallel PCWs remains negligible,
oblique Alfv´ en/PCW fluctuations dominate the
totalE E⊥(k∥) and are responsible for ion heating.
Because the cascade power is distributed over a
range of obliquities, the oblique fluctuations do
not all share the same scattering contours. In a
weaker analogue of the cross-contour transport by
parallel PCWs described in§2.1, diffusion at one
obliquity can therefore move particles across con-
tours that are nearly saturated with respect to
fluctuations at another obliquity. Thus, heating
by oblique PCWs, while weakened, persists in this
near-saturated state.
Moving down the rows of Fig. 7,E E⊥(k∥) flattens
within the resonant range. This spectral flattening
is consistent with the weakening power-law depen-
dence of minor-ion heating rates in Fig. 6. When
parallel PCWs remain weak and heating is solely
by oblique fluctuations, the spectral slopes of the
total electric-field power agree well with the em-
pirical heating-rate scalings througha pred =η−2.
For example, att= 7τ A,η≈ {3,2.6}anda 7τA =
{1,0.6}forβ p0 ={0.3,1/16}, while att= 13τ A,
η≈2.5 anda end = 0.5 forβ p0 = 1/16. For these
slopes, which are only slightly steeper than the
constant-flux valueη= 2, dispersive corrections
are small because they scale asη−3. For example,
ifE E ∼k −2.5
∥ , dispersion changes the predicted
mass–charge scaling only fromQ i ∼A i(Ai/Zi)0.5
to approximatelyQ i ∼A i(Ai/Zi)0.4 over the
range of Ω i considered here.
(iii) A third heating stage arises once quasilinearly fo-
cused parallel PCWs contain sufficient energy near
the minor-ion-resonant range ofk ∥. This stage
still belongs to the second regime of§2.2, in which
ion VDFs are nearly flat along oblique contours
and standard quasilinear heating by oblique fluc-
tuations slows. Parallel PCWs then strongly fa-
cilitate cross-contour diffusion, providing an alter-
native pathway for further minor-ion heating and
becoming the relevant wave population for deter-
mining the mass–charge scaling. This mechanism
explains the subsequent inversion of the mass-to-
charge dependence in theβ p0 ={1,0.3}imbal-
anced simulations.
Consider the shaded panels in Fig. 7:t= 7τ A and
t= 13τ A forβ p0 = 1, andt= 13τ A forβ p0 = 0.3.
At these times, quasilinear predictions based on
thek ∥-slope of the totalE E⊥ substantially over-
predict the measuredain Fig. 6. Concurrently,
the lowest-obliquity blue bin contains relatively
more power than in the other panels. Because
the parallel PCWs are driven by protons and peak
at a finitek ⋆
∥,P, at smaller parallel scales than
those resonant with most minor ions, they flatten
thek ∥-spectrum of the lowest-obliquity bin across
the minor-ion-resonant range. When this spec-
trum becomes shallower than the constant-flux
scaling,k −2
∥ , the predicted heating-rate scaling in-
verts,Q i ∼A i(Ai/Zi)a witha pred =η−2<0.
This matches the inversions of the measureda
in Fig. 6 for theβ p0 = 0.3 andβ p0 = 1 imbal-
anced simulations. These parallel PCWs reach
large amplitudes earlier and at lowerk ∥dp0 for
higher plasma beta. This trend is consistent with
the heating-rate inversion occurring by 7τ A for
βp0 = 1, by 12τ A forβ p0 = 0.3, and not occur-
ring forβ p0 = 1/16.

18Zhang et al.
In the balanced-turbulence simulations, we do not ob-
serve a large population of parallel PCWs or an inver-
sion of the heating-rate dependence onA i/Zi. The fitted
scalings from these simulations are shown in red in the
bottom panel of Fig. 6. Their evolution is less well cap-
tured by quasilinear predictions based on the evolving
k∥-slopes of the electric-field spectra. The spectra for
the balanced runs are not shown. This weaker agree-
ment is expected due to stronger nonlinear frequency
broadening in balanced turbulence (Johnston & Squire
2025). We therefore view the balanced simulations pri-
marily as a control case demonstrating that the inver-
sion mechanism is promoted in imbalanced turbulence,
where quasilinear focusing is enhanced by the helicity
barrier.
Putting these results together, the saturated minor-
ion heating rates in our simulations can be expressed by
the semi-empirical formula
Qi
Qp
≈A i
 Ai
Zi
a
×



1.0,balanced
1.7,imbalanced
,(30)
where we have neglected the weakβ p0 dependence of
the coefficient and the dispersive corrections described
in§2.2. For imbalanced turbulence, the helicity bar-
rier predicts an electron heating rate ofQ e/(Vε inj)≈
1−ε inj,H/εinj, which then implies in saturation that
the proton heating rate isQ p/(Vε inj)≈ε inj,H/εinj. The
mass–charge dependence ofQ i is then set by the quasi-
linear phenomenology of§2.2, witha≈η−2 deter-
mined by the electric-field spectrum,E E⊥ ∼k −η
∥ , of the
wave population that controls the heating. When par-
allel PCWs control the heating, their flatter spectra can
invert the dependence, causing heating rates to correlate
negatively with mass-to-charge ratio.
With this formula, we can contextualize the trends of
Ti/Ti0 with imbalance andβ p0 from§4.1. Despite the
lower values ofε inj in the imbalanced runs (Table 1),
minor-ion temperatures become most extreme when tur-
bulence is imbalanced because both proton heating rel-
ative to electron heating,Q p/Qe, and minor-ion heat-
ing relative to proton heating,Q i/Qp, are enhanced.
The helicity barrier gives rise to both enhancements,
while the dispersive properties of PCWs, which affect
protons most strongly, also contribute to the enhance-
ment ofQ i/Qp. Althoughε inj, and thereforeQ i, varies
only weakly withβ p0 in the imbalanced runs, the frac-
tional temperature increase,T i/Ti0, grows strongly to-
ward lowerβ p0. This trend follows from our choice to
normalize the forcing to the magnetic-field energy, or
equivalently to comparable Alfv´ enic fluctuation ampli-
tudes, rather than to the initial thermal energy: for
comparableu ⊥/vA, the fluctuation energy represents a
larger fraction of the initial ion thermal energy at lower
beta. Together with the tendency fora(t) to saturate
at higher values at lowerβ p0, owing to weaker parallel-
PCW growth, this explains why minor-ion temperatures
are most extreme in low-β p0, imbalanced turbulence.
5.SUMMARY
As tracers, minor ions provide rich diagnostics of the
kinetic physics governing waves, turbulence, and dissi-
pation throughout the collisionless solar wind. Their
wide range of masses and charge states tightly constrains
theories that seek to explain their extreme perpendicular
temperatures and the dependence of those temperatures
on mass-to-charge ratio,A i/Zi. We develop a quasilin-
ear phenomenology for this mass-to-charge dependence,
predicting how minor-ion heating rates scale withA i/Zi
as Alfv´ enic turbulence and heating evolve toward satu-
ration. Combined with the physics of turbulence imbal-
ance and the helicity barrier, this phenomenology pre-
dicts the salient features of minor-ion heating in hybrid-
kinetic simulations across solar-wind-relevant parame-
ters: proton beta,β p0 ∈ {1,0.3,1/16}, and normalized
cross helicity,σ c ≈ {0,0.9}.
Minor-ion temperatures and temperature anisotropies
become most extreme and most perpendicular in im-
balanced turbulence at lowβ p0. For example, by the
end of our imbalancedβ p0 = 1/16 simulation, we find
T⊥O5+ /T⊥p ≈39 andT ⊥O5+ /T∥O5+ ≈10, reproducing
remote UVCS measurements of coronal holes (Cranmer
et al. 2008; Kohl et al. 2006). The extreme temperatures
arise from enhanced proton heating relative to electron
heating,Q p/Qe, and enhanced minor-ion heating rela-
tive to proton heating,Q i/Qp ∝K/Q p, when turbu-
lence is imbalanced. In our simulations,K≈1.7Q p
for imbalanced turbulence andK≈1.0Q p for balanced
turbulence. Both enhancements arise from the helic-
ity barrier, while the enhancement ofQ i/Qp is further
strengthened by stronger dispersive effects for resonant
protons. At lowerβ p0, the fluctuation energy is also
larger relative to the initial ion thermal energy. Like-
wise, the temperature-anisotropy trends follow the VDF
shapes predicted by quasilinear saturation in imbalanced
turbulence.
Our phenomenology predicts that minor-ion heating
rates scale asQ i ≈KA i(Ai/Zi)a(vη
ph,k∥,res
/vg,k∥,res).
Here,a=η−2, whereηis thek ∥-spectral slope of
the perpendicular-electric-field spectrum,E E⊥ ∼k −η
∥ ,
over the minor-ion-resonant range of the wave popula-
tion responsible for heating. Unlike previous quasilin-
ear treatments of the mass–charge scaling of minor-ion
heating (Isenberg & Hollweg 1983; Hollweg 1999; Cran-
mer 2002), our model retains both oblique and paral-
lel PCWs. Their relative importance changes as ion
VDFs approach quasilinear saturation along oblique-
PCW contours, and both wave populations emerge self-
consistently in imbalanced turbulence. Because of the
helicity barrier, oblique Alfv´ enic fluctuations in the iner-
tial range develop smaller parallel scales and become dis-
persive, oblique PCWs. The resulting strong cyclotron-

Inverted minor-ion heating in imbalanced turbulence19
resonant proton heating by these high-frequency oblique
PCWs drives the proton population unstable to the
emission of parallel PCWs throughquasilinear focus-
ing(Chandran et al. 2010b). When minor-ion VDFs
are nearly quasilinearly saturated along oblique-PCW
scattering contours, these parallel PCWs facilitate ad-
ditional cross-contour diffusion and enable further heat-
ing by oblique fluctuations. Unlike oblique fluctua-
tions, whose energy decreases as they cascade to higher
k∥, these parallel PCWs concentrate power near large
k∥ ∼k ⋆
∥,P. Because minor ions resonate strongly at
k∥,res,i ∼Ω i/vA, and the power in parallel PCWs de-
creases away fromk ⋆
∥,P > k ∥,res,i, minor ions with higher
gyrofrequency Ω i ∝Z i/Ai (i.e., smaller mass-to-charge
ratioA i/Zi) become preferentially heated. This process
can invert the mass-to-charge scaling ofQ i, changinga
from positive values toa <0.
We measurea(t) for minor-ion heating rates in our
simulations and find that its evolution is consistent with
our phenomenology when the turbulence is imbalanced.
At early times, before parallel PCWs develop apprecia-
ble power, the oblique-dominated spectra are steep, ap-
proximatelyk −4
∥ , and the power-law scaling peaks near
a≈2. As the turbulence evolves, the spectra flatten,
accompanied by a corresponding decrease ina(t). When
parallel PCWs reach sufficient amplitude, the predicted
inversions occur, witha <0. In contrast, our simula-
tions with balanced turbulence exhibit weaker, less per-
pendicular minor-ion heating and no inversion of the
heating-rate dependence onA i/Zi. Because nonlinear
broadening is strong in balanced turbulence (Johnston
& Squire 2025), our quasilinear phenomenology is less
applicable in this regime and the balanced simulations
do not produce parallel PCWs for the same reasons.
We therefore predict that, in the solar wind, “in-
verted” scalings of minor-ion temperature with ion
mass-to-charge ratio,T i/Ai ∝(A i/Zi)a witha <0,
should preferentially occur in intervals with a history of
enhanced coherent parallel PCW power and large cross
helicity. A caveat is that observed minor-ion temper-
atures reflect the accumulated history of heating along
the flow, whereasa(t) in our simulations describes the
instantaneous dependence of heating rates on the local
turbulent spectra. Nevertheless, if the regions that con-
tribute most strongly to minor-ion temperatures are also
highly imbalanced, then ion-cyclotron heating, quasilin-
ear focusing, and parallel-PCW emission should operate
efficiently there. In that case, the connection between
inverted temperature scalings, parallel PCWs, and cross
helicity may remain visible in the accumulated minor-
ion temperature signatures.
Previous observational studies of minor-ion temper-
atures, including inversions with mass-to-charge ratio
(Tracy et al. 2016), have often organized intervals by
collisional age. For ion–proton thermalization, the
species-dependent collisional age can be written approx-
imately asA C,i ∼(R/v sw)νip, whereν ip is the Coulomb
thermalization rate between ion speciesiand protons
(Kasper et al. 2008). Thus, low-A C intervals tend to
correspond to faster, less collisionally processed solar
wind, and Tracy et al. (2016) find broader ranges of
inverted thermal-speed scalings in such intervals. Be-
cause solar-wind speed, collisional age, and cross helicity
are themselves correlated, ongoing measurements from
Parker Solar ProbeandSolar Orbitershould seek to also
isolate cross helicity as an independent organizing pa-
rameter for minor-ion heating. The most direct tests are
whether increasing cross helicity correlates with stronger
coherent parallel PCWs, enhanced minor-ion temper-
atures, larger perpendicular temperature anisotropies,
and more frequent or stronger inverted scalings with
mass-to-charge ratio. If these correlations are observed,
they would provide direct evidence that turbulence im-
balance and the helicity barrier govern particle heating
in high-cross-helicity regions of the solar wind.
This work benefited from useful conversations with
Kristopher Klein, Benjamin Chandran, Christopher
Chen, Mihailo Martinovi´ c, Romain Meyrand, and Zade
Johnston. M.F.Z., M.W.K., and E.Y. were supported
by the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion (NASA) under Grant No. 80NSSC24K0171 issued
through the Heliophysics, Theory, Modeling and Simula-
tion Program. Support for J.S. was provided by Ruther-
ford Discovery Fellowship RDF-U001804 and Marsden
Fund grant UOO1727, which are managed through the
Royal Society Te Ap¯ arangi. Additional support for
E.Y. was provided by NASA grant No. NNN06AA01C.
This work is part of the Frontera computing project at
the Texas Advanced Computing Center under alloca-
tion number AST20010; it also made extensive use of
the Stellar cluster at the PICSciE-OIT TIGRESS High
Performance Computing Center and Visualization Lab-
oratory at Princeton University. The authors thank the
Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics (KITP) for its
hospitality during the completion of this work; KITP is
supported in part by the National Science Foundation
under Award No. PHY-2309135.
REFERENCES
Adkins, T., Meyrand, R., & Squire, J. 2025, ApJ, 990, 138,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade9b0
Arzamasskiy, L., Kunz, M. W., Squire, J., Quataert, E., &
Schekochihin, A. A. 2023, PhRvX, 13, 021014,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.13.021014

20Zhang et al.
Bame, S. J., Asbridge, J. R., Feldman, W. C., & Kearney,
P. D. 1974, SoPh, 35, 137, doi: 10.1007/BF00156963
Bochsler, P. 2000, RvGeo, 38, 247,
doi: 10.1029/1999RG000063
—. 2007, A&ARv, 14, 1, doi: 10.1007/s00159-006-0002-x
Bochsler, P., Geis, J., & Joos, R. 1985, JGR, 90, 10779,
doi: 10.1029/JA090iA11p10779
Boldyrev, S. 2006, PhRvL, 96, 115002,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.115002
Bowen, T. A., Bale, S. D., Chandran, B. D. G., et al. 2024,
NatAs, 8, 482, doi: 10.1038/s41550-023-02186-4
Byers, J. A., Cohen, B. I., Condit, W. C., & Hanson, J. D.
1978, JCoPh, 27, 363, doi: 10.1016/0021-9991(78)90016-5
Cerri, S. S., Arzamasskiy, L., & Kunz, M. W. 2021, ApJ,
916, 120, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abfbde
Chandran, B. D. G. 2010, ApJ, 720, 548,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/720/1/548
Chandran, B. D. G., Li, B., Rogers, B. N., Quataert, E., &
Germaschewski, K. 2010a, ApJ, 720, 503,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/720/1/503
Chandran, B. D. G., Pongkitiwanichakul, P., Isenberg,
P. A., et al. 2010b, ApJ, 722, 710,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/722/1/710
Chen, C. H. K. 2016, JPlPh, 82, 535820602,
doi: 10.1017/S0022377816001124
Cranmer, S. R. 2002, SSRv, 101, 229,
doi: 10.1023/A:1020840004535
—. 2009, LRSP, 6, 3, doi: 10.12942/lrsp-2009-3
Cranmer, S. R., Panasyuk, A. V., & Kohl, J. L. 2008, ApJ,
678, 1480, doi: 10.1086/586890
Gendrin, R. 1968, JATP, 30, 1313,
doi: 10.1016/S0021-9169(68)91158-6
Goldreich, P., & Sridhar, S. 1995, ApJ, 438, 763,
doi: 10.1086/175121
Halekas, J. S., Bale, S. D., Berthomier, M., et al. 2023,
ApJ, 952, 26, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acd769
Hewett, D. W., & Nielson, C. W. 1978, JCoPh, 29, 219,
doi: 10.1016/0021-9991(78)90153-5
Hollweg, J. V. 1999, JGR, 104, 24781,
doi: 10.1029/1999JA900300
Hollweg, J. V., & Isenberg, P. A. 2002, JGRA, 107, 1147,
doi: 10.1029/2001JA000270
Horbury, T. S., Forman, M., & Oughton, S. 2008, PhRvL,
101, 175005, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.175005
Isenberg, P. A. 1984, JGR, 89, 6613,
doi: 10.1029/JA089iA08p06613
—. 2004, JGRA, 109, A03101, doi: 10.1029/2002JA009449
—. 2012, PhPl, 19, 032116, doi: 10.1063/1.3697721
Isenberg, P. A., & Hollweg, J. V. 1983, JGR, 88, 3923,
doi: 10.1029/JA088iA05p03923
Isenberg, P. A., & Lee, M. A. 1996, JGR, 101, 11055,
doi: 10.1029/96JA00293
Isenberg, P. A., Lee, M. A., & Hollweg, J. V. 2001, JGR,
106, 5649, doi: 10.1029/2000JA000099
Isenberg, P. A., & Vasquez, B. J. 2011, ApJ, 731, 88,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/731/2/88
Johnston, Z., & Squire, J. 2025, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2512.03472, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2512.03472
Kasper, J. C., Lazarus, A. J., & Gary, S. P. 2008, PhRvL,
101, 261103, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.261103
Kasper, J. C., Stevens, M. L., Lazarus, A. J., Steinberg,
J. T., & Ogilvie, K. W. 2007, ApJ, 660, 901,
doi: 10.1086/510842
Kawazura, Y., Barnes, M., & Schekochihin, A. A. 2019,
PNAS, 116, 771, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1812491116
Kennel, C. F., & Engelmann, F. 1966, PhFl, 9, 2377,
doi: 10.1063/1.1761629
Klein, K. G., & Chandran, B. D. G. 2016, ApJ, 820, 47,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/820/1/47
Ko, Y.-K., Fisk, L. A., Geiss, J., Gloeckler, G., &
Guhathakurta, M. 1997, SoPh, 171, 345,
doi: 10.1023/A:1004943213433
Kohl, J. L., Noci, G., Cranmer, S. R., & Raymond, J. C.
2006, A&ARv, 13, 31, doi: 10.1007/s00159-005-0026-7
Kunz, M. W., Stone, J. M., & Bai, X.-N. 2014, JCoPh, 259,
154, doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2013.11.035
Landi, E., & Cranmer, S. R. 2009, ApJ, 691, 794,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/691/1/794
Livi, S., Lepri, S. T., Raines, J. M., et al. 2023, A&A, 676,
A36, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346304
Mallet, A., Schekochihin, A. A., & Chandran, B. D. G.
2015, MNRAS, 449, L77, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slv021
Marsch, E. 2012, SSRv, 172, 23,
doi: 10.1007/s11214-010-9734-z
Matthaeus, W. H., Goldstein, M. L., & Roberts, D. A.
1990, JGR, 95, 20673, doi: 10.1029/JA095iA12p20673
McIntosh, S. W., de Pontieu, B., Carlsson, M., et al. 2011,
Natur, 475, 477, doi: 10.1038/nature10235
McIntyre, J. R., Chen, C. H. K., Squire, J., Meyrand, R., &
Simon, P. A. 2025, PhRvX, 15, 031008,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.15.031008
Meyrand, R., Squire, J., Schekochihin, A. A., & Dorland,
W. 2021, JPlPh, 87, 535870301,
doi: 10.1017/S0022377821000489
Mostafavi, P., Jagarlamudi, V. K., Raouafi, N. E., et al.
2025, ApJL, 991, L35, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae0732
Mostafavi, P., Allen, R. C., Jagarlamudi, V. K., et al. 2024,
A&A, 682, A152, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202347134
Panchal, U., Wicks, R. T., & Stawarz, J. E. 2025, ApJ, 983,
160, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adbfff

Inverted minor-ion heating in imbalanced turbulence21
Rivera, Y. J., Badman, S. T., Stevens, M. L., et al. 2024,
Science, 385, 962, doi: 10.1126/science.adk6953
Rivera, Y. J., Klein, K. G., Wang, J. H., et al. 2025, ApJL,
990, L60, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adfa97
Rowlands, J., Shapiro, V. D., & Shevchenko, V. I. 1966,
JETP, 23, 651
Schekochihin, A. A., Kawazura, Y., & Barnes, M. A. 2019,
JPlPh, 85, 905850303, doi: 10.1017/S0022377819000345
Squire, J., Meyrand, R., & Kunz, M. W. 2023, ApJ, 957,
L30, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad0779
Squire, J., Meyrand, R., Kunz, M. W., et al. 2022, NatAs,
6, 715, doi: 10.1038/s41550-022-01624-z
Stix, T. H. 1992, Waves in plasmas (American Institute of
Physics)
Tracy, P. J., Kasper, J. C., Raines, J. M., et al. 2016,
PhRvL, 116, 255101,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.255101
Verscharen, D., Klein, K. G., & Maruca, B. A. 2019, LRSP,
16, 5, doi: 10.1007/s41116-019-0021-0
von Steiger, R., Schwadron, N. A., Fisk, L. A., et al. 2000,
JGR, 105, 27217, doi: 10.1029/1999JA000358
Wang, J. H., Horbury, T. S., Matteini, L., & Trotta, D.
2025, ApJL, 978, L17, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad9ddd
Yerger, E. L., Chandran, B. D. G., David, V., Bowen,
T. A., & Bale, S. D. 2026, JPlPh, in press.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25117
Zhang, M. F., Kunz, M. W., Squire, J., & Klein, K. G.
2025, ApJ, 979, 121, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad95fc