Title: Running Vacuum in the expanding Universe: a unified QFT paradigm for Inflation and Dark Energy
Authors: Joan Solà Peracaula
Published: 2026-06-03
Categories: gr-qc, astro-ph.CO, hep-ph, hep-th

Running Vacuum in the expanding Universe: a unified QFT
paradigm for Inflation and Dark Energy
Joan Sol` a Peracaula1
Departament de F´ ısica Qu` antica i Astrof´ ısica,
and
Institute of Cosmos Sciences,
Universitat de Barcelona,
Av. Diagonal 647, E-08028 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
E-mail: sola@fqa.ub.edu
Abstract.The concordance ΛCDM model, based on a rigid Λ-term for the entire cosmic
history, has been in crisis for a long time. In our expanding Universe, an evolving Λ with the
expansion is intuitively much more reasonable, especially if a fundamental theoretical reason
can be given for it. In the running vacuum model (RVM) framework, based on quantum field
theory (QFT) in curved spacetime, quantum effects induce a vacuum energy density (VED)
ρvac = Λ/(8πG) which is a function of the Hubble rateHand its time derivatives,ρ vac =
ρvac(H, ˙H, ¨H, . . .). Currently,ρ vac evolves very slowly with the expansion,δρ vac ∼ O(m 2
PlH 2),
and this fact provides a possible fundamental origin of dark energy (DE), conceived as dynamical
vacuum energy. The RVM framework leads to a “renormalized ΛCDM”, an upgraded version
of the concordance model which can help cure the cosmological tensions. In it, Newton’sG
is also evolving, but much more slowly (logarithmically withH):G=G(lnH). In the very
early universe, on the other hand, the vacuum fluctuations of the quantized matter fields induce
higher (even) powers, e.g.∼H 4, capable of triggering fast inflation in a very short period, in
whichHis very large and approximately constant. This is the mechanism of ‘RVM-inflation’.
It does not require an ‘inflaton’ field since inflation is brought about by pure QFT effects on
the dynamical background. It differs from Starobinsky’s inflation, whereHis never constant.
Furthermore, the dynamics ofρ vac(H) andG(H) can also have implications on the frequently
discussed possibility that the fundamental ‘constants’ of Nature can be mildly evolving with
the cosmic expansion. Putting things together, a unified QFT framework of dark energy and
inflation ensues as a realistic theory for the description of the universe as a whole on fundamental
grounds. In it, dynamical VED is predicted and is much welcomed, since it fits in with current
DESI measurements, preferring dynamical DE over a rigid Λ term.
1Invited contribution to the the 40th Anniversary Special Issue of IJMPA and MPLA.
1
arXiv:2606.05352v1  [gr-qc]  3 Jun 2026

Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 Running vacuum framework: quantum field theory aspects 8
2.1 Classical versus quantum field theory and quantum gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2 Quantum effects and mode functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3 Zero-point energy in curved spacetime versus flat spacetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4 An analogy with the Casimir effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.5 Off-shell renormalization in curved spacetime: the RVM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.6 Renormalized Einstein equations in QFT in curved spacetime . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.7 Renormalized VED from subtracting Minkowski vacuum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.8 Fine tuning and CCP: a digression on the quantum vacuum . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.9β-function of the physical running vacuum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3 Effective action approach in the RVM framework 31
3.1 RG-invariance and running couplings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.2 Running of the VED from the vacuum effective action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.3 Renormalized vacuum pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4 RVM in the very early universe: inflation without inflaton 39
4.1H 4-inflation from RVM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.2 Solution of theH 4 inflationary scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.3H 4-inflation from unstable de Sitter vacuum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5 Running vacuum and equation of state in the current universe 50
5.1 Equation of state of the quantum vacuum in the RVM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.2 Confronting the running vacuum with cosmological data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.3 Running of Newton’sGwith the cosmic expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.4 Solving the entropy problem inH 4-Inflation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6 Running vacuum and cosmic drift of the fundamental ‘constants’ 61
6.1 The micro and macro connection in the laws of Nature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.2 Cosmic drift of Newton’sGand Sommerfeld’sα. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7 Discussion and outlook 71
A Off-shell adiabatic expansion of the mode functions 76
B Mode expansion versus effective action method 78
C The quantum vacuum in QED: is the zero-point energy ‘real’? 82
2

1 Introduction
An essential component of Einstein’s equations is the cosmological term, Λ, usually assumed to be
constant, which is why it is still called the cosmological constant (CC) [1]. The reasons adduced
by Einstein in 1917 for introducing this term are now only of mere historical interest and, in
fact, scientifically flawed with regard to the presumed static model of the universe at that time 2.
Ironically, his reasons for abandoning Λ in 1931 [2], 14 years after its introduction, were no less
flawed, since Λ is no obstacle at all to the expansion of the universe, discovered by Hubble two
years before [3]. In addition, as we now know for almost three decades, Λ may provide a timely
candidate for what we call the dark energy (DE) of the universe, which is purportedly responsible
for the observed speeding up of the cosmological expansion, provided Λ>0 [4, 5]. The DE in
this case would be associated with the ‘vacuum energy density’ (VED),ρ vac = Λ/(8πG), whereG
is Newton’s gravitational coupling. The parameter Λ, assumed to be constant throughout cosmic
history, is a fundamental ingredient of the standard or ‘concordance’ ΛCDM model of cosmology
[6, 7]. Although Λ is nominally the “simplest” candidate, it is anything but simple. In fact, we
know very little about its nature and physical interpretation. Even though we tend to interpret it
in terms of the density of vacuum energy, we do not really know what that nonmaterial density
is. It was G. Lemaˆ ıtre in 1934 (when Einstein had already rejected Λ) who first discussed the
notion of ‘primeval atom’ and vacuum energy in cosmology [8] through the mentioned association
ρvac = Λ/(8πG), but he did not make any connection of this concept with quantum theory and the
vacuum fluctuations, despite the many consolidated developments of quantum mechanics existing
at that time. This conceptual transition came 34 years later with Y. Zeldovich [9], who realized
that any quantum field of nonvanishing massmshould produce a contribution to the VED of
order∼ℏm 4, a pure quantum effect (hence proportional toℏ). With this observation, it was
made clear that the idea of Λ (or, more properly, ofρ vac) as the “simplest” candidate for the
DE might not be granted at all, since these quantum contributions are generally many orders
of magnitude bigger than the observed valueρ 0
vac ∼10 −47 GeV4 (in natural units). This is the
so-called ‘old cosmological constant problem’ (CCP) [10], the biggest theoretical conundrum of all
time; in fact, the most fascinating and challenging enigma of all theoretical physics ever. For some
of the historical development of the problem (and more), see e.g. [11].
That there is a huge problem worth meditating on here is beyond doubt. Indeed, the typically
predicted value forρ vac in the standard model (SM) of particle physics is given by the vacuum
expectation value of the Higgs potential,⟨V H ⟩ ∼G −1
F M 2
H ∼10 9GeV4 (with negative sign), where
GF ≃1.166×10 −5 GeV−2 is Fermi’s constant andM H ≃125 GeV is the measured value of the
Higgs boson mass. Hence|⟨V H ⟩|is 56 orders of magnitude larger than the observed vacuum energy
densityρ 0
vac in cosmology. There are additional contributions within the SM, such as those arising
from a variety of QCD vacuum condensates induced by strong interactions, which should also
2What is not flawed at all is that Λgµν is a valid term in the field equations, since is allowed by general covariance.
Once this fundamental fact is recognized, it cannot be withdrawn by fiat. So, as the saying goes, every cloud has a
silver lining. Still, we are left with Λ: but what is it?...
3

affect, in principle, the vacuum energy of the SM (see, however, Refs. [12, 13]), although they are
comparatively much smaller. Therefore, paradoxically, the main offending contribution comes from
the time-honored Higgs sector of the SM, which represents the “jewel of the crown” of the particle
physics world. Whereby the bulk of the CCP ultimately originates from the fundamental concept
of spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB), or Higgs mechanism, on which the very SM architecture
is built upon! So, as it happens, the world-wide celebrated success of the Higgs boson finding at
CERN in 2012 proved to be a fiasco in the deep conceptual domain of cosmology, since it instantly
detonated a ‘cluster bomb’ in the very core of theoretical physics, with myriad consequences on
all sectors of particle physics and quantum field theory (QFT). Actually, on top of the fantastic
SSB contribution from the Higgs sector, we still have to add the zero-point energies (ZPE’s) of all
the quantum fields in the SM (and beyond), which are not just crumbs underneath the table. The
ZPE ensues from pure quantum effects associated with the vacuum fluctuations in QFT, and are of
order±m 4
i for all bosons and fermions (following Zeldovich’s estimate). They can be particularly
large in some cases, comparable to the SSB part. This is the case with respect to the zero-point
energy of the Higgs particle itself and that of the top quark, which has a huge massm t ≃173
GeV. They have different signs, but there is no chance of cancellation.
This murky state of affairs between theoretical cosmology and particle physics defines the
dramatic birth of the modern form of the CCP, namely the experimental confirmation that the
electroweak (EW) vacuum energy, and in fact all vacuum effects emerging from the ZPE and the
SSB mechanism, are extremely large compared to the total vacuum energy density that we have
measured in the universe. The CCP is usually formulated in even more dramatic terms in the
literature by invoking mind-boggling contributions associated with the Planck scalem Pl ∼10 19
GeV, which generate effects of orderm 4
Pl ∼10 76 GeV4 on the vacuum energy, hence∼123 orders
of magnitude bigger than the measuredρ 0
vac ∼10 −47 GeV4. However, there is no need to appeal
to the Planck scale, we have already a 100% certified ‘real’ problem at ‘low energies’ of order
|⟨VH ⟩|1/4 ∼100−200 GeV (fully accessible to our accelerators), where the discrepancy is ‘only’ of
56 orders of magnitude!
A first naive thought may cross our mind: performing a fine tuning among the various con-
tributions. But it is actually impracticable, since it is further aggravated by a tower of quantum
corrections from higher order perturbative effects which unavoidably emerge from QFT, including
a variety of non-perturbative contributions of various sorts. The CCP is therefore a very hard beast
to deal with, in fact indomitable at present [14]. For many, it may be thought of as a theoretical
fiction. For a serious theoretical physicist, however, it is a formidable intellectual challenge. At
face value the CCP should be as “real” as the Higgs boson itself, one cannot exist without the
other, which is a very uncomfortable situation! There are virtually as many attempts at solving
the CCP as stars are in the sky; for a very incomplete list, see e.g. [10, 11, 14–23] and references
therein. Unless one appeals to the Anthropic principle [24], all known attempts involve (some-
times quite surreptitiously) extreme fine tuning of the parameters. See [22] for a vigorous attempt
based on an automatic adjustment mechanism. Old examples are [25–29]; and, in particular, the
4

well-known ‘cosmon model’ [30], which was further discussed by Weinberg [10] in the context of
his ‘No-go Theorem’ (NGT) 3. For a milder and thought provoking presentation of the CCP and
related matters, more accessible to general readers, see [32].
Despite the difficulties outlined above with the CCP, recent theoretical studies on renormalizing
the vacuum energy in curved spacetime, specifically in the context of the running vacuum model
(RVM) in Friedmann-Lemaˆ ıtre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) cosmology, point to new theoretical
avenues for ameliorating the status of the CCP, see [14,33–36]. The root of the problem lies in the
renormalization procedure, which should be more physical. The RVM approach is old in origin;
see e.g. [11] and references therein, but it was only after the aforementioned recent works arose
that the RVM framework has been put in a solid theoretical status. Explicit calculations within
QFT in FLRW spacetime, which we shall outline in the present review, demonstrate that the VED
is a smooth functionρ vac(H) of the Hubble rateH(and its time derivatives), and hence it is
predicted to be a time-evolving quantity from first principles. The RVM approach is therefore a
bold proposal implying a breakthrough in the subject and certainly a change of paradigm beyond
the concordance ΛCDM model. Moreover, the time evolution of the VED as predicted by the
RVM is as mild as the cosmic expansion itself, since it follows the (currently) slow pace defined by
the expansion rateH. We shall review all these aspects here; see the aforementioned studies for
more details. Needless to say, a variable VED,ρ vac(H), also leads to a ‘variable CC’, Λ = Λ(H),
since the latter is just 8πGρ vac(H). It is worth noticing that the dynamical character of the
predicted vacuum energy in the RVM fits in with timely with the recent measurements of the
DESI collaboration that favor in a significant way a mild dynamical evolution of the DE [37–40].
In fact, the RVM framework was initially aimed at a QFT theory of cosmological evolution. This
perspective was pinpointed long ago using semi-qualitative arguments based on the renormalization
group (RG) [41–48]. For earlier RG work in cosmology, see [49]. The main purpose [11,50] was to
provide a dynamical evolution to the Λ-term without resorting toad hocscalar fields (quintessence
and the like [17,18,20,51–53]) and without imposing a variety of (no lessad hoc) time dependencies
on Λ, as it was done in the old and extensive class of ‘Λ(t) scenarios’ in the literature, still under
scrutiny, see e.g. [54–60]. A further step in the RVM road was to try to incorporate inflation [44]
from the anomaly-induced effective action [61] using the framework of the aforementioned ‘cosmon
model’ [30]. Later on, an alternative unification of the cosmic history within the RVM pipeline
was vindicated on phenomenological grounds [62–70]. However, an explicit QFT approach was still
missing beyond the mentioned semiqualitative RG ideas. Only very recently a full-fledged QFT
formulation was systematically put forward in [33–36] and [71, 72] which has definitely revamped
the RVM framework and put it on solid theoretical ground.
The practical outcome of the RVM approach [14] for the current universe is that the standard
3Weinberg’s NGT states that no local field theory, in particular classical gravity, can have a flat spacetime
(Minkowski) solution for generic values of the parameters. Put another way: it forbids the existence of any solution
to the CCP within local field theories without fine tuning. The theorem (based on classical gravity) is claimed to
be valid also in quantum gravity (QG) upon using BRST invariance of the effective action [31].
5

ΛCDM is promoted into a ‘renormalization group improved ΛCDM’ (denoted ¯ΛCDM in [67]),
in which the fundamental cosmological parameters become slightly shifted with respect to the
original ones, and moreover the small predicted shifts (quantum corrections) are dynamical with
the expansion:α i →α i +δα i(H), withα i = Λ, ρvac, G, gi, mi.... Here,g i andm i stand respectively
for the gauge couplings of strong and EW interactions and the particle masses, all of them subject
to cosmic time dependence since they become functions of the Hubble rateH. All parameters are
indeed sensitive to quantum effects and thereby become “effective charges” in the literal sense of
the RG, see [11, 14] and references therein. As such, their physical (renormalized) values differ
only very mildly from the original parameters for the entire (post-inflationary) cosmic history:
δαi(H)≪α i. Parameters closely related to cosmology, such as Λ andG, acquire a theoretical
status similar to ordinary gauge couplings, and the small (time-evolving) shiftsδΛ(H) andδG(H)
can have fruitful phenomenological implications, as these small renormalization effects may provide
a better description of the cosmological data [73–75]. In actual fact, the RVM approach is more
ambitious since it points to a generalization of the RG in which the gauge couplingsg i (e.g. the
electromagnetic chargeeand the associated fine structure constantα em =e 2/4π) now depend on
tworenormalization scales [76]:,g i =g i(µ;M) namely, one scale (usually denotedµ) related to
the ordinary (high energy) running of the gauge theories of strong and electroweak interactions;
and another one,M, which describes the (low-energy) cosmic running of these couplings. The
same applies to physical massesm i =m i(µ;M) [76–78]. Cosmological parameters such as Λ orG,
instead, depend only onMin the RVM framework. As we shall see,M=M(t) is dynamical and
is naturally associated with the Hubble rateH(t), as was implicit in the above discussion.
Renormalization effects are small in the present universe, but not in the early universe. In
the RVM, inflation is dominated by quartic quantum vacuum effectsρ vac(H)∼H 4, which are
huge in the primeval epoch and negligible at present. In contrast, the current universe (and
for that matter the entire post-inflationary era) is dominated by quantum vacuum effects of order
∼m 2
PlH2. Notice that in gravity the running can be power-law, because of the dimensional coupling
constants involved. This is at variance with the usual renormalizable gauge field theories of strong
and electroweak interactions, where the running is in all cases logarithmic because couplings are
dimensionless4). This is an important distinction that appears when we discuss renormalization
in gravity and in particular in the RVM approach that we present here.
The implication that neither Λ norGare constant but subject to renormalization group running
leads to a new paradigm that, in fact, goes beyond Einstein’s theory [1] and Brans-Dicke theory [79]
(in which Λ was never considered as a part of the discussion). As noted above, the reach of this
paradigm is even more ambitious since it suggests that all of the ‘fundamental constants’ of Nature
are actually time-evolving with the cosmological expansion [76], a possibility which has been (and
4For Newton’sG, the term in the action is∼R/G(withRthe curvature scalar). The natural dimension ofR
is +2 and that ofGis−2, which is carried byG N = 1/m2
Pl, the local value of the gravitational coupling, obtained
e.g. from Cavendish-like (torsion balance) experiments. Thus the running ofGcan be dimensionless and in fact is
logarithmic (cf. Secs. 3.1 and 5.3). In stark contrast, the running ofρ vac is power-law sinceρ vac is additive in the
action and has dimension +4.
6

is being) repeatedly tested by high precision lab and astrophysical experiments, see e.g. [80–83]
and references therein. Not surprisingly, the golden rule in this field says the following: when one
‘fundamental constant’ varies, all of them vary!
Hereafter, I will review the RVM as a unified theoretical paradigm for explaining inflation
and dynamical dark energy on fundamental QFT grounds, see also [11, 14] and [50, 65, 67], and
references therein. Now, theory without phenomenology is not keen of physics. Fortunately, the
RVM has been extensively tested in the literature. The vacuum dynamics inherent in it improves
the quality fits to the cosmological data and provides a possible solution or attenuation of the
famous tensions onH 0 andσ 8 that still affect the concordance ΛCDM, see [84–87] and [88–90]
(and the extensive bibliography cited in these papers). The RVM paradigm provides its own
solutions to these problems [73–75] due to the dynamical character of the vacuum in that context.
The idea that dark energy could be dynamical has a long pedigree. Already about ten years ago,
the positive impact of dynamical DE was highlighted by several devoted studies which considered
large sets of cosmological data of various kinds; some of these old works involved the RVM and
provided remarkable fits to the observations, see particularly [91–98] and [99–102]. For related
analyses involving the RVM, see e.g. [103–109].
In addition, several RVM-inspired studies (including running vacuum extensions of Brans-
Dicke theories [110–114]) have produced interesting results to alleviate the cosmological tensions.
Let us also mention the ΛXCDM [115], a composite DE model that incorporates the notion of
‘phantom matter’, a cosmic fluid which recently has proven useful to fit modern cosmological
data [116–118] – cf. also the related approach [119–121]. Besides, the RVM framework admits
effective (low-energy) ‘stringy’ extensions [122–124] (denoted StRVM), which enrich its theoretical
scope and possible phenomenological implications [125–133]. Finally, the RVM behavior can be
mimicked by other gravitational frameworks, includingf(T) theories [134,135], entropic-force and
holography [136–141], finite-temperature renormalization effects [142, 143] and lattice quantum
gravity [144]. As indicated, it might even provide an explanation for the time variation of the
fundamental constants of Nature [76–78]. For an in depth exposition of the RVM in both QFT
and stringy StRVM formulations, see [145].
The flow chart of this review is as follows. In Sec. 2 the basics of the QFT approach to the RVM
is presented, in particular the off-shell adiabatic renormalization procedure and the calculation of
theβ-function of the running VED. In Sec. 3 we consider the effective action approach as an
alternative method. In Sec. 4 we study the different aspects of RVM-inflation and also briefly
compare with de Sitter vacuum decay. In Sec. 5 we review some phenomenological aspects for the
present universe; in particular, the equation of state (EoS) of the RVM and the running ofρ vac
andG. We also present a solution to the entropy problem. Sec. 6 shows how the RVM could
explain the possible cosmic drift of the fundamental ‘constants’ of Nature. In the last section,
we recapitulate. Finally, in three appendices, we illustrate the method of calculating the off-shell
adiabatic expansion and its connection with the effective action, and revisit the quantum vacuum
in QED. In this paper, natural units (ℏ=c= 1) will be used throughout, except in special cases.
7

2 Running vacuum framework: quantum field theory aspects
In what follows, I will try to summarize the recent theoretical developments setting the foundations
of the RVM, a framework aiming to describe the entire cosmological expansion from a fundamental
QFT point of view. Full-fledged technical details can be found in [33–36]. For earlier reviews, see
also [11, 14]. For more recent developments along the lines of seeking a unified QFT theory of
dynamical dark energy and inflation inspired by the RVM framework can be found in [71,72].
2.1 Classical versus quantum field theory and quantum gravity
As can be expected, QFT calculations in cosmology are generally rather cumbersome. The main
difficulty is that we have to deal with renormalization in curved spacetime, and this is more
demanding than QFT in Minkowski spacetime. A consequence of this fact is that apart from the
ultraviolet (UV) divergent integrals of the type we usually encounter in flat spacetime calculations,
in the present context, we meet a new type of UV-divergent integrals whose existence is inherent
to the spacetime curvature, meaning that with zero curvature these contributions would not be
present.
This is not a minor issue, since it can have a direct bearing on the CCP. In this kind of
subtle problem, every bit counts and we cannot afford to introduce any level of noise into the
result. For example, conventional approaches to the CCP within QFT in flat spacetime based on,
say, noncovariant cutoff procedures or even the minimal subtraction scheme (MSS) [146–148] are
unsuitable, as they lack a direct physical meaning and end up introducing some level of arbitrariness
in the results and also involving serious fine tuning among the parameters [14]. Thus, despite the
many valuable attempts in the literature discussing the computation of the vacuum energy in
Minkowski spacetime and the corresponding implications in cosmology (sometimes even involving
considerations on the running of the gravitational quantities) we deem this is not a realistic pathway
to approach the problem. For different considerations on these matters showing the limitations
of this kind of approach, see, e.g., [41–48] and [147, 149–156]. We have to admit that discussing
the CCP in QFT in flat spacetime is a bit of a cheat. It has been over-exploited in the literature
and should finally be abandoned, as the vacuum energy in QFT in flat spacetime (if there is any
vacuum energy at all in this case, see Sec. 2.7 and Appendix C) is completely unrelated to the
cosmological constant. There is no mutual implication between the two concepts. The logical
link usually works only one-way: Λ̸= 0 implies the existence ofρ vac ̸= 0 in curved spacetime, but
ρvac ̸= 0 does not always imply the existence of Λ; in fact, it never implies it in flat spacetime, since
Λ cannot be defined in it, except if Λ = 0, as only then Minkowski spacetime can be considered a
solution of Einstein’s equations.
To properly discuss the physical running of the cosmological quantities requires us to consider
background curvature effects from the very beginning, possibly including considerations into the
QG arena [157–162]. We shall, however, not deal with QG here, not even in the context of effective
field theory [163] or in the quadratic gravity framework [164] where (it is claimed) that perturbative
8

QFT may consistently be formulated within the strict renormalizability criterion – see e.g. [165]
and references therein. The bare reality is that we are still far away from achieving a proficient
knowledge of QG as a ultimate theory of gravity, provided it exists at all. For, it is not even
clear whether QG is necessary since gravity could be just an ‘emergent phenomenon’ [166–168].
Therefore, we will not quantize the gravitational field here, only the matter fields. This means that
we will work in a semiclassical formalism, i.e. in the context of QFT in curved spacetime, where
the metric acts as an external field and is not subject to the quantization process, which exclusively
affects the matter fields [169–172]. We know how to apply this approach in a safe way: if only
‘small’ fluctuations of the ‘vacuum EMT’, i.e. of⟨T µν⟩ ≡ ⟨0|T µν|0⟩, are involved, the semiclassical
approach leads to a perfectly consistent and renormalizable picture of quantum matter fields in
a curved classical background (see [173] for a precise definition of ‘small’ in this context). For a
variety of studies related to the VED in the semiclassical approach, see e.g. [174–177] and references
therein.
We adopt the adiabatic renormalization prescription (ARP), which is very convenient in cos-
mological spacetimes for which the comoving angular frequency Ω k is slowly varying at early and
late times (cf. Sec. 2.2), so that an expansion of the solution in terms of higher order adiabatic
corrections is asymptotically convergent (meaning, as usual, only up to a finite order, as in the
case of a WKB series). This method is particularly adequate for the removal of divergences in the
vacuum expectation value (VEV) of the energy-momentum tensor (EMT) of a quantized field prop-
agating in the FLRW background. The conventional formulation of the ARP is well known and we
refer the reader once again to classic textbooks [169–172] (and comprehensive reports [178, 179])
on the subject, and references therein. However, the RVM approach makes one further step in
the adiabatic procedure. It offers a genuinely new formulation of this method that relies on an
off-shell renormalization scale,M. Such a generalization (“off-shell ARP” [33–36]) is crucial to
enable us to explore the cosmological evolution of the vacuum energy and in general of the VEV of
the EMT,⟨T µν⟩(a quantity which we already called the ‘vacuum EMT’ for short) at any cosmic
epoch. Calculations in the RVM therefore will depend on a floating scaleM 5. This is after all
customary in QFT and especially within the context of the RG. At the end we have to make
contact with physics and we associate the renormalization pointMwith the value of the Hubble
rateHcorresponding to the cosmic epoch under study, sinceHis indeed the characteristic energy
scale (in natural units) of cosmological spacetime at any given epoch; andH 2 provides a measure
of its four-dimensional curvature in the considered epoch. Notice that such a ‘scale setting’ is in
consonance with the usual practice in particle physics based on selecting the RG scale near the
typical energy of the process. In our case, the ‘process’ is nothing but the cosmic expansion of
5We prefer to denote this renormalization scale asMrather thanµto emphasize that our renormalization
scheme is not MSS with dimensional regularization (DR) [146–148]. Notwithstanding, DR can still be used here as
an auxiliary tool for intermediate calculations related to regularization, but not with renormalization. All our final
results will be independent ofµ; yet the renormalized VED in the off-shell ARP will still depend onM, as it should
since it is only the full renormalized effective action (of which the vacuum effective action is only one part) which
must be overall independent ofM; not so the renormalized vacuum action taken in isolation [33,34] – see Sec.3.
9

the universe at a given epoch. So, for FLRW spacetime, the scale settingM=Hlooks entirely
natural.
The resulting expansion dynamics of the VED that emerges from the RVM is tantamount to
saying that the physical cosmological term Λ(H) = 8πG(H)ρ vac(H) becomes a running quantity
with the expansion, where even the Newton’s coupling may also develop some small evolution. In
this context, therefore, Λ no longer appears as a true ‘cosmological constant’. The implications
of this approach are far reaching, as indeed the internal consistency of the theory (e.g. with the
Bianchi identity in Einstein’s equations) leads also to the cosmic evolution of the gravitational
‘constant’,G=G(H), and in general of all the so-called fundamental ‘constants’ of Nature (cf.
Sec. 6). This connection of the RVM framework with a potential variation of the fundamental
constants was first pointed out in [76].
Let us start from the classical Einstein-Hilbert (EH) action for gravity plus matter 6:
SEH+m = 1
16πG
ˆ
d4x√−g(R−2Λ) +S m
= 1
16πG
ˆ
d4x√−g R−
ˆ
d4x√−g ρΛ +S m ,
(1)
where the quantity
ρΛ = Λ
8πG (2)
has dimension of energy density. At the moment, for us the termρ Λ is just a bare parameter of the
EH action, asGitself. In a QFT context, they cannot be called at this point vacuum energy and
Newton’s constant, respectively. In fact, in the presence of quantum fluctuations the physical values
of the various parameters and quantities cannot be identified at the level of the classical action; we
need to go to the quantum level (i.e. we need to quantize the matter fields) and renormalize the
theory. Only at this point we will be in position to speak of physical quantities. However, once
renormalization is implemented, an analogous relation to (2) holds for the renormalized quantities.
ρΛ(M) = Λ(M)
8πG(M) ,(3)
whereMis the renormalization scale, which, as indicated, will eventually be identified withHin
cosmological spacetime. However, not even the renormalizedρ Λ(M) is to be naively associated
with the physical VED since the vacuum fluctuations contribute also to the vacuum energy, of
course, and therefore we have to carefully distinguish betweenρ Λ(M) and the renormalized VED
valueρ vac(M), which we will define later on.
For illustrative purposes it will suffice to consider the semiclassical calculation of the energy
density of the vacuum fluctuations for a single quantized, neutral, scalar fieldϕnon-minimally
coupled to the scalar curvature of FLRW spacetime. This field plays the role of our matter
6Conventions: sign(g µν) = (−,+,+,+); Riemann tensorR λ
µνσ =∂ ν Γλ
σµ + Γλ
νρΓρ
σµ −(ν↔σ); Ricci tensor
Rµν =R λ
µλν; and Ricci scalarR=g µν Rµν. Overall, these conventions correspond to (+,+,+) in the classification
by Misner-Thorn-Wheeler [180].
10

component and will be used to define the matter actionSm. Therefore, the matter action associated
withϕtakes on the form
S[ϕ] =−
ˆ
d4x√−g
1
2 gµν∂µϕ∂νϕ+ 1
2(m2 +ξR)ϕ 2

.(4)
Forξ= 0 the matter fieldϕis said to be only minimally coupled to gravity, but forξ̸= 0 it is
non-minimally coupled. The particular valueξ= 1/6 together with the massless case (m= 0)
makes the action conformally invariant. We are not interested in this case and we will keep the
non-minimal couplingξgeneral. We shall see that it is phenomenologically fruitful to proceed in
this way.
Since we are targeting pure quantum effects, viz. the zero-point energy (ZPE) in curved
spacetime, we shall not contemplate a contribution to the VED from an effective potential forϕ,
which could also be there, of course. The calculation is already sufficiently cumbersome without
including the potential and its quantum effects, so we shall not address this part here. However,
later on we will briefly comment on the possible impact of the effective potential in our discussion
and argue that nothing fundamental can change in our main qualitative conclusions.
At the moment, we remain in the classical domain. On vaying the action (1), first with respect
to the metric, it yields Einstein’s field equations:
1
8πG Gµν =−ρ Λgµν +T ϕ
µν ,(5)
whereG µν =R µν −(1/2)g µνRis the usual Einstein tensor andT ϕ
µν is the energy-momentum tensor
(EMT) corresponding toϕ. The above are classical field equations and hence do not incorporate
quantum effects yet. This will be done upon quantization in the next section.
The classical EMT forϕis obtained from the action (4) in the usual way:
T ϕ
µν =− 2√−g
δS[ϕ]
δg µν = (1−2ξ)∂ µϕ∂νϕ+

2ξ− 1
2

gµν∂σϕ∂σϕ
−2ξϕ∇ µ∇νϕ+ 2ξg µνϕ□ϕ+ξG µνϕ2 − 1
2 m2gµνϕ2.
(6)
On the other hand, varying the action (4) with respect toϕyields the Klein-Gordon (KG) equation
in curved spacetime: (□−m 2 −ξR)ϕ= 0,where□ϕ=g µν∇µ∇νϕ= (−g) −1/2∂µ (√−g gµν∂νϕ).
As announced, we shall perform our QFT calculations in the background spacetime defined by
the FLRW line element. We choose spatially flat three-dimensional hypersurfaces since this is the
canonical option. Furthermore, we use the conformally flat form of the metric:
ds2 =a 2(τ)η µνdxµdxν ,(7)
whereη µν = diag(−1,+1,+1,+1) is the Minkowski metric in our conventions, anda(τ) is the
scale factor as a function of the conformal timeτ. Recall thatdt=a(τ)dτ. Primes will denote
derivatives with respect toτ( ′ ≡d/dτ). The Hubble rate in conformal time isH(τ)≡a ′/a. Even
though our calculations will be performed using the conformally flat metric, the final results will
be delivered in terms of the usual Hubble functionH(t) = ˙a/a( ˙≡d/dt) in cosmic time. Useful
relations for the conversion areH=aH,H ′ =a 2(H2 + ˙H),H ′′ =a 3

2H3 + 4H ˙H+ ¨H

, etc.,
which will be used frequently in our calculations.
11

2.2 Quantum effects and mode functions
Obviously, to further advance in the study of the vacuum effects, we must move from the above
classical field theory treatment to quantum field theory, which is based on the vacuum action
as a most fundamental field theory concept. Thanks to it we know that the vacuum is sort of
“boiling” all the time with quantum fluctuations, which must be taken into account by means
of an appropriate renormalization program. In our semiclassical treatment, we consider only
the quantum fluctuations of the matter fields, in this case the scalar fieldϕ, around a classical
background valueϕ b:
ϕ(τ, x) =ϕ b(τ) +δϕ(τ, x).(8)
The background fieldϕ b(τ) is assumed to be spatially homogeneous. Not so the fluctuating part,
which depends both on time and the spatial coordinates,δϕ(τ, x). It obviously satisfies the curved
spacetime KG equation and hence it can be decomposed in Fourier frequency modes. Changing
the field variable fromϕtoφ=aϕand denotingh k(τ) the frequency modes of the fluctuating
part, we can write its Fourier decomposition [33,34]:
δφ(τ,x) =
ˆ d3k
(2π)3/2
h
Akeik·xhk(τ) +A †
ke−ik·xh∗
k(τ)
i
.(9)
In this expression,A †
k andA k are the (time-independent) Fourier coefficients. Upon quantization
they become promoted, respectively, to creation and annihilation operators and. satisfy the usual
commutation relations:
[Ak, A′†
k] =δ(k−k ′),[A k, A′
k] = 0.(10)
The above Fourier expansion then provides the solution of the field equation in the Heisenberg
representation. Inserting such an expansion into the KG equation, we can see that the frequency
modes of the fluctuations,h k(τ), satisfy the differential equation
h′′
k + Ω2
k(τ)h k = 0,Ω 2
k(τ)≡ω 2
k(m) +a 2 (ξ−1/6)R ,(11)
where Ωk(τ) are the comoving angular frequencies of these modes. Except in simple cases, finding
a solution of the above (linear) equation requires an approximation method, typically a recursive
self-consistent iteration procedure such as the WKB expansion. The procedure is conveniently
initialized with a change of variable defined by the phase integral
hk(τ) = 1p
2Wk(τ)
exp

i
ˆ τ
Wk(˜τ)d˜τ

.(12)
The normalization factor ensures that it satisfies the so-called Wronskian conditionh ′
kh∗
k −h kh∗′
k =
i ,which is necessary for the quantum field to satisfy the canonical commutation relations, given the
corresponding relations (10) for the creation and annihilation operators. The functionsW k (which
play the role of effective frequencies) obey a non-linear differential equation, which is nothing more
than the standard WKB equation:
W 2
k (τ) = Ω 2
k(τ)− 1
2
W ′′
k
Wk
+ 3
4
 W ′
k
Wk
2
.(13)
12

Since the exact vacuum cannot be obtained in this approximation, a convenient vacuum state that
makes sense out of these calculations is the so-called adiabatic vacuum [169–171]. In a way it is
an analog of the geometrical optical limit [34] in that it involves only short wave lengths and weak
gravitational fields. As noted, the adiabatic approach proves useful for cosmological spacetimes
for which the comoving angular frequency Ω k, defined in Eq. (11), slowly varies at early and late
times. In this way an expansion of the solution in adiabatic corrections (carrying a growing number
of derivatives with respect to cosmic or conformal time) is asymptotically convergent; as usual,
this means convergent only up to a finite order, which is characteristic of a WKB series. If the
adiabaticity condition is not minimally met, a particle physics interpretation becomes hard in
quantum field theory in curved spacetime. But if it holds, the Fourier modes of the field inside the
horizon admit a particle description at asymptotic times with the help of the adiabatic vacuum.
Worth noticing, the adiabatic behavior can be useful, e.g. to estimate particle production in a
time-dependent background. In particular, it helps to estimate the gravitational generation of
cosmological relics in the very early universe, see e.g. [181,182].
By adopting the adiabatic vacuum as an approximation to the true vacuum, the WKB solution
of our field equation can be written as
Wk =ω (0)
k +ω (2)
k +ω (4)
k +ω (6)
k · · ·(14)
in which the superscript denotes the adiabatic order. If the expansion is performed up to theNth
adiabatic order, the vacuum state annihilated by all ladder operatorsA k satisfying (10) is known
as theNth-order adiabatic vacuum. Because we have to preserve the adiabaticity condition, the
above expansion is meaningful only if the gravitational field is not strong and if changes of the
physical quantities are slow (adiabatic).
As could be expected, the counting of adiabatic orders in the WKB expansion follows the
number of time derivatives. Notice that general covariance requires the presence of only even
adiabatic orders. Theω (j)
k can be expressed in terms of Ω k(τ) and its time derivatives. Following
[33,34,183] we consider an off-shell procedure in which the frequencyω k of a given mode is defined
not at the mass shell,m, of the particle but at an arbitrary mass scaleM:
ωk ≡ω k(τ, M)≡
p
k2 +a 2(τ)M 2 .(15)
At zeroth order,ω (0)
k =ω k in Eq. (14). Although the particle mass ism(on-shell value), the
arbitrary mass scaleM(off-shell value) plays the role of floating RG scale (as previously noticed).
This is characteristic of renormalization theory, but the floating mass scale can be introduced in
different ways, and in some cases its physical interpretation can be more direct. As we shall see,
our off-shell adiabatic renormalization prescription (ARP) enables to describe the cosmological
expansion history with the help ofM, which is identified with the Hubble rate (at the end of the
calculation). In this way we can track the running of the VED withHand hence also of the
cosmological ‘constant’ Λ. This interpretation was first put forward on firm grounds in [33, 34]
and was used to systematically establish the off-shell ARP procedure to renormalize the EMT in
13

cosmological spacetime (cf. Sec. 2.5). The difference between the on-shell squared valuem 2 and
the square of the RG scaleM 2 (both of them being of zero adiabatic order) generates a quantity
∆2 ≡m 2 −M 2 which must be counted as being of adiabatic order 2 since ∆ 2 appears in the WKB
expansion along with other terms of the same adiabatic order. This can be seen by working out
the second and fourth order terms of (14) 7.
ω(0)
k =ω k ,
ω(2)
k = a2∆2
2ωk
+ a2R
2ωk
(ξ−1/6)− ω′′
k
4ω2
k
+ 3ω′2
k
8ω3
k
,
ω(4)
k =− 1
2ωk

ω(2)
k
2
+ ω(2)
k ω′′
k
4ω3
k
− ω(2)′′
k
4ω2
k
− 3ω(2)
k ω′2
k
4ω4
k
+ 3ω′
kω(2)′
k
4ω3
k
.
(16)
As it is transparent, ∆ 2 in the first term ofω (2)
k appears along with other quantities which are
manifestly of adiabatic order 2, such asR,ω ′′
k andω ′2
k (obviouslyω k is of order zero). The
on-shell result is recovered forM=m, for which ∆ = 0 and corresponds to the usual ARP
procedure [169, 171]. It is easy to see that the adiabatic expansion becomes an expansion in
powers ofHand its time derivatives, e.g.
ω′
k =a 2H M 2
ωk
, ω ′′
k = 2a2H2 M 2
ωk
+a 2H′ M 2
ωk
−a 4H2 M 4
ω3
k
.(17)
These expressions indeed confirm that the adiabatic series is an expansion in the number of time
derivatives of the scale factor, and amounts to an expansion in powers of the Hubble rate and
its time derivatives. The terms with more and more time derivatives should contribute less and
less. The final result appears as an expansion in even powers ofHand also odd derivatives of it,
all these terms being of even adiabatic order. In fact, as warned before, this is what we should
expect since the result must be consistent with the covariance of the effective action, which can
only admit terms with an even number of time derivatives with respect to the scale factor.
Let us now proceed to the identification of the vacuum expectation value (VEV) of the EMT,
i.e. what we call the ‘vacuum EMT’⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩, which involves the effect of the fluctuationsδϕof
the matter fields. To start with, the VEV of the fieldϕis connected with the background value,
⟨0|ϕ(τ, x)|0⟩=ϕ b(τ), which can be zero or not (e.g. in the presence of SSB). The VEV of the
fluctuation is, however, always zero:⟨δϕ⟩ ≡ ⟨0|δϕ|0⟩= 0, sinceA k|0⟩= 0 (∀k). In contrast, the
VEV of the bilinear products of fluctuations is generally non-zero,⟨(δϕ) 2⟩ ̸= 0, and it leads to
UV-divergences since it entails the product of distributions at the same spacetime point. This
is ultimately the need for renormalization in QFT, of course, Now, it is natural to decompose
⟨T ϕ
µν⟩=⟨T ϕb
µν ⟩+⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩, where⟨T ϕb
µν ⟩=T ϕb
µν is the effect from the classical background part and
⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩ ≡ ⟨0|T δϕ
µν |0⟩is the sought-for vacuum contribution from the field fluctuations. The latter is
precisely what we have just called the vacuum EMT, which is a pure quantum effect associated
7See Appendix A for a summary of the calculation method of the off-shall adiabatic expansion terms (16) up to
fourth order. One can provide a more formal approach in the context of the effective action/heat-kernel computation
of the VED, as we shall see in Sec. 3.
14

with the vacuum fluctuations of the matter fields. Its 00th component⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩defines the ‘zero-point
energy’ (ZPE) of the quantum fieldϕ. However, in the absence of these pure quantum effects, we
would still have the termρ Λ in the EH action (1), which defines the naive classical vacuum term
(technically, a bare term in the QFT contex). Therefore, the ‘full vacuum EMT’ is the sum of
these two terms:
⟨T vac
µν ⟩=−ρ Λgµν +⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩.(18)
We note here that after we defineρ vac in Sec. 2.5, the above expression generally doesnotimply
the relation⟨T vac
µν ⟩=−g µνρvac, which is quite often presumed in the literature as if it were self-
evident. However, it is not, and we shall see why in Sec. 3.3. The formula above, however, shows
in a manifest way that the vacuum (and hence eventually the physical CC) receives contributions
not only from the ‘cosmological term’ in the EH action but also from the quantum fluctuations
of the EMT. Nevertheless, these quantities are both formally UV-divergent sinceρ Λ is a bare
parameter at this point, and, as previously noted, the vacuum EMT⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩involves products of
distributions (see next section), which are not generally distributions themselves, so the physical
(finite) vacuum energy densityρ vac cannot be identified at this instance, but only a posteriori upon
suitable renormalization.
2.3 Zero-point energy in curved spacetime versus flat spacetime
As noted previously, the ZPE associated to the quantum vacuum is given by the 00th-component
of the fluctuating part of the EMT. In curved spacetime with FLRW metric, this follows from
ϕ→ϕ+δϕin (6) and selecting the quadratic terms of the corresponding VEV. The unrenormalized
ZPE is then given by
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩=
1
2
 
δϕ′2 +
1
2 −2ξ

(∇δϕ)2 + 6ξHδϕδϕ ′
−2ξδϕ∇ 2δϕ+ 3ξH 2δϕ2 + a2m2
2 (δϕ)2

.
(19)
Here (δϕ ′)2 ≡(δ∂ 0ϕ)2 = (∂0δϕ)2 stands for the fluctuation of the field derivative with respect to
conformal time. Substituting the Fourier expansion ofδϕ=δφ/aas given in (9) into Eq. (19), using
the commutation relations and then symmetrizing the operator field productsδϕδϕ ′ with respect
to the creation and annihilation operators, one obtains the final result in Fourier space [33, 34].
We may recast it in terms of the field modesh k:
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩= 1
4π2a2
ˆ
dkk2
|h′
k|2 + (ω2
k +a 2∆2)|hk|2 +

ξ− 1
6
 
−6H2|hk|2 + 6H(h′
kh∗
k +h ∗
k
′hk)

.
(20)
The modesh k are determined from Eq. (12) using the adiabatic expansion defined in the previous
section, which up to 4th order is given by (16). Upon inserting the result in Eq.(20) we find the
15

full form of the unrenormalized ZPE:
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩(0−4) = 1
8π2a2
ˆ
dkk2

2ωk + a4M 4H2
4ω5
k
− a4M 4
16ω7
k
(2H′′H − H′2 + 8H′H2 + 4H4)
+ 7a6M 6
8ω9
k
(H′H2 + 2H4)− 105a8M 8H4
64ω11
k
+

ξ− 1
6

−6H2
ωk
− 6a2M 2H2
ω3
k
+ a2M 2
2ω5
k
(6H′′H −3H ′2 + 12H′H2)
− a4M 4
8ω7
k
(120H′H2 + 210H4) + 105a6M 6H4
4ω9
k

+

ξ− 1
6
2
− 1
4ω3
k
(72H′′H −36H ′2 −108H 4) + 54a2M 2
ω5
k
(H′H2 +H 4)
#
+ 1
8π2a2
ˆ
dkk2
 a2∆2
ωk
− a4∆4
4ω3
k
+ a4H2M 2∆2
2ω5
k
− 5
8
a6H2M 4∆2
ω7
k
+

ξ− 1
6

−3a2∆2H2
ω3
k
+ 9a4M 2∆2H2
ω5
k

,
(21)
where we recall thatH=a ′/ais the Hubble rate in conformal time. The expression above is
manifestly UV-divergent in some of the terms, a fact that was expected for the reasons mentioned
in the previous section. Note that the dependence on the off-shell scaleMappears in all powers
ofω k ≡ω k(τ, M) involved in the denominators of the various terms – cf. (15) – but also in the
specific contributions that carry the factor ∆ 2 of adiabatic order 2.
On a simple inspection of Eq. (21), we confirm that only even adiabatic orders (made out of
powers ofHand/or derivatives of it) remain in the final result. In [184] a simplified form of this
calculation was considered in the on-shell case (M=m) and minimal coupling (ξ= 0). It proves
to be a particular case of the above formula, as can be easily checked. A much more drastic
simplification occurs for flat spacetime (Minkowski) corresponding toa= 1 (henceH= 0) since
in that case the above result shrinks to just the following:
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩

Minkowski
= 1
4π2
ˆ
dkk2ωk =
ˆ d3k
(2π)3
1
2 ℏω k

=
ˆ d3k
(2π)3
1
2 ℏ
p
k2 +m 2

⇒ 1
2 µ4−n
ˆ dn−1k
(2π)n−1 ℏ
p
k2 +m 2
= 1
2 β(1)
ρΛ

− 2
4−n −ln 4πµ2
m2 +γ E − 3
2

,
(22)
whereℏhas been temporally restored for convenience in some of the terms. In the second line, we
have moved ton-dimensional spacetime, as usually done in a DR approach [146, 147]. Moreover,
γE is Euler’s constant and
β(1)
ρΛ = ℏm 4
2 (4π)2 (23)
is the one-loop coefficient of theβ-function for the parameterρ Λ (cf. Sec. 2.9). Finally,µis the
usual t’Hooft mass unit in DR [146]. The ZPE in Minkowski space is seen to be quartically UV-
divergent (expressed as a simple pole in DR atn= 4); so it is in curved spacetime, of course.
16

However, in a curved background there are additional types of divergences, since they depend
on the value of the Hubble rate and derivatives. This is evident from Eq. (21). For example,
the first two terms on itsr.h.s.that are proportional toξ−1/6 timesH 2 are quadratically and
logarithmically divergent, respectively. In flat spacetime these terms are absent.
Consider now the usual procedure followed in most of the literature to renormalize the quartic
divergences of the VED in the Minkowski case through the use of the MSS [147, 149, 150]. Let
us define the VED in a symbolic shorthand way asρ vac =ρ Λ+ZPE, where the ZPE is the (un-
renormalized) zero-point energy given by Eq. (22) in flat spacetime, andρ Λ is the bare term in the
action (1), both quantities being UV-divergent. Next, we split the bare term asρ Λ =ρ Λ(µ) +δρΛ,
whereρ Λ(µ) is the renormalized value ofρ Λ, and the countertermδρ Λ is then chosen to cancel the
pole atn= 4 of the result (22) in DR. This renders the well-known result:
ρvac =ρ Λ(µ) + m4
64π2

ln m2
µ2 +C vac

.(24)
The second term on ther.h.s.of (24) is the renormalized ZPE at one-loop in flat spacetime. It
carries an arbitrary constantC vac since the counterterm itself is not uniquely specified except for
cancelling the pole of the unrenormalized ZPE inn= 4 spacetime dimensions. In the modified
MSS, the counterterm absorbs additive constants such asγ E and ln 4πin (22) (which can be
hidden in a redefinition of the unphysical scaleµ, if desired) but still leavesC vac =−3/2. This is,
of course, completely arbitrary, and such arbitrariness does not disappear in a curved spacetime
calculation with DR [185], nor does this procedure allow for a proper treatment of the running of
the VED andGin cosmology [186]. In the case of the VED, first and foremost an appropriate
identification ofρ vac(M) is required not limited to just the renormalization of the parameterρ Λ.
In our approach, the full vacuum EMT is correctly identified right from the start (cf. Eq. (18)) and
the arbitrary additive constants cancel along with the UV-divergences in the ARP renormalization
procedure (cf. Sec. 2.5). At the same time the running ofGis also obtained in a way fully
consistent with the running of the VED (cf. Secs. 3.1 and 5.3)).
In a flat spacetime approach this programme is impossible. One obvious aspect of Eq. (24) is
that it has no connection whatsoever with the expanding universe, since it does not depend on
its expansion rateHor any other cosmological quantity. This point reminds us of our discussion
in Sec. 2.1, which we wish to emphasize anew here: the existence of VED does not always lead to
a CC term. The former may exist, in principle, in a perfectly renormalized form in Minkowski
spacetime, as given e.g. in Eq. (24), while the latter can only exist in the context of Einstein’s
equations in curved spacetime. However, only in a curved spacetime we are entitled to establish a
physically meaningful liaison between the two concepts. The Minkowskian results (22)-(24) know
nothing about the spacetime curvature; not surprisingly, a simplified approach of this sort misses
many contributions (including UV-divergent ones) that are tied to the spacetime curvature itself,
as noted before. Taking the aforementioned formulas and settingµ=H, as some authors do in
the literature (in an attempt to artificially inject some cosmological physics in the last minute) is
completely artificial in a flat spacetime context. Only in the presence of gravity the CC is physically
17

meaningful and only then its value becomes naturally linked with the VED through Einstein’s
equations (in proper renormalized form):ρ vac = Λ/(8πG). The above Minkowskian spacetime
result illustrates that a calculation of the VED in flat spacetime, even after renormalization, has
no impact whatsoever on the value of the cosmological constant since the latter cannot be defined
in that spacetime! In short, but reiterating the message: one cannot properly discuss such matters
as the CCP and running of Λ in Minkowski space, since having Λ̸= 0 is inconsistent with the
solution of Einstein’s equations in that spacetime. Neither can these issues be fruitfully discussed
in curved spacetime with inappropriate renormalization schemes, e.g. in those leaving behind
arbitrary additive constants. As said, every bit counts a lot in matters such as the CCP.
The moral is clear: in order to make contact with the physical CC in cosmology we cannot limit
ourselves to compute the value of Eq. (22) and adopt its renormalized form Eq. (24), as done too
often in the literature. In Minkowski space, the scaleµis a pure artifact that has no connection
whatsoever to cosmological physics. Furthermore, even if too obvious to say it, the termρ Λ in
the EH action isnotthe VED associated with the measured cosmological constant, and hence its
renormalization group equation (RGE) isnotat all the one for the physical cosmological term or
VED (cf. Sec. 2.9). In order to provide a physical meaning to the scale settingµ=Hand find the
correct RGE for the VED, we must face the QFT calculationab initioin the context of cosmological
spacetime, then correctly identify the VED and, finally, use an appropriate renormalization scheme,
namely one that has more physical meaning than just the formal renormalization performed within
the minimal subtraction scheme as sketched above, which is devoid of physical interpretation.
Quite often, vacuum considerations present additional complications. For example, if we focus
on such an important theory as standard quantum electrodynamics (QED) in Minkowski spacetime,
the vacuum energy associated with the fluctuations (in this case of the quantized electromagnetic
field) must be zero to make the theory compatible with GR. But this is not the end of the story, as
it raises important nontrivial issues that must be carefully addressed, which still make the presence
of the vacuum component necessary as an internal consistency condition for QED (see Appendix
C for an expanded reflection on these matters).
How much of the renormalization program has been covered in our approach thus far? Up
to this point, we have identified the vacuum EMT, given by Eq. (18), and we have computed the
unrenormalized ZPE in FLRW spacetime, given by Eq. (21) rather than the naive Minkowskian
result (22). What remains to be done right next is to properly renormalize the curved spacetime
formula (21) and extract a physically meaningful VED. So there is still quite some work to do
before we can make contact with physics.
2.4 An analogy with the Casimir effect
Let us elaborate on a simple analogy, which despite being useful, nonetheless has its own limi-
tations. The (dynamical) vacuum energy in our expanding universe may be thought of as being
the energy stored in a giant Casimir device in which the parallel plates move apart very slowly
(“expand”) [11, 65] – cf. Appendix C. Although the total vacuum energy cannot be measured,
18

the distinctive effect associated with the boundaries (the plates) and their increasing separation
with time can be measured. We may establish an analogy with cosmological spacetime. In it, the
4-dimensional scalar curvature can be expressed in different equivalent ways as follows:
R=6
 a′′
a3 + K
a2

= 6
 ˙a2
a2 + ¨a
a + K
a2

= 6

2H2 + ˙H+ K
a2

=−8πG T µ
µ = 8πG
X
i=vac.,mat.
(ρi −3P i)
,(25)
where in the second line we used Einstein’s equations to express the result in terms of the energy
densities and pressures of vacuum and matter (relativistic and nonrelativistic). The above expres-
sion is obviously zero in strict Minkowskian spacetime (characterized bya= 1 andK= 0; and,
of course, without any energy component that could modify the spacetime geometry). Some par-
ticular cases can be of interest. For example, ifa= 1 butK̸= 0, we can still have 4-dimensional
curvature at the expense of the 3-dimensional one. HavingK̸= 0 would be somehow the analog
of the geometric boundaries introduced by the plates in the static Casimir effect. If the plates also
move, we have a dynamical Casimir effect with moving boundaries. Finally, ifK= 0 (as expected
from inflation), butH̸= 0, there are no boundaries, but we still have a dynamical situation in
which the 4-dimensional curvature of spacetime is exclusively associated with its expansion pro-
cess. The Casimir analog of it would be peculiar since now there are no plates or can just be
conceived at infinity. It is nevertheless the closest parallelism to the cosmological picture, since
here the 3-dimensional geometry in between the infinitely separated plates is stretching and there-
fore creating a 4-dimensional curvature and a corresponding vacuum energy density filling all the
empty space (without plates!). In the absence of expansion, there could not be such a spacetime
curvature in this instance, and hence no vacuum energy either. So, the expansion is a distinc-
tive effect that stands out from the bulk presence of the three-dimensional geometric background
and endows it with 4-dimensional curvature (see more on this analogy in Sec. 2.7). It is therefore
natural to expect that the presence and evolution of the VED in the expanding universe should
be measurable only through the existence of 4-dimensional curvature carried by the purely geo-
metric contributions proportional toR,R 2,R µνRµν etc., hence toH 2 and ˙H(and corresponding
higher powers). These structures carry the ripples of the spacetime geometry and are therefore
responsible for the VED. The purported ZPE contributions in flat spacetime before any ripple
of curvature is present are of the order∼m 4 for any quantized matter field, as we have seen in
the previous section. But no matter what the value of the ZPE is, the VED must be zero to be
consistent with Einstein’s equations, see Sec.2.7. The necessary adjustment to be made between
the ZPE and theρ Λ term to ensure this fact constitutes, however, no fine tuning at all, as it is just
a formal (in fact, artificial) arrangement imposing by fiat that spacetime is flat. It is similar to
the use of normal ordering (cf. Sec. 2.8), another arbitrary arrangement. They have no physical
significance, as flat (Minkowski) spacetime does not exist as a global spacetime in nature, only as
a local approximation in the neighborhood of a given spacetime point. At the tangent Minkowski
space of this point (local inertial frame), we perform that adjustment which is, of course, valid only
19

as an approximation in that flat neighborhood. We can do the same at the next neighborhood,
but we cannot compare the two neighborhoods in curved space, so it is clear that it has no global
physical meaning. Only spacetime curvature can have global physical meaning in the universe.
Thus, according to Eq. (25), the existence of a nonvanishing VED is meaningful in the spacetime
manifold only if the latter has four-dimensional curvatureR, and therefore gravity is present. So
gravity is ultimately the source of VED in cosmological spacetime.
To put in a nutshell, the VED is zero in Minkowski space, and the ZPE computed in it
cannot have any cosmological significance, much in the same way as the vacuum energy of the
space surrounding the Casimir device is not measurable either (cf. Appendix. C)). Although the
Casimir effect is, of course, just a rough analogy, explicit QFT calculations indeed show that in
cosmological spacetime we expect curvature-dependent contributions to the VED of orderm 2R
(∼m 2H2, m2 ˙H), in which both the spacetime geometry and the quantum field masses participate,
these being much softer than the quartic mass contributions∼m 4. Obviously, all effects in which
the Hubble rate enters explicitly are not harmful at all from the point of view of the CCP, since
H2 ≪m 2 at present for any known particle mass (recall thatH 0 ∼10 −42 GeV). Let us see in
practice how these softer vacuum effects emerge explicitly from our QFT framework.
2.5 Off-shell renormalization in curved spacetime: the RVM
The next step in our program, of course, is to retake the calculation of the ZPE of the quantized
matter fieldϕin FLRW spacetime. We have seen in Sec. 2.3 that the result is UV-divergent
and it must be renormalized. As indicated previously, we adhere to adiabatic renormalization
[169–171], in which physical quantities are organized in the so-called adiabatic orders, although
with a crucial and distinctive characteristic with respect to the traditional method, to wit: we
renormalize the energy-momentum tensor (EMT) ‘off-shell’. In fact, following the RVM approach
of [33,34], this means that we define its renormalized VEV (associated with the fluctuationsδϕof
the fields) by subtracting the vacuum EMT at an arbitrary mass scaleM, which plays the role of
a renormalization point:
⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩Ren(M) =⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩(m)− ⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩(0−4)(M).(26)
This subtraction recipe defines the ‘off-shell ARP’ for renormalizing the EMT. It is a characteristic
inherent to the modern RVM formulation within the QFT context [14] and was not present in the
old RVM formulation [11].
In 4-dimensional spacetime, the above subtraction at the scaleMis performed only up to
the fourth adiabatic order, this is the meaning of⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩(0−4)(M). This prescription suffices to
provide a finite renormalized vacuum EMT. The on-shell value⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩(m) can be computed at any
adiabatic order (bearing, however, in mind the asymptotic character of the adiabatic expansion)
or even performing the calculation in an exact form when possible (e.g. in the case of de Sitter
spacetime [72] – see Sec. 4.3 –, but certainly not in a general FLRW spacetime for which no such
exact solution exists [33–36].) We should also note that despite the fact that the above subtraction
20

prescription is not manifestly covariant, adiabatic regularization is known to be equivalent to
covariant point splitting. This equivalence was proven for zero spatial curvature (K= 0) in [187]
and was generalized for anyKin [188].
On applying the above renormalization recipe to the ZPE part of the EMT, as given by Eq. (21),
one finds after some calculations the following result [33,34]:
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩Ren(M) = a2
128π2

−M 4 + 4m2M 2 −3m 4 + 2m4 ln m2
M 2

−

ξ− 1
6
 3H2
16π2

m2 −M 2 −m 2 ln m2
M 2

+

ξ− 1
6
2 9
 
2H′′H − H′2 −3H 4
16π2a2 ln m2
M 2 +. . .
(27)
Here the dots stand just for higher order adiabatic orders. According to (18), the renormali-
zed full vacuum EMT at the scaleMis now obtained from including the contribution from the
(renormalized)ρ Λ-term in the Einstein-Hilbert action (1):
⟨T vac
µν ⟩Ren(M) =−ρ Λ(M)g µν +⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩Ren(M).(28)
On the other hand, the renormalized VED just follows from the 00th-component of the previous
expression:
ρvac(M) = ⟨T vac
00 ⟩ren(M)
a2 =ρ Λ(M) + ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M)
a2 ,(29)
where we should remember thatg 00 =−a 2 in the conformal metric. Notice that Eq. (29) for the
VED originates from treating the vacuum as a perfect fluid, that is, with an EMT of the form
⟨T vac
µν ⟩=P vacgµν + (ρvac +P vac)u µuν ,(30)
in whichu µ is the 4-velocity (u µuµ =−1) and no presumption is made on the vacuum EoS. In
conformally flat coordinates and considering the comoving FLRW frame,uµ = (1/√−g00,0,0,0) =
(1/a,0,0,0) and henceu µ = (−a,0,0,0). The 00th-component thus yields⟨T vac
00 ⟩=−a 2Pvac +
(ρvac +P vac)a 2 =a 2ρvac, which holds good irrespective of the EoS relatingρ vac andP vac. This
leads to Eq. (29) by inserting the 00th-component of (28) 8.
In the renormalized theory formulated in our framework, the sum (29) provides the physically
measurable VED at the scaleM, which again takes the general form VED =ρ Λ + ZPE.More
explicitly,
ρvac(M, H) =ρ Λ(M) + 1
128π2

−M 4 + 4m2M 2 −3m 4 + 2m4 ln m2
M 2

+

ξ− 1
6
 3H2
16π2

M 2 −m 2 +m 2 ln m2
M 2

−

ξ− 1
6
2 9

6H2 ˙H+ 2H ¨H− ˙H2

16π2 ln m2
M 2 +· · ·
(31)
8We may also derive it in more formal terms. Recall that in relativistic mechanics the energy of a particle of
4-momentump µ as measured by an observer of 4-velocityu µ is given byE=−p µuµ. Similarly, in field theory the
VED measured by that observer isρ vac =⟨T vac
µν uµuν ⟩. Recalling that in the rest frame of the observer the 4-velocity
isu µ = (1/a,0,0,0), Eq. (29) follows at once.
21

where in the above equation we have converted all the terms involving the Hubble rate in con-
formal time into cosmic time. In particular, it is easy to show that 2H ′′H − H ′2 −3H 4 =
a4

6H2 ˙H+ 2H ¨H− ˙H2

. In the caseH=const. (corresponding to de Sitter spacetime), such a
higher order adiabatic contribution simply vanishes.
2.6 Renormalized Einstein equations in QFT in curved spacetime
As is well-known, GR is perturbatively non-renormalizable in the context of quantum gravity
[189,190]. However, by complementing the Einstein–Hilbert action with appropriate higher deriva-
tive (HD) geometric terms, specifically quadratic terms in the curvature, gravity can be made
perturbatively renormalizable [164], although we should add that the dust has not yet settled fully
in this approach. Be as it may, we reiterate that in our RVM framework we will not quantize the
gravitational field, only the matter fields. The semiclassical formulation (QFT in curved space-
time) will suffice for our considerations. In it, the HD terms in the action are also indispensable
for renormalization. Thus, in order to implement the renormalization program in our context,
we must extend the EH action by considering the HD gravity terms up to the second adiabatic
order [169]. This extension of the vacuum action leads to the renormalized Einstein field equa-
tions, which incorporate the quantum effects from the quantized matter fields. If we consider only
vacuum terms, the generalized field equations (compare with the original form (5)) can be written
as follows:
1
8πG(M) Gµν +ρ Λ(M)g µν +α(M) (1)Hµν =⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩ren(M),(32)
whereMis the renormalization scale introduced before. Here (1)Hµν is the (covariantly conserved)
HD tensor which appears from the metric functional variation of theR 2-term in the higher deriva-
tive vacuum action for FLRW spacetime, andα(M) is the corresponding renormalized coupling.
We recall the reader that the HD term obtained from the variation ofR µνRµν (the square of the
Ricci tensor), called (2)Hµν, is not needed in our case since it is not independent of (1)Hµν for
conformally flat spacetimes (in particular, FLRW) [169].
The couplingsG(M), ρ Λ(M) andα(M) are the renormalized couplings at the scaleM, and
⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩ren(M) is the (adiabatically) renormalized vacuum EMT. Me way now striaghtforwardly
subtract the renormalized Einstein equations (32), term by term, at two scalesMandM 0, with
the result
1
8π δG−1(m, M, M0)Gµν +δρ Λ(m, M, M0)gµν +δα(M, M 0) (1)Hµν =δ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩(0−4)
ren (M, M0),(33)
where we have definedδ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩(0−4)
ren (M, M0)≡ ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩(0−4)
ren (M)− ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩(0−4)
ren (M0) and similarly for
δρΛ,δG −1 andδα. Upon using (27) for the calculation ofδ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩(0−4)
ren (M, M0) and the explicit
expressions forG 00 and (1)H00 in the conformally flat metric 9, we obtain the following results:
δρΛ(m, M, M0)≡ρ Λ(M)−ρ Λ(M0) = 1
128π2

M 4 −M 4
0 −4m 2(M 2 −M 2
0 ) + 2m4 ln M 2
M 2
0

,(34)
9These are the following [34]:G 00 = 3a2H2 and (1)H00 =−18a 2

˙H2 −2H ¨H−6H 2 ˙H

.
22

δG−1(m, M, M0)≡G −1(M)−G −1(M0) =

ξ− 1
6
 1
2π

M 2 −M 2
0 −m 2 ln M 2
M 2
0

(35)
and
δα(M, M0)≡α(M)−α(M 0) =− 1
32π2

ξ− 1
6
2
ln M 2
M 2
0
.(36)
These relations furnish the scaling laws obeyed by the couplingsρ Λ(M),G(M),α(M) in the
renormalized Einstein’s equations, i.e. their respective (finite) shifts when we perform a change of
scale (renormalization point) fromM 0 toM. We shall encounter these same equations when we
address the adiabatic renormalization of the vacum EMT in de Sitter spacetime.
Having obtained the explicit form of the renormalizedρvac(M, H) (31) in our approach, the next
step is to compute its scaling evolution in the span mediating in between two cosmic epochs in the
near past, say those characterized by the Hubble rate valuesHandH 0. This is actually the physical
result we are aiming at since it corresponds to the main aim of the renormalization theory, namely,
to compute the scaling evolution of a quantity between two renormalization points. But for this, we
must use our scale settingM=Hat the end of the calculation to trace the evolution of the VED
with the cosmic expansion. The result thus follows from Eq. (31) by selecting the renormalization
pointsMandM 0 precisely at the values of the Hubble rate in those epochs, henceM=Hand
M0 =H 0 respectively. Definingρ vac(H)≡ρ vac(M=H, H) andρ vac(H0)≡ρ vac(H0, H0), we
obtain
ρvac(H)−ρ vac(H0) = 3
 
ξ− 1
6

16π2

H2

H2 −m 2 +m 2 ln m2
H2

−H2
0

H2
0 −m 2 +m 2 ln m2
H2
0

+· · ·,
(37)
where we have neglected the contribution from the terms in the last line of (31) as they will not
be relevant for the RVM mechanism of inflation (cf. Sec. 4.1) and they are also irrelevant for
the current universe. Interestingly enough, the dangerous terms∼m 4 have canceled out in the
difference (37). In fact, the entire term in parenthesis at the first line of (31) cancels exactly in
the difference againstρ Λ(M)−ρ Λ(M0), given by Eq. (34), as can be easily checked. This is a most
remarkable and crucial property of our renormalization framework, since because of it the VED
evolution becomes free of quartic mass contributions∼m 4, which, if present, would recreate the
unnatural fine tuning associated with the CCP.
A final observation in this section may be in order. We may wonder what would happen if
our starting action (4) were to include an effective potential for the scalar field under SSB (i.e.
⟨ϕ⟩ ≡v̸= 0). In the context of our off-shell subtraction prescription (26), all constant terms
that do not evolve with the expansion cancel out in the renormalized expression. For the effective
potential, the external tails of the gravitational field do not carry external momentum and therefore
cannot introduce additional powers ofH. So an effective potential can only lead to contributions
of order∼m 4 orv 4 (if there is a VEVvforϕ). Now, terms with powers ofHcan still emerge
at the level of the one-loop effective action of the scalar field (which, in contrast to the effective
potential, is sensitive to external momenta). However, by pure covariance it can only bring in
23

corrections of the existing type∼m 2H2 in the late universe. In fact, the new terms must adapt
to the tensorial structure on thel.h.s.of Einstein’s equations (32), and hence appear as a linear
combination ofg µν,G µν and (1)Hµν. In the FLRW metric, they are of orderm 4,m 2H2 andH 4,
respectively. Therefore, e.g. the 00th component of the vacuum EMT,⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M), can receive
contributions of the form
A a2m4
16π2 ln m2
M 2 + a2m2H2
16π2

B+Cln m2
M 2

+O(H 4),(38)
with calculable coefficientsA, BandC. However, all these terms are of the same type as those we
previously found in the ZPE structure, see Eq. (27). Therefore, the∼m 4 (andv 4) contributions
will cancel against (34) when we operate the difference (37) between two scales, and only∼m 2H2
effects will remain in the current universe, exactly as with the ZPE. The upshot is that there can
be no aggravation of the fine tuning issue, and the evolution of the VED (and vacuum pressure)
should remain qualitatively as smooth as we have found with the ZPE treatment alone.
2.7 Renormalized VED from subtracting Minkowski vacuum
It is useful to note that the renormalized VED in our subtraction scheme can be thought of as
being the result of subtracting the Minkowskian ZPE from the curved spacetime result. Indeed,
let us evaluate
ρvac(M)≡ ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M)
a2 −
"
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M)
a2
#Mink
= ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M)
a2 − ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩Mink
ren (M), (39)
where in Minkowski spacetimea= 1,H=H= 0. In the flat background, Eq.(32) boils down to
justρ Λ(M)η µν =⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩Mink
ren (M), or
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩Mink
ren (M) =−ρ Λ(M).(40)
As a result, Eq. (39) yields
ρvac(M) = ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M)
a2 +ρ Λ(M) = ⟨T vac
00 ⟩ren(M)
a2 ,(41)
which is precisely our starting formula for the renormalized VED, Eq. (29).
This alternative formulation reminds us of our analogy with the Casimir effect made in Sec. 2.4,
in the sense that subtracting the Minkowskian contribution is similar to obtaining a finite energy
density in the Casimir device after removing the background space and only leaving the differential
effect caused by the presence of the plates, which in our case would be represented by the curvature
of spacetime. The latter is the key ingredient that provides the departure of the FLRW background
from Minkowskian spacetime. Thus, upon performing such a subtraction, the VED should depend
only on the curved geometry and evolve only mildly with the cosmic evolution through a function
of the Hubble rate. Such a mildly evolving function is exactly given by ther.h.s.of Eq. (37).
From the former considerations, in Minkowski space we should expect zero vacuum energy in
our context. This result is usually justified using normal ordering of the quantum operators in the
24

canonical formalism. Here we do not need to appeal to normal ordering, since after all it is an
arbitrary prescription to get rid of the ZPE from the quantum fields in flat spacetime. In our case,
the renormalized ZPE in Minkowski space is the value of⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M), given by Eq. (27) fora= 1
andH= 0:
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩Mink
ren (M) = 1
128π2

−M 4 + 4m2M 2 −3m 4 + 2m4 ln m2
M 2

. (42)
This quantity is purely formal and has no connection with the measured CC term. This situation is
similar to our discussion around Eq. (24), except that here it is placed in a gravitational framework
and therefore such expression is recovered in the flat spacetime limit of our curved spacetime result.
In fact, the above quantity cancels exactly againstρΛ(M). From equations (40) and (41) we confirm
that the VED in Minkowskian spacetime is exactly zero in our renormalization setup:
ρMink
vac =
"
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M)
a2
#Mink
+ρ Λ(M)
=⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩Mink
ren (M) +ρ Λ(M) =−ρ Λ(M) +ρ Λ(M) = 0,
(43)
for all scalesM, as it should.
2.8 Fine tuning and CCP: a digression on the quantum vacuum
In a non-gravitatinal context (i.e. in QFT in flat spacetime) the ZPE is given by the first two
terms on ther.h.s.of Eq. (31) i.e.
ρMink
vac (M) =ρ Λ(M) + 1
128π2

−M 4 + 4m2M 2 −3m 4 + 2m4 ln m2
M 2

=ρ Λ(M) + m4
64π2

ln m2
M 2 − 3
2 − M 4
2m4 + 2M 2
m2

.
(44)
This expression for the renormalized VED of a scalar field in Minkowski spacetime is not required
to be zero, in principle, since it is not related to the cosmological constant. The second equality
is particularly convenient in order to make a more direct contact with Eq. (24)) in the modified
MSS (for whichC vac =−3/2). We can see that the two expressions match forM 2 ≪m 2, which
is reminiscent of the fact that when we move to FLRW spacetime we associateMwithH, which
is certainly much smaller than any known particle mass.
On the other hand, if Minkowski spacetime is to be a particular solution of Einstein’s equations,
this is only possible if the VED computed in QFT in flat spacetime is exactly zero. So, Eq.(44)
must vanish:
ρΛ(M) + 1
128π2

−M 4 + 4m2M 2 −3m 4 + 2m4 ln m2
M 2

= 0.(45)
This says thatρ vac =ρ Λ+ZPE= 0 in Minkowski space. The cosmological constant is then zero
and, of course, also the VED, as we have seen in the previous section. In flat spacetime, the scaleM
becomes a purely formal artifact devoid of physical meaning, much in the same way as the artificial
mass unitµemployed in DR, see Eq. (24). Given that there is no gravity dynamics in Minkowski
25

space, nothing can physically run with the scaleM(orµ). Therefore, the above equation (45) is
no fine tuning at all, since it carries no relation between measurable quantities; it is just a formal
consistency relation aimed at obtaining Minkowski spacetime as a particular solution of Einstein’s
equations. There is no more fine tuning in it than there is in the totallyad hocimposition of normal
ordering in the canonical formulation of QFT. Fine tuning actually occurs instead in the opposite
situation, that is, when one artificially enforces that the flat spacetime formula (44) should yield
the value of the CC. Not too surprising, since such a requirement is physically meaningless.
At the price of some digression on these matters, which I believe are central for understanding
the quantum vacuum, let us comment briefly here on the situation in Quantum Electodynamics
(QED) – for an extended discussion, see Appendix C. In QED, the quanta have zero mass,m= 0,
and the above approach cannot be applied to study the vacuum energy. However, standard QED
tells us that the electromagnetic field can be treated as an infinite collection of harmonic oscillators.
This eventually leads to an infinite sum of the vacuum fluctuations of all the modes. The usual
practice in QFT in Minkowski spacetime, where only energy differences matter, is to get rid of
such an infinite sum (which is after all a constant, even if infinite) through the normal ordering of
the ladder operators in the field HamiltonianH F . That is, one redefines it as follows:
HF →H F − ⟨0|HF |0⟩= 1
2 ℏω

aa† +a †a

− 1
2 ℏω
= 1
2 ℏω

2a†a+ 1

− 1
2 ℏω
=ℏωa †a ,
(46)
where we have used the standard commutation relations (10), which in a discrete situation for a
single mode just reads [a, a†] = 1. We do this for all modesω k, of course, and sum over all of them.
The new Hamiltonian is said to be ‘normally ordered’ since the creation operatorsa † appear to
the left of the annihilation operatorsa, which ensures that the vacuum energy is zero,H|0⟩= 0,
due to the fact that thea-operators annihilate the vacuum:a|0⟩= 0. This is fine but, of course, it
is based on an arbitrary definition which we are entitled to use since we do not have an absolute
measure of energy in that spacetime.
However, in a GR context, it is not just an option; we are actually enforced to kill the vacuum
energy in Minkowski spacetime in order to prevent a contribution to the CC and hence contradict
Einstein’s equations. In this sense, it is surprising to see that one might still insist on calculating
the value of Λ in a flat spacetime context after we have already declared that the VED is zero by
fiat (i.e. on imposing normal ordering). I suppose that the confusion in the literature must be
caused because one still has in mind Eq.(44), corresponding to a massive scalar field, and then one
is tempted to compute the finite contribution emerging from the ZPE part of it for various particle
masses. In the QED context, instead, we cannot use that formula, of course, since the photon is
massless. Still, the Hamiltonian acting on the vacuum state (before operating normal ordering) is
infinite and for QED there does not exist a counterpart to the finite renormalized term given by
Eq.(44), except a zero renormalized ZPE. In QED the situation might look simpler in that we can
switch on normal ordering and then all vacuum effects become somehow hidden under the rug.
26

But this is actually not true, the situation is actually much subtler. Even after imposing normal
ordering, QED would be inconsistent without the vacuum fieldE 0(t,x). This is well-known, but
sometimes is forgotten! If we would ignore it, the canonical commutation relations of Quantum
Mechanics would break down. For example, the canonical commutator [x(t),p(t)] would collapse
to zero after a very short time rather than taking the steady valueiℏthat we expect at all times; the
reason being that forE 0(t,x) = 0 the differential equation forx(t) would render an exponentially
damped solution. Such a behavior is caused by the so-called ‘radiative (or radiation) reaction
field’, a well-known effect described in the theory of radiation in classical Electrodynamics, which
would exponentially damp the system in the absence of the vacuum fieldE 0(t,x) (see Appendix
C for an extended discussion).
In curved spacetime, in contrast, there is a vacuum fluctuating field and we donothave to
enforce vanishing ZPE through normal ordering nor any other artifact. We have actually computed
the VED in detail for a non-minimal scalar field model and the result is given by Eq. (31). This
defines a physical Λ-term, which turns out to be dynamical. The different pieces involved on the
r.h.s.of Eq. (31) cannot be isolated. In particular, we are not entitled to assume that Eq. (45)
holds now. Here, the scaleMis no longer a formal quantity, since we identify it withH, which is
now relevant since we are in FLRW spacetime. Therefore, all terms in that equation are involved
and are nonzero, but cannot be isolated piece by piece At this point, let us imagine (in the manner
of a Gedankenexperiment) a process in which we gradually ‘turn off’ the curvature of spacetime
by formally taking the limita→1 (H→0), which implies vanishing curvature of spacetime, e.g.
R→0 (forK= 0 in Eq. (25)) as well as the curvature tensors. Thel.h.s.of (31) must go to
zero, since in this limit we have to obtain Minkowski space as a solution of the field equations.
At the same time, ther.h.s.must go to zero too. The terms that are explicitly dependent on the
Hubble rate obviously go to zero; and hence the sum of the first two terms (which do not depend
onH) must also go to zero. In this way we reach the flat spacetime condition Eq. (45) as a limit of
the curved spacetime result; that is to say, we consistently retrieve the Minkowskian space result
from the curved spacetime case (31). However, at any intermediate stage of this limit we cannot
determineρ Λ(M) separately from the ZPE, as only the sum is physically meaningfull: this sum
defines the dynamical vacuum energy density in curved spacetime.
This raises the question as to whether or not the VED can be predicted quantitatively at the
pointM=H, which would be tantamount to solving the old CCP. Strictly speaking, the answer
is no, since we must repeat once more that the main aim of the renormalization group is to use
data on a quantity (in this case, the VEDρ vac) at a given scale, sayM=H 0, so as to find its
value at another scale,M=H; in other words, the aim is to predict the RG evolution of that
quantity, not the value itself of the quantity at a particular scale. All in all, a clue to a possible
solution of the CCP in our renormalization framework is suggested.
Indeed, the dynamics of the VED through its scale dependence onM, and subsequent identi-
fication ofMwithH, expresses in a rigorous mathematical way the original point of view of the
RVM framework from the renormalization group approach [11,14]. But, in fact, it expresses more
27

than that. It suggests that there is no fine tuning in the renormalized value of the VED (and hence
in the physical value of the cosmological term) since, as previously remarked, the first two terms on
ther.h.s.of Eq. (31) vanish in the flat spacetime limit in order that thel.h.s.vanishes too. Howe-
ver, when – in a reversed version of the previous Gedankenexperiment – we start from Minkowski
space and gradually ‘turn on’ the four-dimensional curvature (letting the universe evolve), these
terms will be switched on and by continuity their contribution must remain as small as the remai-
ning terms on ther.h.s., which start getting small values ofO(H 2) andO(H 4). Therefore, while
we cannot compute the value of the VED atM=H, we can still see from the smoothness of the
renormalization procedure that any two points are gently related and that there is no fine tuning
in the structure of the VED.
The fact that this property can be achieved in the off-shell renormalization scheme is due
to the subtraction recipe defined by Eq. (26). This cannot be accomplished in schemes where
countertems are used to pick out particular combinations of UV-divergent terms plus additional
(arbitrary) constants (e.g. MSS renormalization). In our procedure, we get rid of all additive
terms, since the subtraction of UV-divergent quantities includes their full finite parts. Notice also
that the dynamical character ofM=His essential to fulfill this purpose, since it is the clue to
performing subtractions at different points of the cosmological evolution, these subtractions being
completely smooth (absence of large quartic mass contributions∼m 4). Put another way, in the
RVM framework presented here there are no harmful effects of the type originally proposed by
Zeldovich when he first formulated the CCP in the context of particle physics and quantum field
theory (see the Introduction)! An appropriate renormalization of the theory can smooth them
out. Among a large variety of alternative options to escape from these contributions, there are
the unimodular theories of gravity [191, 192], in which the VED vanishes while the cosmological
constant survives as an integration constant. However, this constant is arbitrary, so there is no
explanation for its particular phenomenological value.
2.9β-function of the physical running vacuum
The aforementioned cancellation of them 4 terms in the VED evolution can be reformulated in
renormalization group (RG) terms, namely in terms of theβ-function driving its running. This
function receives only ‘soft’ contributions of the kind∼m 2H2 rather than ‘hard’ contributions
∼m 4. This is the key feature protecting our renormalization framework from the fine tuning
calamity associated with the CCP. It is a more technical and precise way to rephrase the fine
tuning discussion made in the last section. This crucial property was first noticed in [33, 34]. Let
us put it in quantitative terms.
In fact, a chief result that follows from equations (27) and (29) is the expression for theβ-
28

function driving the RG-running of the VED:
βρvac(M, H) =M ∂ρvac(M, H)
∂M =M dρΛ(M)
dM − 1
32π2
 
M 2 −m 22
+

ξ− 1
6
 3H2
8π2
 
M 2 −m 2
−

ξ− 1
6
2 9

6H2 ˙H+ 2H ¨H− ˙H2

8π2
=

ξ− 1
6
 3H2
8π2
 
M 2 −m 2
−

ξ− 1
6
2 9

6H2 ˙H+ 2H ¨H− ˙H2

8π2 ,(47)
where in the last step we have used that theβ-function for the renormalized parameterρ Λ in the
EH-action is
βρΛ(M) =M ∂ρΛ(M)
∂M = 1
32π2 (M 2 −m 2)2 .(48)
The latter follows immediately from Eq.(44), which is RG-invariant since it corresponds to the
VED in Minkowski spacetime. In fact, in this spacetime the VED is a bare quantity in which
ρΛ has been split into a renormalized term plus a counterterm that cancels the divergence of the
unrenormalized ZPE. The result (48) can be compared with the one obtained from (24) in the
MSS within DR. Using the fact that thel.h.s.of (24) is a bare quantity (and hence RG-invariant)
we find:
βMS
ρΛ ≡µ ∂ρΛ(µ)
∂µ = m4
32π2 ,(49)
which is indeed Eq.(23), withℏ= 1 hereafter. Once more we find that this result in the MSS
coincides with (48) forM 2 ≪m 2. The difference between the two situations is clear: in Minkowski
spacetime there is nothing else in the vacuum action apart from the bare termρ Λ. By contrast, in
curved spacetime we have also the curvature scalar plus the geometric HD terms, with correspon-
ding bare couplings. In this case, only the full effective action (which involves the classical part
plus the nontrivial quantum vacuum effects) is RG-invariant. Finally, sinceMeventually will be
set toHin (47), which is currently negligible in front of any particle mass scalem, we have
βρvac =

ξ− 1
6
 3H2
8π2
 
M 2 −m 2
≃ −

ξ− 1
6
 3m2H2
8π2 ,(50)
upon neglecting theO(H 4) terms in the present universe. Thus,β ρvac ∼m 2H2. This softer
behavior of theβ-function in the curved case (m 2H2 ≪m 4) explains the cancellation of the
quartic mass terms in the previous sections. We note that the expression (47), which is our
starting point, is exact and does not depend on the fact that (27) was computed only up to 4th
adiabatic order. The reason is that the higher order terms (order 6thand above) are finite and
hence independent ofM.
Equation (47) gives the running of the VED with the scaleMat fixedH, i.e. the partial
derivative. Since in the end we must putM=H, we need to compute the total derivative
with respect toHof the VED expression (37), where the scale settingM=Hhas already been
29

implemented. Therefore, we obtain
βvac(H)≡H dρvac(H)
dH =

ξ− 1
6
 3m2H2
8π2

−2 + ln m2
H2

≃

ξ− 1
6
 3m2H2
8π2 ln m2
H2
0
(51)
where again we have neglected theO(H 4) contributions in the late universe and in the log we have
used the current value of the Hubble rate,H 0, and the fact that for any known particle ln m2
H2
0
≫1.
We can infer the previous result on more formal terms. Let us assume thatM=M(H) is a
sufficiently smooth function ofH, with an inverseH=H(M). Theβ-function of the full running
withHis obtained from the total derivative of the VED with respect toM, atM=H. The total
derivative reads
βvac(M, H)≡M dρvac(M, H(M))
dM =M
 ∂ρvac
∂M + ∂ρvac
∂H
dH
dM

=β ρvac +M ∂ρvac
∂H
dH
dM .
(52)
Using equations (31) and (47), and considering only theO(H 2) contributions for the present
universe, we find:
βvac(M, H) =

ξ− 1
6
 3H2
8π2
 
M 2 −m 2
+M

ξ− 1
6
 3H
8π2

M 2 −m 2 +m 2 ln m2
M 2
 dH
dM .
(53)
This equation holds for any functionM=M(H). If we specialize toM=H, we obtain once more
Eq. (51) within the same approximation (q.e.d.). This ‘total’β-function for the VED running has a
different sign (and coefficient) as compared to the partial one in Eq.(50), since the former explores
the full evolution (total derivative) with respect toMand not just the variation ofρ vac withM
at fixedH(as in the latter). The above equation (51) tells us that ifξ >1/6 (resp.ξ <1/6)
the VED decreases (resp. increases) with expansion, and therefore the VED effectively behaves
as quintessence (resp. phantom DE). Interestingly enough, we find that the quantum vacuum can
mimic dynamical DE [34,35]. See Sec. 5 for more details.
The above discussion should make clear once and for all that the physical running of the VED
obeys aβ-function with the general behaviorβ ρvac ∼m 2H2, which is much softer than that of
theρ Λ term,β ρΛ ∼m 4. As noted, the latter has been repeatedly discussed in the literature
[147,149–151,153,154,186], but in fact does not reflect the physical behavior of the VED running
(nor that ofG). While in some cases the reason is that the approach to the calculation of the
VED is Minkowskianab initio, in others the approach is made in curved spacetime but without
being sensitive to the background geometry for the relevant terms under discussion, this sensitivity
being necessary, of course, so as to obtain the VED as a function of the expansion rate. In all
these situations, one is left again and again with different forms of the same result (24), which is
completely blind to the effects of the cosmological background.
30

The proper way to access the relevant physical effects is to undertake the vacuum EMT in
curved spacetime by introducing the off-shell character of the renormalization procedure, since
after all this is in the spirit of the RG; and, at the same time, one has to correctly identify from
the very beginning the VED as being the sum of the CC term in the action and the ZPE in curved
spacetime (plus additional SSB contributions, if present), not just through the computation of the
coupling renormalization of the term in the action. This is what we have done here in the RVM
formulation and we have obtained the physical running of the relevant quantities. An alternative
approach within the RVM that fully corroborates our result is provided in Sec. 3.2, which makes
use of the effective action method introduced in the next section.
3 Effective action approach in the RVM framework
The renormalized EMT considered in Sec. 2.5 is related to the (renormalized) effective action of
vacuum [193],W, which describes the vacuum fluctuations of the quantized matter fields of QFT
in FLRW spacetime:
⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩=− 2√−g
δW
δg µν .(54)
This functional relation allows a nontrivial cross-check for the computation of the renormali-
zed EMT. We have previously computed the latter directly by expanding the solution of the
Klein-Gordon equation (□−m 2 −ξR)ϕ= 0 in Fourier modes and letting the creation and an-
nihilation operators to act on the adiabatic vacuum with the usual commutation relations. We
may alternatively compute it using the above effective actionWthrough the DeWitt-Schwinger
expansion [169–171,178,179]. In the RVM approach, this implies correcting the standard DeWitt-
Schwinger coefficients of such an expansion by taking into account the off-shell effects at the scale
M, and finally use Eq. (54) to retrieve with this method the renormalized EMT at the renormali-
zation pointM[34].
The vacuum effective actionWis computed from the trace of the logarithm of the inverse
Green’s function in curved spacetime [14]. More specifically,
W= iℏ
2 T rln(−G −1
F ) = iℏ
2 T rln(−G F )−1 =− iℏ
2 T rln(−G F )
=− iℏ
2
ˆ
d4x√−glim
x→x′
ln

−GF (x, x′)

≡
ˆ
d4x√−g LW .
(55)
The integrand in the last term defines the Lagrangian density √−g LW associated with the quan-
tum vacuum effective action. In the above expression, we have keptℏexplicitly so as to emphasize
the pure quantum nature of the above action. In subsequent expressions, we setℏ= 1.
For the explicit calculation ofL W one follows the method based on the DeWitt-Schwinger
expansion of the effective action. However, the standard method must be corrected for so as to
take into account that the expansion is not on-shell in our case. Therefore, we need to compute the
off-shell curved spacetime propagatorG F involved in the previous formulas. Such a propagator
31

satisfies the equation
 
□x −M 2 −∆ 2 −ξR(x)

GF (x, x′) =−(−g(x)) −1/2 δ(n)(x−x ′),(56)
whereδ (n) is the Diracδ-distribution innspacetime dimensions. It may be convenient to keepn
general if one is (optionally) interested in using DR to regularize UV divergences. The renormali-
zation itself does not depend on that, cf. [33,34] An exact solution of (56) is not generally possible,
butG F can be determined by means of an adiabatic expansion of the solution, in complete analogy
with the method we have used before to compute the vacuum EMT from the mode expansion of
the fields (cf. Sec. 2.2). Again, the key to the off-shell method is the presence of the floating scale
Mand the quantity ∆ 2 ≡m 2 −M 2, which also appeared in the mode expansion method. We see
once more that ∆ 2 must be treated as being of adiabatic order 2, since it goes together with the
Rterm in the above propagator equation. We cannot combineM 2 and ∆2 in it, since they belong
to different adiabatic orders, and this fact must be respected when solving the equation forG F by
adiabatic expansion. The procedure is a bit cumbersome. The calculation in the on-shell case can
be found in [169–171].
In the off-shell situation one proceeds similarly, but with due account of the new ingredients
related to the scaleM, which will produce additional terms non-existing in the traditional on-shell
expansion. The final result for the effective Lagrangian of vacuum defined in Eq.(55) in the off-shell
case is the following [34] (see Appendix B for a summary of the calculation):
LW = µ4−n
2(4π)n/2
∞X
j=0
ˆaj(x)
ˆ ∞
0
(is)j−1−n/2e−iM2sids
= 1
2(4π)2+ ε
2
 M
µ
ε ∞X
j=0
ˆaj(x)M 4−2jΓ

j−2− ε
2

.
(57)
This result constitutes the heat-kernel expansion of the propagator with the DeWitt-Schwinger
technique [178]. Here we use DR to regularize the divergences and defineε≡n−4. The limit
ε→0 is understood. As usual, Γ is Euler’s gamma function andµis the aforementioned ’t Hooft’s
mass unit to keep the effective Lagrangian with natural dimension +4 of energy innspacetime
dimensions. The final results must be independent ofµ, which is an unphysical parameter 10. The
sum overj= 0,1,2, ...involves even adiabatic orders only. However, as warned, the presence
of ∆ 2 modifies the DeWitt-Schwinger coefficients ˆai(x). Up to fourth adiabatic order, the new
coefficients read as follows:
10Our final renormalized result depends onMonly, but not onµ. This is in contrast to the approach of [194],
which lacks of our subtraction off-shell prescription atM, and the final results still carry explicitµ-dependence and
the renormalized results lead to∼m 4 contributions responsible for extreme fine-tuning in the CCP.
32

ˆa0(x) = 1 =a 0(x),
ˆa1(x) =a 1(x)−∆ 2 =−

ξ− 1
6

R−∆ 2,
ˆa2(x) =a 2(x) + ∆4
2 + ∆2R

ξ− 1
6

= 1
2

ξ− 1
6
2
R2 + ∆4
2
+ ∆2R

ξ− 1
6

− 1
3 Qλ
λ ,
(58)
with
1
3 Qλ
λ ≡ − 1
120 C2 + 1
360 E+ 1
6

ξ− 1
5

□R ,(59)
in whichEis the Euler density (whose action defines the Gauss-Bonnet term) andC 2 is the square
of the Weyl tensor. The coefficientsa i(x) are the ordinary DeWitt-Schwinger coefficients for ∆ = 0
(on-shell expansion). The effective Lagrangian (57) is manifestly UV-divergent since Euler’s Γ-
function is divergent forj= 0,1,2 inn= 4 spacetime dimensions. Therefore, renormalization is
required. We avoid using the MSS in this context; instead, we utilize the off-shell ARP adapted
to the effective action method. In fact, we define the renormalized vacuum effective Lagrangian at
the renormalization point M as follows:
Lren
W (M) =L W (m)−L (0−4)
W (M)≡L W (m)−L div(M),(60)
whereL div(M)≡L (0−4)
W (M) is the divergent part. Notice thatL W (m) andL div(M) are both
divergent, but the former may involve the full DeWitt-Schwinger expansion at any desired order,
whereas the latter is computed only up to order 4. This subtraction prescription, which is per-
formed at the level of the effective vacuum Lagrangian, is the exact analog of the off-shell ARP
definition (26) for the renormalized vacuum EMT and it suffices to makeL ren
W (M) finite. Using
Eqs. (57)-(58), and after some relatively lengthy algebra, one can check that the pole terms (which
appear in the limitε→0) exactly cancel out in Eq. (60), leaving the following finite result:
Lren
W (M) =δρ Λ(M)− 1
2 δM2
Pl(M)R−δα Q(M) Qλ
λ
3 −δα 2(M)R 2 +· · ·, (61)
The dots stand for higher order adiabatic contributions that decouple at largem, and
δρΛ(M) = 1
8 (4π)2

M 4 −4m 2M 2 + 3m4 −2m 4 ln m2
M 2

,
δM2
Pl(M) =
 
ξ− 1
6

(4π)2

M 2 −m 2 +m 2 ln m2
M 2

,
δαQ(M) =− 1
2(4π)2 ln m2
M 2 ,
δα2(M) =
 
ξ− 1
6
2
4(4π)2 ln m2
M 2 .
(62)
These quantities are finite renormalization effects which are generated in the subtraction (60). We
have definedδρ Λ(M) =ρ Λ(M)−ρ Λ(m) andδM 2
Pl(M) =M 2
Pl(M)− M 2
Pl(m), whereM 2
Pl(M) =
33

G−1(M)
8π = m2
Pl(M)
8π is the reduced Planck mass squared. In general, for two arbitrary valuesM 1 and
M2 of the scale, we have
ρΛ(M2)−ρ Λ(M1) = 1
8(4π)2

M 4
2 −M 4
1 −4m 2(M 2
2 −M 2
1 )−2m 4 ln M 2
1
M 2
2

,(63)
M2
Pl(M2)− M 2
Pl(M1) =
 
ξ− 1
6

(4π)2

M 2
2 −M 2
1 +m 2 ln M 2
1
M 2
2

.(64)
Similarly with the dimensionless coefficientsα 2 andα Q of the HD terms. We confirm from the
above results that the dependence onµhas canceled altogether along with the poles. It should
be emphasized that the subtracted termL div(M) at the scaleMin (60) involves not just the
UV-divergences but also the full expression obtained up to adiabatic order 4 (j= 0,1,2) in the
DeWitt-Schwinger expansion (57), and therefore it includes their finite parts. This is consistent
with the off-shell ARP procedure (26) which we used before from the direct mode expansion of
the EMT. Thus, as promised, no arbitrary additive constants are left within the ARP procedure,
in contrast to e.g. MSS renormalization.
3.1 RG-invariance and running couplings
While the vacuum effective LagrangianL ren
W (M) computed in the previous section is not RG-
invariant (since it isM-dependent), the full vacuum effective Lagrangian involving also the ex-
tended classical part (EH part plus HD geometric terms) must be RG-invariant, of course. In fact,
the classical part of the Lagrangian reads
Lcl.
G =L EH +L HD =−ρ Λ + 1
2 M2
PlR+α Q
Qλ
λ
3 +α 2R2
=−ρ Λ + 1
2 M2
PlR+α 1C2 +α 2R2 +α 3E+α 4□R ,
(65)
where the coefficientsα i fori= 1,3,4 in the second expression can be easily related to those of
(59) using standard formulae [34]. Thus, the full vacuum effective Lagrangian finally reads
Leff =L cl.
G (M) +L ren
W (M) =−ρ Λ(M) + 1
2 M2
Pl(M)R+α 1(M)C 2 +α 2(M)R 2 +α 3(M)E
+α 4(M)□R+δρ Λ(M)− 1
2 δM2
Pl(M)R−δα Q(M) Qλ
λ
3 −δα 2(M)R 2 +· · ·
= [−ρΛ(M) +δρ Λ(M)] + 1
2

M2
Pl(M)−δM 2
Pl(M)

R+

α1(M) + 1
120 δαQ(M)

C2
+

α3(M)− 1
360 δαQ(M)

E+

α4(M)− 1
6

ξ− 1
5

δαQ(M)

□R
+ [α2(M)−δα 2(M)]R 2 +· · ·
(66)
where we have used Eq. (59) in the second equality, and the dots stand for the same higher order
adiabatic contributions which have not been included in (61), i.e. the subleading finite pieces
emerging from the DeWitt-Schwinger expansion (57).
34

The above LagrangianL eff is the full effective Lagrangian which is RG-invariant [34], since
the dependence onMcancels among the various terms. In fact, we have already paired the terms
appropriately so that each expression in square brackets defines a coupling whose derivative with
respect toMmust be zero. Therefore, defining the correspondingβ-functions as
βi =M ∂λi(M)
∂M (67)
for each of the couplings (λ i =ρ Λ,M 2
Pl, α1, ..., α4), and using the relations (62), we find the
renormalization group equation (RGE) for each one of them:
βρΛ(M) = 1
2(4π)2 (M 2 −m 2)2 (68)
βM2
Pl
(M) =
 
ξ− 1
6

8π2 (M 2 −m 2) (69)
and
βα1 =− 1
120(4π)2 βα2 =−
 
ξ− 1
6
2
2(4π)2 (70)
βα3 = 1
360(4π)2 βα4 = ξ− 1
5
6(4π)2 . (71)
Of particular interest are the first two RGE’s since they involve the parameterρ Λ and the reduced
Planck mass squaredM 2
Pl(M) = G−1(M)
8π . The first of them leads to a RGE that coincides with
Eq. (48), as it should, confirming that the effective action approach is consistent with the direct
EMT computation. Integrating this equation between the scalesM 0 andMwe retrieve Eq.(34).
On the other hand, Eq. (69) leads to the following RGE for the inverse Newton’s coupling:
M d
dM
 1
16πG

= (ξ− 1
6)
(4π)2 (M 2 −m 2).(72)
It can also be integrated to compute the scaling evolution of the gravitational coupling between
M0 andMand one finds Eq.(35) – another consistent result with the direct EMT method. It can
also be recast
G(M) = G(M0)
1 + (ξ− 1
6)
2π G(M0)

M 2 −M 2
0 −m 2 ln M2
M2
0
 .(73)
As for theβ-function coefficients for the HD terms (70)-(71), they are well-known to be correct
[195], see also [11]. We must emphasize once more thatβ ρΛ given by (68) is not the running of
the physical cosmological term, but just that of a coupling in the EH action. As noted previously,
this has been repeatedly discussed in the literature [147, 149–151, 153, 154, 186] and in some cases
may have proven confusing. From our point of view, one should never speak of the running of the
cosmological constant when referring toρ Λ(M), or at least not without adding that the physical
running of the vacuum energy densityρ vac(M) is governed by a completely different equation. The
physical running of the cosmological term stems from the running of the renormalized VED, which
35

we have clearly identified in Sec. 2.9. Finally, in contrast to other results [186], we do also find the
running law ofGwith the scale, as given by Eq. (73) [34]. From it, the physical running can be
obtained by evaluating the change ofGbetween the two cosmic epochsM 0 =H 0 andM=H,
which yields the result
G(H) = GN
1− (ξ− 1
6)
2π
m2
m2
Pl
ln H2
H2
0
= GN
1−ϵln H2
H2
0
,(74)
in whichG N defines the local gravity value usually associated with the inverse Planck mass squared:
G(H0) =G N = 1/m2
Pl (in natural units), and we have neglectedH 2 −H 2
0 versus the logarithmic
termm 2 ln H2
H2
0
, as the ratio between the first and second is of orderH 2
0 /m2 ≪1, forHclose to
H0. The predicted running ofGwithHis, therefore, very mild, since it is logarithmic and with a
very tiny coefficient in front of it:
ϵ≡ 1
2π

ξ− 1
6
 m2
m2
Pl
.(75)
The result (74) will be reconfirmed using a completely different reasoning path involving the
calculation of the vacuum pressure, see Sec. 5.3. As with the VED, it will be shown that the
running ofGultimately stems from the renormalization of the EMT (the most basic physical
quantity in our approach) and not just from mere coupling renormalization. This can already
be foreseen from the considerations in Sec.2.6 and the derivation of Eq.(35) from the generalized
Einstein’s equations, which involve the full renormalized form of the EMT.
3.2 Running of the VED from the vacuum effective action
Once we are secured as to the delicate issues of RG-invariance of the full effective action and the
RGE’s of the various couplings, let us finally derive the vacuum EMT directly from the renormalized
vacuum effective action (55) using the vacuum effective Lagrangian (61):
Wren(M) =
ˆ
d4x√−g

δρΛ(M)− 1
2 δM2
Pl(M)R−δα Q(M) Qλ
λ
3 −δα 2(M)R 2

. (76)
The renormalized vacuum EMT now follows from functionally differentiating the above expression
according to Eq.(54). Notice that we may drop the contribution from the Euler densityEin
Qλ
λ, Eq. (59), since the Gauss-Bonnet term associated with it is a topological invariant inn= 4
spacetime dimensions. Similarly we may drop also the total derivative term□Rat the level of the
action, and also that ofC 2 which vanishes for the FLRW metric (a conformally flat spacetime).
So there is virtually no contribution to the EMT from the terms in (59). The remaining terms in
(76) are easily handled, and from a straightforward calculation, we find
⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩ren(M) =δρ Λ(M)g µν +δM 2
Pl(M)G µν +δα(M) (1)Hµν , (77)
where, in particular, we have used the standard metric variations
1√−g
δ
δg µν
ˆ
d4x√−gR=R µν − 1
2 Rgµν =G µν (78)
36

and
1√−g
δ
δg µν
ˆ
d4x√−gR2 = (1)Hµν (79)
as well as the relation 2δα 2 =δα(whereαwas defined in (32)). We recall that the coefficients of
the various tensor terms on ther.h.s.of Eq. (77) are given explicitly by equations (62). Finally,
the ZPE is the 00th-component of the vacuum EMT. Therefore, expressing the result in terms of
the cosmic time and the corresponding Hubble functionH= ˙a/a, we find the renormalized ZPE:
D
T δϕ
00
E
ren
(M) = a2
128π2

−M 4 + 4m2M 2 −3m 4 + 2m4 ln m2
M 2

−

ξ− 1
6
 3a2H2
16π2

m2 −M 2 −m 2 ln m2
M 2

+

ξ− 1
6
2 9a2
16π2

6H2 ˙H+ 2H ¨H− ˙H2

ln m2
M 2 +O
 H6
m2

,
(80)
where we have used again the relations in the footnote on p.22. The notationO(H 6/m2) schema-
tically denotes the terms of adiabatic order 6. The result (80) obtained from the effective action
approach coincides exactly with the result (27) obtained from the mode expansion method upon
converting the Hubble rate in conformal time to cosmic time. The two methods are therefore fully
consistent.
The following comment is in order to close this section. It aims to clarify the relationship
between our off-shell renormalization approach in QFT in curved spacetime and other formulations
in which QG is taken into account as the fundamental framework. The two formulations are of
course quite different, but the resemblance is particularly clear in the context of the effective
action language of this section. Since we are working in the semiclassical formulation, our use
of the renormalization group isnotbased on seeking, say, a scale-dependent, Wilsonian type,
average gravitational action Γ k[gµν] defining an effective field theory of QG at a certain infrared
energy cutoff,k, below which the running of the VED,Gand other quantities stops [157, 158].
Notwithstanding, there is some analogy between the two approaches, as could be expected. In the
Wilsonian RG formulation, only frequencies with momenta larger thankare integrated out in the
path integral while those with momenta smaller thankare not included. In fact, Γ k is a functional
integral similar to the ordinary effective action in which the contributions of all field modes with
momenta smaller thankare suppressed. Thus, Γ k interpolates between the classical action, say the
EH action (fork→ ∞) and the ordinary effective action (fork→0). Not surprisingly, however,
as in any other formulation, the physical identification of the cutoffkis ambiguous and hence
the procedure is ultimately phenomenological; for example, one can proposek∼1/t(tbeing the
cosmic time) [157]. One could also takek∼H(which is essentially equivalent for most of our
past and again is a viable option in the future if one moves tok∼
√
Λ∼H) [196] . The scale
setting optionk=His the closest to ours and it was first proposed in [42]. In this case, the
truncated effective action Γ k involves only physics above the cutoff scalek∼H, not below it In
an analogous way, in our off-shell RVM approach, we obtain a renormalized theory at a floating
scaleM, which we eventually set toHto connect with phenomenology. This defines the infrared
37

cutoff of our vacuum effective action in the semiclassical approximation 11. The expansion history
of the universe above that value gets connected through the renormalization group, although with
a proviso: the running is triggered by the quantum effects from the matter fields only, which are
the only ones involved in the semiclassical approach. Whether this is just an approximation or not
depends, of course, on whether QG exists as a more accurate theory.
3.3 Renormalized vacuum pressure
Another important quantity in our QFT analysis of the RVM is the vacuum pressure. We should
not assumea priori(as frequently done in the literature) that it satisfies the canonical equation
of state (EoS)P vac =−ρ vac since quantum effects can introduce corrections to it. The vacuum
pressure in our QFT context can be obtained using the isotropy of the vacuum and the assumption
of it being a perfect fluid. An observer of 4-velocityu µ measures a vacuum pressureP vac =
1
3 (gµν +u µuν)⟨T vac
µν ⟩. In the rest frame of the observer, the 4-velocity isu µ = (1/√−g00,0,0,0) =
(1/a,0,0,0), expressed in the conformal metric, and we haveg 00 +u 0u0 = 0. Thus, using Eq. (28),
the renormalized vacuum pressure is
Pvac(M) = 1
3 gkk⟨T vac
kk ⟩ren(M) = ⟨T vac
ii ⟩ren(M)
a2 =−ρ Λ(M) + ⟨T δϕ
ii ⟩ren(M)
a2 ,(81)
(for any fixedi= 1,2,3, and summation overk= 1,2,3 is understood). The isotropy of vacuum
has been used in our assumption that each spatial component counts equal. The same property
implies⟨T δϕ⟩ren(M) =g µν⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩ren(M) =

−⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M) + 3⟨T δϕ
ii ⟩ren(M)

1
a2 for the trace of the
vacuum EMT. Thus,
⟨T δϕ
ii ⟩ren(M)
a2 = 1
3
 
⟨T δϕ⟩ren(M) + ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M)
a2
!
.(82)
Finally, using Eq. (29) for the renormalized VED to eliminateρ Λ(M) in favor ofρ vac(M), the
vacuum pressure (81) can be written [34]:
Pvac(M) =−ρ vac(M) + 1
3
 
⟨T δϕ
ren⟩(M) + 4 ⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩ren(M)
a2
!
.(83)
It is obvious from this formula that the effective EoS of vacuum may deviate from the naive one
Pvac =−ρ vac, provided the quantity in parentheses in the above expression is nonvanishing. To
compute it, we use the renormalized ZPE given by Eq. (80) and take the trace of the renormalized
11As proposed in [76] – see also Sec. (6) – couplings can have a double running pattern (ordinary and cosmological),
αi =α i(µ, H), and therefore can be sensitive to a large number of unsuspected light d.o.f’s that might lurk in the
far infrared [41]. In this sense we cannot exclude the existence of important renormalization effects which are not
captured by the above coarse-graining procedure.
38

vacuum EMT, Eq. (77). The trace is found to be
D
T δϕ
E
ren
(M) = 1
32π2

3m4 −4m 2M 2 +M 4 −2m 2 ln m2
M 2

+

ξ− 1
6
 3
8π2

2H2 + ˙H

m2 −M 2 −m 2 ln m2
M 2

−

ξ− 1
6
2 9
8π2

12H2 ˙H+ 4 ˙H2 + 7H ¨H+
...
H

ln m2
M 2 +O
 H6
m2

.
(84)
Substituting (80) and (84) into (83) the vacuum pressure up to fourth adiabatic order can be
delivered in a remarkably simple form:
Pvac(M, H) =−ρ vac(M, H) +

ξ− 1
6
 1
8π2
˙H

m2 −M 2 −m 2 ln m2
M 2

− 3
8π2

ξ− 1
6
2
6 ˙H2 + 3H ¨H+
...
H

ln m2
M 2 .
(85)
We should note that in deriving this equation there is once more an exact cancellation of the
quartic mass terms∼m 4 introduced by the quantum corrections on the vacuum pressure. In fact,
one can check explicitly that the sum of the two terms in parentheses on ther.h.s.of Eq.(83)
is free from these unwanted quartics. This is remarkable. It follows that the scaling evolution
of the renormalized vacuum pressure is, as the renormalized VED itself, free from quartic mass
dependencies. In addition, we can see in a manifest way that the net quantum correction to
the classical vacuum EoS vanishes identically forH=const. as it is entirely dependent on time
derivatives ofH. This feature will play an important role in the next section, when we discuss the
inflationary epoch.
Before closing this section, the following observation may be appropriate. With the above
formulas connecting the renormalized vacuum energy density and pressure, we can now understand
the issue mentioned in Sec. 2.2 as to why the full renormalized vacuum EMT in the RVM (defined
in Sec. 2.5) generally doesnotsatisfy the relation⟨T vac
µν ⟩=−g µνρvac, which is nevertheless
generally taken for granted in many places of the literature. In fact, this relation clearly hinges
on the assumption of the validity ofP vac =−ρ vac as a ‘canonical’ definition of vacuum. However,
it is not generally warranted in the presence of quantum effects that can modify it; and, in fact,
we have just seen that it is the case in the RVM, since quantum corrections to this ‘classical’ EoS
introduce a small deviation, which can be significant in some cases. For the RVM, this relation is
satisfied only during the de Sitter regimes (H=const.) occurring in the remote past and in the
remote future, as is apparent from Eq. (85). See also our discussion of the de Sitter scenario in
Sec. 4.3.
4 RVM in the very early universe: inflation without inflaton
Inflation is necessary to fix a number of serious inconsistencies of the standard ΛCDM model.
Without inflation, we could not understand the homogeneity and isotropy of the observed CMB,
39

for instance, or the high level of spatial flatness of the universe at present without fine-tuning.
Furthermore. in the absence of inflation, we could not figure out the origin of structure formation
nor the large amount of entropy today:S∼10 88 (in natural units). Since the standard model
ΛCDM cannot solve any of these problems, they are usually ‘fixed’ad hocby postulating the
existence of a cosmic scalar field [197, 198] (later called the “inflaton” [199]) which purportedly
takes care of these arrangements early on in the cosmic history [200–202]. Even if this patch-up
can be efficient and is considered acceptable by many cosmologists, we must admit that it is not
very natural, since it is added up without explaining the origin of the inflaton field. A much more
appealing proposal should be to have a unified theory of the cosmic evolution based on fundamental
physics, that is, an overarching approach accounting for the expansion history from the very early
times till today.
4.1H 4-inflation from RVM
As we shall see, the structure of the RVM involves not only the necessary ingredients to shape
the physics of the current cosmological era through a slightly time-evolving VED, but also the
physics of the very early epoch characterized by a super-fast time evolution. Indeed, it predicts
a new mechanism of exponential inflation, called ‘RVM-inflation’, which is characterized by a
short period whereH≃H I =const. The valueH I must be very large, presumably around a
characteristic Grand Unified Theory (GUT) scale just below the Planck mass. The matter fields
in the GUT constitute the driving force for this framework, nothing else. Therefore, noad hoc
scalar field potential for an inflaton field is required at all, in stark contrast to the traditional
approach [200–202]. In our framework, it is instead the pure work of gravity fueled by the quantum
matter effects of the semiclassical theory.
As said, RVM-inflation is characterized by the existence of a short period in the very early
cosmic history in whichHremains constant. However, to trigger inflation with this mechanism,
we need powers ofHgreater thanH 2. If we take into account that only even powers of the
Hubble rate are allowed by the general covariance of the effective action, the canonical option is
H4. We can see thatH 4-powers are indeed present in our renormalized VED(37). In passing, this
explains why the terms in the third line of Eq. (31) were not considered in (37), since they do not
contribute to RVM-inflation, for whichH=const. Neglecting also the terms related to the value
H0 pertaining to the current universe, we find that the VED triggering inflation in the primeval
universe is as follows:
ρvac(H)≃ 3
 
ξ− 1
6

16π2

H4 +H 2m2

ln m2
H2 −1

.(86)
An important feature can be appreciated from this formula: RVM-inflation is not possible for
minimal coupling (ξ= 0) since the coefficient of the dominant termH 4 during inflation cannot
be negative. Nor can we assume the conformal limit (ξ= 1/6). Besides, if many scalar fields
are involved with the same mass and non-minimal coupling, a multiplicity factor can be easily
included. If, however, the masses and/or minimal couplings are different, one has to sum over the
40

various contributions in an obvious way. For simplicity, we shall stick to one scalar field at the
moment.
Equation (86) can be rewritten by making a clear separation between the leading and subleading
power of the Hubble rate:
ρvac(H) = 3
 
ξ− 1
6

16π2 H4 + 3ν(H)
8πGN
H2 ,(87)
where
ν(H)≃ϵ

−1 + ln m2
H2

,(88)
withϵas defined previously in Eq. (75). Parameterϵis very small sincem 2 ≪m 2
Pl, even for particle
masses around the GUT scaleM X ∼10 16 GeV. It is involved both in the running ofGand of
the VED. We shall, however, not consider the running effect ofGfor the analysis of inflation,
since it is completely negligible. On the one hand the running ofGis logarithmic, as evident
from Eq. (74), and on the other hand from (87) we can see that it would lead toO(ϵ 2) effects.
During the inflationary period,Hremains essentially constant around a large valueH I ≫m. We
shall confirm this fact after solving the cosmological equations in the next section. Thus, in the
inflationary stage we can approximateν(H) by its value atH=H I, given by
νI ≡ν(H I) = 1
2π

ξ− 1
6
 m2
m2
Pl

−1 + ln m2
H2
I

.(89)
To determine this parameter, we need to estimateH I. This will be done in the next section.
When the inflationary period is over,Hevolves towards values much smaller thanH I, andν(H)
increases according to Eq.(88). So when we reach the present universe,H=H 0 and the value of
ν(H0) is much greater thanϵ. It is useful to realize that at low energies we can replaceHwithH 0
in the log term of (88), and then the relevant coupling for the late universe is given by
νeff ≡ν eff(H0) = 1
2π

ξ− 1
6
 m2
m2
Pl
ln m2
H2
0
.(90)
This effective parameter is the one that can be fitted by phenomenological analyzes of the RVM,
such as [73–75]. BecauseH 2
0 ≪m 2 for any particle mass, the low energy coupling (90) is much
larger than the high energy one (89). We discuss the RVM prediction for the current universe in
Sec. 5 .
4.2 Solution of theH 4 inflationary scenario
To solve the cosmological equations with the vacuum energy density given by Eq. (87), let us
assume thatν(H) in that equation can be approximated by the previously defined constant value
νI in (89). This introduces a great simplification and in fact provides a rather accurate analytical
solution, as will be confirmed by comparing with the exact numerical approach. For constantν(H),
the VED given by (87) can be considered a particular case of a more general family of models
ρvac(H) = 3
κ2

c0 +νH 2 + H4
H2
I

,(91)
41

in whichκ 2 = 8πG N = 8π/m 2
Pl. The coefficients of the termsH 2 andH 4 can be identified by
comparing the above equation with (87). In particular,νis taken as in (89) within the appro-
ximation mentioned above. The identification ofH I will be discussed later. As forc 0, it has
no analog in (87), but this is because we neglected the terms related to the current universe in
the more general Eq.(37). This is justified for the early universe, of course. The neglected terms
determinec 0. In the absence of the powers ofHin (91), the cosmological constant that we have
measured today would just be Λ = 3c0. We neglect this constant to discuss the inflationary period,
but we still keep theH 2 term as it represents the leading subdominant contribution, which will
be important in the post-inflationary regime. Thus, the cosmological equations to solve are the
following Friedmann-like equations:
3H2 =κ 2(ρrad +ρ vac(H)),
3H2 + 2 ˙H=−κ 2(Pvac(H) + 1
3 ρrad).
(92)
In these equations, the EoS of matter isw rad = 1/3 since matter is relativistic in the very early
epochs. In fact, matter appears from the decay of the primeval (and highly energetic) vacuum, as
we shall show in a moment. Moreover,ρ vac(H) is the function of the Hubble rate given by (91)
withc 0 = 0. For the vacuum EoS, we can use the canonical formP vac(H) =−ρ vac(H) during the
very short inflationary period atH=const. This is fully justified in view of Eq.(85). This fact
allows us to combine the above equations into a single differential equation for the Hubble rate:
˙H+ 2H 2 = 2(νH 2 + H4
H2
I
).(93)
It is apparent from it that there exists an inflationary solution forH=const., specifically for
H=H I
√1−ν≃H I, which is the starting point for inflation. However, there is an evolution
of the Hubble rate from this point onward, which can be computed by solving Eq. (93). For
ν=const an exact analytical solution can be obtained in terms of the scale factor (recall that
d/dt=aHd/da), with the following outcome:
H(a) =
√
1−ν HIp
1 +Da 4(1−ν)
.(94)
Substituting this result into equations (92) we can also analytically solve for the energy densities
of vacuum and radiation. The results are readily found:
ρvac(a) = 3H2
I (1−ν)(1 +νDa 4(1−ν))
κ2 (1 +Da 4(1−ν))2 ,(95)
ρrad(a) = 3H2
I (1−ν) 2Da4(1−ν)
κ2(1 +Da 4(1−ν))2 .(96)
The integration constantDis determined by the equality condition between vaccum energy density
and radiation:ρ vac(aeq) =ρ rad(aeq), witha eq the equality point. The latter defines the incipient
radiation era. Thus,D= 1
1−2ν a−4(1−ν)
eq ≡a −4(1−ν)
∗ . The above cosmological solution holds good
for a VED of the generic form (91) and forc 0 zero or negligible. Previous analyses addressed that
42

10-2 10-1 100 101 102 10310-16
10-14
10-12
10-10
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
100
10-2 10-1 100 101 102 10310-16
10-14
10-12
10-10
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
100
Figure 1: Transition from inflation to the radiation epoch. On the left it is shown the numerical
solution of the VED (solid line) versus the approximate analytical solution. On the right the
radiation energy is also included. In both cases we assumeν= 10 −4, andmis of order of a typical
GUT scale. See [71] for more details.
form on pure phenomenological grounds without connection with QFT calculations, see [62–70].
Instead, here we have derived the VED form (91) in the context of QFT in curved spacetime,
It is convenient to rephrase the above solution in terms of the rescaled variables ˆa=a/a ∗ and
˜HI = √1−νH I, as follows:
H(ˆa) =
˜HIp
1 + ˆa4(1−ν)
,(97)
ρvac(ˆa) =ρI
1 +νˆa4(1−ν)
[1 + ˆa4(1−ν)]2 ,(98)
ρrad(ˆa) =ρI(1−ν) ˆa4(1−ν)
[1 + ˆa4(1−ν)]2 ,(99)
whereρ I = 3
κ2 ˜H2
I is the total energy density at the early start of the inflationary period. As can
be seen, the initial pointa= 0 is nonsingular in this framework since the Hubble function and
the energy densities are functions taking finite values in it:H(0) = ˜HI,ρ vac(0) =ρ I = 3
κ2 ˜H2
I and
ρrad(0) = 0. Thus, we find that RVM-inflation is characterized by a non-singular de Sitter phase.
It is also worthwhile to note fromρ rad(ˆa) above that once we leave inflation behind and pen-
etrate deep into the radiation-dominated epoch ( ˆa≫1, equivalentlya≫a ∗) we obtain the
asymptotic behaviorρ rad(ˆa)≃ρ I(1−ν)ˆa−4(1−ν) ≃ρ I a4
∗ a−4 for small|ν| ≪1. This is essentially
the standard evolution law of the radiation energy density:ρ rad =ρ 0
rada−4. From this fact, we can
obtain a useful estimate for the crossover pointa ∗ (the point where ˆa= 1), which depends on a
combination of low-energy and high-energy parameters:
43

a∗ ∼

Ω0
rad
ρ0
c
ρI
 1
4
.(100)
This relation will be used later on to estimate the numerical value ofa ∗ once we estimate the order
of magnitude ofρ I. From equations (98) and (99) we find that during the radiation-dominated
epoch, the vacuum energy is suppressed by the small factor|ν| ≪1 (becauseρ vac/ρrad ∼ν) and
therefore the primordial BBN period can proceed standard without being altered, see the BBN
bound onνfrom [203].
As promised, we now turn to the estimate of the inflationary scaleH I. It can be found by
comparing equations (87) and (91):
HI =
s
2π
ξ− 1
6
mPl = m√ϵ ,(101)
where the second equality follows from our definition ofϵin Eq. (75). For 0< ϵ≪1, which can be
considered the normal regime for implementing RVM-inflation, we haveH I > m. The caseϵ= 0
is clearly not allowed sinceH I is not well defined; it corresponds to the conformal limit (ξ= 1/6).
This was also expected from the fact that, in this limit, the coefficient ofH 4 in Eq. (87)would be
zero and there would be no running of the VED to account for inflation. It is also worth noticing
that we cannot accommodateξ= 0 (minimal coupling) either, for whichϵ <0. In hindsight,
this was an important reason to assumeξ̸= 0 from the beginning. But not any nonvanishingξ
is admissible, we needξ >1/6, i.e.ϵ >0. Only if this condition is met, the coefficient of the
leading powerH 4 can be positive to trigger inflation. Now, for multiple scalar fields with different
non-minimal couplingsξ i (hence differentϵ i), these conditions for inflation could be somewhat
relaxed.
Let us now compare the numerical analysis of the energy densities in Fig. 1 with the results
of the analytical solution. From that figure we can see that in the beginning (ˆa= 0) there is no
radiation at all while the vacuum dominates and its energy density is the total energy density of the
universe,ρ I. This fact is also reflected in the approximate analytical solution given by equations
(98) and (99). The vacuum decays very fast into radiation and the inflationary period goes through
a ‘graceful exit’ transition into the standard FLRW radiation-dominated epoch. When the universe
exits the inflationary phase (for ˆa≫1) both energy densities scale approximately asρ∼a −4, but
the VED is suppressed by a tiny coefficientν, which in the exact numerical solution is actually a
slowly varying functionν(H), Eq. (88). Because of this dependence onH, this transition can only
be handled through numerical analysis. The EoS of the vacuum further evolves and it changes
from−1 during the inflationary period intow vac − →1/3, i.e. it adopts the same EoS as that of
radiation – cf. Sec.5.1 for more details. The evolution of the vacuum EoS in the very early universe
can be appreciated in Fig. 2.
The RVM-inflationary epoch connects in a continuous way with the canonical description of
the late universe in the RVM, which remains very close to the standard FLRW picture and has a
mildly evolving VED as a fundamental distinctive feature (see Sec. 5). The RVM account of the
44

10-3 10-2 10-1 100 101 102 103-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
Figure 2: Equation of state parameter of the running vacuum in the very early universe, as a
function of ˆa=a/a ∗. Its value changes fromw vac =−1) during inflation tow vac = 1/3 in the
radiation-dominated epoch.
early cosmic history, therefore, is able to perform a graceful exit transition from the inflationary
era into the radiation epoch. The tiny amount of VED left out during the radiation-dominated
epoch is highly suppressed in front of the energy density of radiation. This feature is welcome, of
course, in that RVM-inflation does not spoil the successful explanation of the BBN by the standard
model of cosmology [203]. Overall, it is reassuring to confirm that the analytical and numerical
analyzes of the cosmological transition from the inflationary phase into the standard radiation
regime convey consistent conclusions.
4.3H 4-inflation from unstable de Sitter vacuum
This scenario has recently been discussed in great detail in [72]. De Sitter spacetime has been amply
studied in the literature; see e.g. [204–215] and the textbooks [169–171], and references therein.
De Sitter spacetime is well-known to be the maximally symmetric solution to the vacuum Einstein
field equationsR µν = Λg µν,R= 4Λ, with positive curvature and hence positive cosmological
constant, Λ>0. Its symmetry group isSO(1, n) for n spacetime dimensions, therefore enjoying
the same degree of symmetry as Minkowski spacetime (10 Killing vectors forn= 4). Because of
this, analytical QFT methods can be applied with relative simplicity.
The Hubble rate of de Sitter spacetime is constant, since it is fixed by the primordial vacuum
energy densityρ I, which is assumed to remain constant during the early stages in order to trigger
inflation:
H2 =
 ˙a
a
2
= 8πGρI
3 ≡H 2
I = const.(102)
The energy density in the inflationary phase is typically associated with the VEDρ vac of some
GUT scaleM X near the Planck mass, henceρ I =ρ vac ∼M 4
X. As a result, the scale factor grows
45

exponentially, and it leads indeed to a super-fast inflationary epoch :
a(t)∝e HI t =e
q
ΛI
3 t ,(103)
where ΛI = 8πGρI is the (huge) cosmological constant in that epoch. Such an exponential inflation
flattens virtually any trace left of three-dimensional curvature, if it was nonvanishing to start with.
Indeed, for any value ofKthe last term in the first line of Eq. (25) is virtually zero, and the
curvature of de Sitter spacetime simplifies to
R= 6(2H 2 + ˙H) = 12H 2 .(104)
BeingHconstant, de Sitter spacetime is an exactly soluble QFT. Despite its simplicity, solving
the model is not as trivial as one might naively think; in fact, it is rather cumbersome. We cannot
provide a minimally self-contained discussion of de Sitter spacetime here, but the main features
are worth mentioning owing to the close similarities with the RVM framework. For full details,
see [72]. In both scenarios, RVM and de Sitter, inflation is triggered by the powerH 4 of the
Hubble rate and includes subleadingH 2 powers as well. Of course,Hcannot remain constant all
the time, as otherwise inflation would never end. It suffices to assume that there is a very short
period whereHremains approximately constant and very large in the early universe:H≃H I.
The mode functions discussed in Sec. 2.2 then obey the differential equation
h′′
k +

k2 + m2 + (ξ−1/6)R
τ 2H2

hk = 0,(105)
where againτis the conformal time. The above equation can be transformed into a Bessel equation
by an appropriate change of variables. For convenience, we can express the solution in terms of
Hankel functions of the first and second kindH (1)
ς =J ς +iY ς andH (2)
ς =J ς −iY ς, whereςis the
order of the Bessel equation, which is given by
ς2 = 9
4 −µ 2 −12ξ .(106)
We have definedµ≡m/H(which should not be confused with the ’t Hooft mass unitµin DR
since we do not use it in this context). By imposing the Bunch-Davies vacuum limit forτ− → −∞
(corresponding toa→0 in the very early epoch [208]), the Hankel function of the second kind
does not participate and we obtain
hk =
√π
2 |τ| 1/2e
iπ
2 (ς+ 1
2) H(1)
ς (k|τ|).(107)
Inserting this expression in Eq. (20) and performing some calculations, we find
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩dS(m) = e−πImς
16πa2
ˆ
dkk2
 1
4|τ| |H(1)
ς |2 +|τ|k 2|H(1)
ς
′
|2
+ k
2

H(1)
ς H(1)∗
ς
′
+H (1)∗
ς H(1)
ς
′
+ω 2
k|τ||H (1)
ς |2
+

ξ− 1
6

− 6
|τ| |H(1)
ς |2 − 6
|τ|

|H(1)
ς |2 +k|τ|

H(1)
ς H(1)∗
ς
′
+H (1)∗
ς H(1)
ς
′
.
(108)
46

Here, Imςdenotes the imaginary part ofς. One can show that this expression is divergent and
therefore renormalization is required, as in the RVM case. So once more we subtract the first
four adiabatic orders to it, according to the prescription Eq.(26) within the off-shell ARP. The
above integrations with Hankel functions are nontrivial, and special formulas are needed; see [72]
(Appendix A.3) for details. After a significant amount of calculations one can finally produce the
off-shell adiabatically renormalized ZPE at the scaleM(which is free from divergences since they
cancel in the subtraction):
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩Ren(M) = a2
128π2

M 2 −3m 2 + 36H2

ξ− 1
6

m2 −M 2 + 12H2

ξ− 1
6

+ 2m2

m2 + 12H2

ξ− 1
6

ψ
3
2 −ς(µ)

+ψ
3
2 +ς(µ)

−ln M 2
H2

+ a2H4
960π2 − a2H2m2
96π2 − 3a2H2(m2 −M 2)
 
ξ− 1
6

8π2 − 9a2H4 
ξ− 1
6
2
2π2 .
(109)
In it,ψ(z) =dln Γ(z)/dz= Γ ′(z)/Γ(z) is the standard digamma function, i.e. the logarithmic
derivative of Euler’s gamma function. Now, given the 00th component of the vacuum EMT in de
Sitter spacetime, the maximal degree of symmetry of this spacetime allows one to generate the full
vacuum EMT as follows [72] 12
⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩Ren(M) =−g µν
⟨T δϕ
00 ⟩Ren(M)
a2 ,(110)
which can be explicitly written in a convenient way:
⟨T δϕ
µν ⟩Ren(M) =− gµν
64π2

m2

m2 +

ξ− 1
6

12H2

×

ψ
3
2 +ς

+ψ
3
2 −ς

−ln
 M 2
H2

− 2
3 m2H2 − 3
2 m4 − 1
2 M 4 + 2m2M 2
+

ξ− 1
6

12M 2H2 −24m 2H2
−72H 4

ξ− 1
6
2
+ H4
15
)
.
(111)
From this expression one can easily check that in the on-shell situation (M=m) it boils down to
⟨Tµν⟩BD =− gµν
64π2

m2

m2 +

ξ− 1
6

12H2


ψ
3
2 +ς

+ψ
3
2 −ς

−ln
 m2
H2

−m 2

ξ− 1
6

12H2 − 2m2H2
3 −72H 4

ξ− 1
6
2
+ H4
15
)
,
(112)
12Notice that if we substitute Eq.(110) in the full vacuum EMT (28) and then use our definition of VED, Eq. (29),
we immediately find⟨T vac
µν ⟩=−g µν ρvac, since here we are in de Sitter space. However, as warned in Sec. 3.3, such a
relation is not fulfuilled in general spacetimes.
47

which is precisely the well-known Bunch-Davies result that was obtained in [208] using the man-
ifestly covariant point-splitting regularization procedure. See also the approach of [206]. This
shows the consistency of our off-shell result.
Using (109) in the definition of VED, Eq. (29), we find the vacuum energy density in the early
universe (during inflation) in the de Sitter scenario [72]:
ρinfl.
vac (H) = 3m2H2
16π2

ξ− 1
6

ψ
3
2 −ς(µ)

+ψ
3
2 +ς(µ)

+ 1
128π2
(
H4
"
2
15 + 24

ξ− 1
6

−144

ξ− 1
6
2#
−m 2H2
4
3 + 48

ξ− 1
6
)
+ m4
64π2

ψ
3
2 −ς(µ)

+ψ
3
2 +ς(µ)

−lnµ 2

.
(113)
To derive the above expression we have proceeded as in the RVM case by performing the difference
of the VED between two scales, sayM 0 =H 0 (which represents the current universe) and another
scaleM=H(representing in this case the early universe) using the scaling relations discussed
in Sec. 2.6. In fact, denoting once moreρ vac(M, H) atM=Hsimply asρ vac(H), and similarly
forρ vac(H0), the above result follows upon neglecting the contribution from the current universe
(H=H 0) since the VED in much smaller than in the inflationary time.
In an analogous manner as in the RVM, see Eq. (87), we can rewrite the above result for the
renormalized VED in the de Sitter scenario as follows:
ρinfl.
vac (H) = α
2π2 H4 + 3˜ν(H)
8π m2
PlH2 ,(114)
where we have neglected the last term of (113) since it is subleading during the inflationary stage
(H4 ≫m 4). We have also defined the coefficient
α= 1
480 + 3
8

ξ− 1
6

− 9
4

ξ− 1
6
2
.(115)
Notice that the expression (114) in the de Sitter case also adapts to the template (91), provided
we use a constant value ofν. This values is taken to be ˜ν I ≡˜ν(HI), with
˜ν(H) = m2
2πm2
Pl

ξ− 1
6

ψ
3
2 −ς(µ)

+ψ
3
2 +ς(µ)

− m2
πm2
Pl
 1
36 +

ξ− 1
6

. (116)
It follows that the (approximate) analytical solution (97)-(99) can also be used here with the new
identification ofνin the de Sitter case. The coefficient of theH 4 power, Eq. (115), now has a
richer structure than in the RVM. Again, it must be positive for inflation to occur. This condition
implies that for the de Sitter inflation, the range ofξturns out to be much narrower than in
the RVM case (see Sec. 4.1). In fact, the necessary conditionα >0 to have inflation implies the
following (approximate) numerical range forξ−1/6:
−0.00538<

ξ− 1
6

<0.172 (117)
48

10−2 10−1 100 101 102
ˆa
10−16
10−13
10−10
10−7
10−4
10−1
ρ/ρI
ξ = 0.3 ; N0 = 1000
ρrad
ρaprox.
rad
ρvac
ρaprox.
vac
Figure 3: Unstable de Sitter vacuum decay: shown are the energy densities for vacuum and
radiation forξ= 0.3, as a function of the scale factor normalized to the transition point, ˆa=a/a ∗.
The valueN 0 is the field multiplicity. The numerical solution (solid lines) is compared with the
(RVM-like) analytical approximation (dashed lines) given by Eqs. (98)-(99). See [72] for more
details.
or, equivalently, forξ:
0.161< ξ <0.339.(118)
As can be seen, for a single component, the non-minimal coupling is fairly well determined. Notice
that sinceξ >0 there cannot be instabilities in the equation of motion ofϕ[216]. Furthermore,
in the context of a typical GUT with many scalar fieldsN 0 (which may also involve supersymme-
tric particles, of course), each with different nonminimal couplingsξ i, the condition for inflation
becomes
A≡ N0
480 + 3
8
N0X
i

ξi − 1
6

− 9
4
N0X
i

ξi − 1
6
2
>0.(119)
The value of (119) determines the parameterH I defined in (91). In the de Sitter case, we have
HI =
r
3π
4GA =
r
3π
4A mPl ,(120)
where in the second equality we have expressed the result in terms of the Planck mass,m Pl.
For the unstable de Sitter scenario, the numerical and analytical solutions are very similar to
those shown in Fig. 1 for the RVM. In fact, an explicit example of de Sitter vacuum decaying into
radiation can be seen in Fig. 3 for a choice of parameters in the physical region; for more details,
49

see [72]. In both inflationary scenarios (RVM and de Sitter) we have an initial situation dominated
by a huge vacuum energy density of order∼H 4 that stays approximately constant for a short
time and then decays into radiation, as shown in the figures. The subsequent radiation-dominated
epoch obtained in both cases represents nothing more than the primeval FLRW regime of the
ΛCDM model up to small corrections of orderν. Therefore, there is a smooth connection with
the standard thermal history, except that (as a bonus) the existence of an inflationary period of
the sort we have described can explain the large entropy of the universe at present, see Sec.5.4.
Let us, however, mention a significant difference between the twoH 4 inflationary scenarios. The
equation of state (EoS) of vacuum is not the same. We deal with this subject in the next section
and consider the implications for the current universe.
5 Running vacuum and equation of state in the current universe
Consider first the RVM scenario. In the late universe, theO(H 4) terms of the VED formula given
by Eq. (37) are negligible and one can easily show that the leading evolution of the vacuum energy
can be expressed as follows [33,34]:
ρvac(H)≃ρ 0
vac + 3ν(H)
8π (H2 −H 2
0)m 2
Pl ,(121)
whereρ 0
vac ≡ρ vac(H0) is identified with today’s value of the VED through the observed CC, i.e.
ρ0
vac = Λobs/(8πG). In the formula above, we have introduced the effective coupling
ν(H)≡ 1
2π

ξ− 1
6
 m2
m2
Pl

−1 + ln m2
H2 − H2
0
H2 −H 2
0
ln H2
H2
0

.(122)
This coupling is the low-energy counterpart of (88). Owing to the log behavior, functionν(H)
changes very slowly with the Hubble rate and the effect from the last term becomes quickly
suppressed for higher values ofHaboveH 0. In addition, ln m2
H2 ≃ln m2
H2
0
≫1 for the late universe,
and henceν(H) can be approximated by lettingH→H 0, i.e. by the effective parameter
νeff ≡ν eff(H0) = 1
2π

ξ− 1
6
 m2
m2
Pl

−2 + ln m2
H2
0

≃ϵln m2
H2
0
,(123)
where
ϵ= 1
2π

ξ− 1
6
 m2
m2
Pl
,(124)
is the same small parameter that we have found for the running ofG, see Eq. (74). Parameters
νeff andϵare both small (|ν eff|,|ϵ| ≪1), butϵ≪ν eff ≪1 since ln m2
H2
0
=O(100) for virtually any
known particle mass (recall thatH 0 ∼10 −42 GeV). For practical purposes, we can write (121) as
follows:
ρvac(H) =ρ 0
vac + 3νeff
8πGN
(H2 −H 2
0).(125)
This equation is indeed the canonical form of the running VED at low energies in the RVM context,
see [11, 14]. The characteristic in it is the presence of ‘soft vacuum effects’ of the type∼m 2H2,
50

which can give a measurable contribution in the current universe (see the next two sections). There
are no ‘hard vacuum effects’ of the Zeldovich type (cf. Sec. 1 ), i.e. no contributions of the form
∼m 4. Therefore, the RVM seems to provide the kind of smoothly renormalized theory of the
quantum vacuum which is free from troublesome effects prompting to extreme fine tuning of the
cosmological parameters. This is probably one of the main achievements of the RVM approach.
Consider now the de Sitter scenario. We have previously discussed the relation between the
renormalized pressure and energy density of vacuum, see Eq. (83). It turns out that the term
in parentheses on the right hand side of that equation varnishes identically for the renormalized
quantities in the de Sitter case [72]. As a consequence, the renormalized pressure and density
satisfy the canonical vacuum EoS:
Pvac(M) =−ρ vac(M) (w vac =−1,for de Sitter).(126)
This is a remarkable result which, though expected, is still worth mentioning since it is a QFT
result. In fact. it is a nontrivial property of the de Sitter vacuum since it is not satisfied by the
unrenormalized quantities, only by the renormalized ones. In view of this result, we might be led
to think that this scenario just mimics a cosmological term, but this is not exactly so. Remarkably
enough, the late time behavior of the decaying de Sitter vacuum is very similar to that of the RVM,
which means that the VED evolution is exactly as in Eq. (125). We skip details here (see [72])
and just summarize the main steps leading to this result. At low energies, we can neglect the
∼H 4 contribution in Eq. (114) and we can just concentrate on the second term of that expression.
But we should not forget to restore the last term of (113) since it is no longer subleading at low
energies. Despite the presence of them 4 factor in it, expansion of the digamma function forµ≫1
(i.e forH≪m) shows that the mentioned term yields soft contributions of the typem 2H2 in the
current universe [72]. Additionally, when we perform the subtraction of the VED between points
HandH 0 of the cosmic expansion, now we must also restore the low-energy terms that depend
onH 0 (recall that the latter were neglected at the inflationary epoch, but they must be now kept
at low energies). The final result is, as announced, that the VED evolution law for the de Sitter
scenario at low energies is formally coincident with the RVM one given by Eq. (125) and with the
same coefficient (123). The only proviso, of course, is the more restricted range forξthat holds
for the de Sitter scenario compared to the RVM.
The net outcome is that both QFT pictures of the cosmological evolution, viz. running vacuum
and unstable de Sitter vacuum, turn out to converge to the same prediction for the late time
vacuum dynamics, i.e. Eq. (125), notwithstanding the fact that in the de Sitter scenario the
vacuum EoS parameter is strictly constant,w vac =−1 – Eq. (126) – whereas in the RVM case
wvac =w vac(z) is evolving with the expansion (see the next section). It goes without saying that
the fundamental parameterν eff in the common VED formula (125) of both scenarios is subject to
the same phenomenological boundsν eff ≲10 −4 −10 −3 obtained in the literature [73–75]. Overall,
the formal resemblance between the RVM and de Sitter is notable, since both QFT pictures of the
cosmological evolution converge to one and the same picture for the late time universe in which
51

Figure 4: The running vacuum EoS (128) as a function of the redshift [34–36]. It mimics
quintessence forν eff >0 (left) and phantom DE forν eff <0 (right). In the last case the VED
vanishes at some point in the past, and this appears as a vertical asymptote in the EoS plot,
although no physical singularity occurs in any observable.
there is dynamical DE in the form of running vacuum energy. This is significant in view of the
current evidence of dynamical DE [37–40].
5.1 Equation of state of the quantum vacuum in the RVM
In Sec. 3.3 we have elaborated on the pressureP vac of the quantum vacuum and related it to the
VED,ρ vac. Both quantities receive independent quantum corrections and, in general, we find that
the canonical resultP vac =−ρ vac receives quantum corrections which make it depart from the
canonical value. In the RVM context, the leading correction term deviating from the canonical
result, which is relevant for the present universe, is given as follows (see Eq.(85)):
Pvac(M) =−ρ vac(M) +
 
ξ− 1
6

8π2
˙H

m2 −M 2 −m 2 ln m2
M 2

.(127)
SettingM=H, neglecting terms higher thanO(H 2), using also the running VED formula at
low energies, Eq. (125), and expressing these results in terms of the redshift, the equation of state
(EoS) of vacuum can be rewritten in a more practical way for phenomenological analysis [35]:
wvac = Pvac
ρvac
≃ −1 +ν eff
Ω0
m(1 +z) 3 + 4Ω0
r
3 (1 +z) 4
Ω0vac +ν eff (−1 +E 2(z)) ,(128)
up to correctionsO
 
ν2
eff

, withE 2(z)≡Ω 0
vac+Ω0
m (1 +z) 3+Ω0
r (1 +z) 4 . Notice that the important
coefficientν eff was defined in the previous section and, in general, it embodies the combined effects
from fermions and bosons, see [36] for the detailed formula. From the above EoS formula it is
52

evident that forν eff >0 (ν eff <0) the quantum vacuum mimics quintessence (phantom DE) near
our time (cf. Fig.4). This is particularly transparent upon approximating Eq. (128) linearly inν eff
for low redshift (z≪1):
wvac(z)≃ −1 +ν eff
Ω0
m
Ω0vac
(1 +z) 3 .(129)
However, the more accurate formula (128) shows a peculiar feature of the RVM, which is highlighted
in Fig. 4. In it, we display the EoS of the running vacuum in the extended redshift domain
comprising the matter-dominated epoch up to the radiation-dominated epoch. One can appreciate
in a manifest way that at higher and higher redshifts the vacuum equation of state tends to adopt
the EoS of the dominant matter component (namely, firstw vac ≃0 and subsequentlyw vac ≃1/3).
This curious ‘chameleonic nature’ of the quantum vacuum, referred to in [35], is caused by the
quantum effects on the classical description. If detected, it can provide evidence of the QFT-RVM
approach. Despite the fact thatw vac ≃ −1 at present, as it is obvious from (129), the quantum
corrections induce a deviation of the standard expectations, which leads to an effective quintessence
or phantom-like behavior (depending on the sign ofν eff). The canonical formw=−1 is recovered
again, with great precision, in the very early universe where inflation occurs. We have shown this
feature previously in Fig.2 when we discussed the inflationary period.
Finally, we should clarify that the fact that the EoS of the de Sitter scenario (studied in
Sec. 4.3) remains canonical does not mean that it is perceived as such by the usual methodology
of the cosmological observations since the VED of the de Sitter scenario remains dynamical. The
practical methodology for scrutinizing the DE properties makes use of a variety of phenomenologi-
cal parameterizations of the DE [37–40] which allows to capture potential evidence of its dynamical
character [217–219]; and it may even provide a model-agnostic reconstruction of the background
quantities associated with dark energy and late-time cosmic expansion – cf. [220, 221] and re-
ferences therein. These purely phenomenological methods are nonetheless far from providing a
satisfactory explanation of its ultimate nature. Therefore, nothing prevents that a positive sign of
DE dynamics captured by these parameterizations can actually be the direct reflect of dynamical
vacuum energy of the sort studied here. In fact the evolution of the VED is not necessarily linked
to a departure of the fundamental EoS from−1. We have mentioned that the VED of the de Sitter
scenario is indeed evolving at low energies, and it does it in an identical form to that of the RVM,
a remarkable result. Given this fact, it should be noticed that it has long been shown that the
dynamics of the VED implies automatically an effective EoS behavior departing fromw vac =−1
when described in terms of standard parameterizations of the DE, see [222–225]. Therefore, the
dynamical DE that we may have detected in modern times may still correspond to either the RVM
or even to the de Sitter unstable vacuum scenario that we have described.
5.2 Confronting the running vacuum with cosmological data
In this short section, we illustrate the practical performance of the RVM with a direct phenome-
nological application to fitting the observational data. We do this by reviewing the analysis of the
53

RVM confronted with the ΛCDM and also with the generic DE parameterization XCDM [226] (also
calledwCDM) for the data sets SnIa+BAO+H(z)+LSS+CMB used in [73, 74]. We have shown
that the simplest form of the VED in the RVM for the current universe is given by Eq. (125). This
canonical version should suffice for a phenomenological analysis, but it can be generalized. Being
bothH 2 and ˙Hhomogeneous quantities of adiabatic order two, one expects that the VED at low
energy should be in general a function of both terms carrying independent coefficients [67]. In
fact, this was later confirmed in the QFT approach, where one can show that in a more general
context the VED can take the extended form [33,34]:
ρvac(H) = 3
8πGN

c0 +ν effH2 + ˜νeff ˙H

+O(H 4).(130)
Again, theO(H 4) terms can be neglected for the present universe. The two coefficientsν eff and
˜νeff must be fitted to the observational data. However, following [73, 74] we explore the simplest
option ˜νeff =ν eff/2, as this leads to a dynamical component of the VED which is proportional to
the Ricci scalarR= 12H 2 + 6 ˙H:
ρvac(H) = 3
8πGN

c0 + νeff
12 R

≡ρ vac(R).(131)
This form has the advantage that the dynamical part is negligible in the radiation-dominated
epoch, whereR∝ −T µ
µ =ρ−3P= (ρ r +ρ m)−3(P r +P m) =ρ m ≪ρ r (sinceρ r −3P r = 0 and
Pm = 0); therefore the VED influence in the radiation-dominated period is essentially nullified
and the basic facts of the thermal history during the radiation-dominated epoch are preserved, in
particular the primordial BBN features and the bounds derived from them [203]. The contours
in Fig.5, obtained from the fitting analysis to the observational data [73, 74], are based on the
VED form (131). One can see from that figure that theH 0 andσ 8 tensions are highly alleviated
within the RVM; see the references mentioned above for a detailed discussion. One findsν eff in
the ballpark of 10 −4 −10 −2 depending on particular assumptions.
We should also mention that the specific scenario considered above assumes that matter is
conserved in the standard way (ρ m ∼a −3). In order to preserve the Bianchi identity in a matter
conserving scenario and a variable VED, a simultaneous running of Newton’s couplingGmust
occur. The variation ofGis found to be logarithmic with the Hubble rate, hence very mild. In
point of fact, we know that this is a generic QFT prediction of the RVM (cf. Sec.3.1), and in the
next section an extended discussion is provided. The details and explicit solution of the model are
given in [73, 74], where other variants of the RVM are considered. For example, we may assume
thatGremains fixed at the expense of an interaction between vacuum and dark matter. One may
even consider thatν eff vanishes above a given redshif (implying a true CC above that redshift),
or even thatν eff flips sign in a particular redshift interval (the so-called ‘flipped RVM’) [75]. We
refer the reader to the mentioned works for these alternative implementations of the RVM. They
are in part phenomenological, but can also be theoretically motivated in stringy RVM (StRVM)
scenarios [122,123,145].
54

Figure 5: Easing theH 0 andσ 8-tensions. Contours at 1σ, 2σand 3σc.l. in the (σ 8-H0) and (S 8-
H0) planes, whereS 8 ≡σ 8
p
Ω0m/0.3. The considered models are RVM, ΛCDM and the generic
DE parameterization XCDM (orwCDM) for the data sets SnIa+BAO+H(z)+LSS+CMB used
in [74]. Only the RVM alleviates theH 0 tension and at the same time it reduces theS 8 one.
5.3 Running of Newton’sGwith the cosmic expansion
From the running law of the VED at late time given by Eq. (121), and with the help of the vacuum
pressure equation that we have inferred in Sec. 3.3, we can reconfirm the important running law
(74) for the gravitational coupling that we derived in Sec. 3.1 [34]. Although the derivation of
Eq. (74) in that section might be considered as just a formal running coupling renormalization
similar to the case of the bare parameterρ Λ in the EH action, it is not so. The difference is
that in the computation of the VED one needs to put together two pieces at a time to construct
the physical result:ρ vac =ρ Λ+ZPE. None of these pieces makes physical sense in an isolated
way, only the sum represents the physical observable (after renormalization). In the case ofGwe
do not meet such a situation, and the running law obtained forGis physically meaningful after
renormalization. In fact, the two running laws are intimately connected by a generalized form
of the Bianchi identity that also takes into account the quantum effects on the vacuum pressure.
This alternative derivation, which we undertake here, can therefore be viewed as manifestly more
physical, as it stems from the local conservation of the full vacuum EMT, which is the most relevant
physical quantity in our discussion. To proceed, we first multiply both sides of the generalized
Einstein’s equations (32) by 8πG(M) and subsequently compute the covariant derivative of the
resulting expression. In doing this, we use the fact that the HD tensor is covariantly conserved
((∇µ (1)Hµν = 0); and, of course, we also borrow the Bianchi identity of the Einstein tensor
(∇µGµν = 0). Finally, using the definition of the full vacuum EMT in renormalized form, Eq. (28),
and taking theν= 0 component of the obtained result, we reach after some calculations the
55

following expression:
˙G(M) (ρϕ +ρ vac) +G(M) ˙ρvac + 3HG(M) (ρvac(M) +P vac(M))
=

α(M) ˙G(M) +G(M) ˙α(M)
 (1)H00
a2 ,
(132)
where dots stand, as usual, for cosmic time differentiation. In it, we can see that the scaling
evolution ofG(M) is explicitly involved. For completeness, in the above equation we have included
the contribution from the background matter fieldϕb defined in Sec. 2.2 (which we have just denoted
ϕhere for simplicity). The present discussion is not affected by its presence since we assume that
it is covariantly conserved,∇ µT ϕ
µν = 0, a relation that holds identically provided that there is
no exchange of matter with the vacuum. This conservation law can be straightforwardly verified
using the explicit form of the EMT in Eq. (6) and the equation of motion forϕ(viz. the free KG
equation). Since we perform our analysis in the post-inflationary epoch and, in particular, in the
current universe, we may disregard the HD contribution on ther.h.s.of Eq. (132). Therefore, we
are left with the simplified form
˙G(H) (ρϕ +ρ vac(H)) +G(H) ˙ρvac(H) + 3HG(H) (ρvac(H) +P vac(H)) = 0,(133)
where we have setM=H, according to our prescription to make contact with physics. This
equation can be conveniently put as follows,
˙ρvac + 3H(ρ vac +P vac) =−
˙G
G (ρϕ +ρ vac) =−
˙G
G
3H2
8πG ,(134)
where in the last step, we used Friedmann’s equation. From the above generalized conservation law
we can see that the vacuum pressure can play an important role, since the last term on thel.h.sis
generally non-zero (except in de Sitter spacetime). Furthermore, Eq.(134) shows that the vacuum
is not conserved if ˙G̸= 0. Thus, in general, we have∇ µ⟨T ϕ
µν⟩ren ̸= 0 (in contrast to∇ µT ϕ
µν = 0 for
the background field). It should not be surprising, since a dynamical vacuum cannot satisfy the
Bianchi identity unless there is a compensation for its variation through a corresponding evolution
ofG(or through interaction with matter, or both things at a time). This observation is the key
to finding the running ofGwith the scale, which is seen to be directly related to the vacuum
conservation law. In fact, thel.h.s.of Eq. (134) can be explicitly computed using the equations
for the VED and the vacuum pressure that we have obtained in previous sections. To this end, we
insert the late time expression for the VED,ρ vac(H), from (121) in the above equation, and use
the explicit expression forρ vac(H) +P vac(H) relevant for the current universe, namely Eq.(127),
which is proportional to ˙H. As always, we neglect the higher order termsO
 
H4
generated in
intermediate calculations, which are irrelevant after the inflationary epoch. All in all, Eq. (134)
can be put into a differential equation forGas follows:
3 d
dt
 νeff(H)
8πGN
(H2 −H 2
0)

+ 3H
 
ξ− 1
6

8π2
˙Hm2

1−ln m2
H2

+ 3H2 ˙G(t)
8πG2(t) = 0, (135)
56

where we recall thatG N is constant, whereasG(t) =G(H(t)) is the function that we wish to
determine by solving the above equation. Notice that there is a pending time derivative to be
computed in the first term of that equation, which involves calculating ˙ν eff(H) = d
dt νeff(H) using
the exact expression (122) rather than just a constant approximation. At this point it is important
to keep all terms since, in general, expressions that are neglected are not necessarily negligible after
being differentiated. After some calculations we reach the following beautifully simple and compact
expression:
dG
G2 =
 
ξ− 1
6

π m2 dH
H ,(136)
in which we have replaced the time derivatives ˙G=dG/dtand ˙H=dH/dtby just the differentials
dGanddHsincedtcancels on both sides. Finally, integrating by simple quadrature Eq. (136) from
the present time (H 0, G(H0), whereG(H 0) =G N ≡1/m 2
Pl, up to an arbitrary moment around
our past (H, G(H)), we get the final result we are after:
G(H) = GN
1− (ξ− 1
6)
2π
m2
m2
Pl
ln H2
H2
0
.(137)
In this way we have proven once more Eq. (74) following a completely different reasoning road,
which was now based directly on the local conservation laws (q.e.d.) The obtained formula is our
QFT prediction for the physical running of the gravitational coupling with the cosmic expansion.
We emphasize that the running law forGthat we have inferred is directly connected to that of the
VED through the generalized Bianchi identity (133). Notice that forξ <1/6, the gravitational
couplingG(H) increases logarithmically with the expansion of the universe and hence was smaller
in the past; that is,G(H) is asymptotically free. Forξ >1/6 it does the opposite, decreases with
the expansion and was bigger in the past.
An even more powerful result follows from using the expressions forρvac(M, H) andP vac(M, H)
that we have obtained in the previous sections, before implementing the scale settingM=H, in
order to express the conservation law satisfied by the VED as a function of the renormalization
scaleM. We obtain [34,35]:
˙ρvac + 3H(ρ vac +P vac) = 3 ˙M
8π2M

ξ− 1
6

H2(M 2 −m 2)
+3

ξ− 1
6
2
˙H2 −2H ¨H−6H 2 ˙H
#
=
˙M
M βρvac .
(138)
Remarkably, as the last equality shows, ther.h.sof this equation is proportional toβ ρvac (theβ-
function for the physical running of the VED), which we obtained in Eq. (47). The results obtained
previously can be recovered as a particular case of that more powerful formula. For example, on
inserting Eq. (137) into Eq.(134), one finds
˙ρvac + 3H(ρ vac +P vac) =− 3
8π2

ξ− 1
6

H ˙Hm2 ,(139)
57

which is the same result emerging from Eq.(138) when we consider the current universe and
implement the settingM=H, see Eq. (50). The above equation tells us unambiguously that
in an expanding universe (H̸= 0) the VED is generally dynamical. In the de pure Sitter case,
H=const. andP vac =−ρ vac, and thus ˙ρ vac = 0, which implies thatρ vac =const. in the short
period whenHis strictly constant. But for FLRW spacetime, bothH̸= 0 and ˙H̸= 0, and at
the same timeP vac ̸=−ρ vac (cf. Eq.(127)); hence ˙ρ vac ̸= 0. Recall our analogy with the Casimir
effect in Sec. 2.4) when the plates are at infinity and the space is stretching (expanding). There
is, in fact, a nonvanishing (and dynamical) 4-dimensional curvature ( ˙R̸= 0) associated with the
vacuum being dynamical ( ˙ρvac ̸= 0.).
The beauty of Eq. (138) is that it embodies the essence of the RVM, for it says that the non-
conservation of the VED, and hence its dynamical character, is due to both the running ofρ vac
withM(caused byβ ρvac ̸= 0) and also due to the cosmic time dependence of the renormalization
scaleM(viz. the fact that ˙M̸= 0, which in our case is implemented asM=H(t)). Both
features are necessary, not just one. This remarkable property of the VED in curved spacetime
is in contradistinction to ordinary gauuge theories of strong and EW interactions, and enables us
to probe the effect of the (cosmic) time-dependence of the running couplings and masses in the
particle and nuclear physics world (see the final part of this review, Sec. 6).
5.4 Solving the entropy problem inH 4-Inflation
The implications of the RVM account of cosmic evolution diversify in manyfold aspects. In particu-
lar, the thermodynamic history of RVM-inflation is different from the usual inflationary paradigm
based on the hypothetical existence of an inflaton [200–202]. The highly non-adiabatic event called
‘reheating’, which is characterized by superheavy massive particles decaying into conventional par-
ticles in the early universe after inflation and causing the birth of the radiation epoch, does not
occur in the RVM case. There is instead a super-fast heating-up process in which vacuum decays
into radiation in a continuous way. In this sense, the RVM is once more different from the Starobin-
sky type of inflation [227], in which, as already remarked,Hnever goes through an inflationary
regime characterized byH=const. and where, in addition, there is an intermediate state where
the scalaron field decays into relativistic particles. The huge energy of the RVM inflation process
stems from theH 4-nonlinearities imprinted on the external gravitational field of the very early
universe by the quantum fluctuations of the matter fields, not by the presence of, say, af(R) func-
tion imposedad hocin the classical action. These quantum effects are the genuine driving force of
RVM-inflation. It is also the reason why the RVM has no horizon problem, forH≃H I remains
approximately constant during inflation. It follows that a light pulse starting in the remote past
att=t 1 ≳t i (beginning of inflation) will have traveled until the end of the inflation epoch,t f, a
physical distance
dH(af) =a(t f)
ˆ af
a1
da′
a′2 H = af
HI
 1
a1
− 1
af

≃
 af
a1

H −1
I .(140)
58

Beinga f exponentially larger thana 1, we havea f /a1 ≫1 and hence the above integral (called
the particle horizon) can be as big as desired. All points in the past are therefore connected by
light signals and the entropy production is causal. This is in stark contrast to the standard ΛCDM
model for whichd H(a)/a→0 fora→0 (both in the radiation and matter-dominated epochs),
which means that observers have been isolated in the past, and hence they have been unable to
exchange information.
Let us explain how the entropy problem anda fortiorithe horizon problem are resolved in
the RVM. They are essentially the same problem [200]. Let us start considering a most crucial
thermodynamical quantity, which is the temperature of the heat bath of radiation following from
the decay of the primeval vacuum in the RVM. It can be obtained from equating the radiation
densityρ rad(a), given by Eq. (99), to the black-body formula (π 2/30)g∗T 4. Hereg ∗ is the number
of active degrees of freedom (d.o.f.) at the given temperature, typically of order 100−1000 in a
GUT (for instance,g ∗ = 160.75 in non-supersymmetricSU(5)). We find
Trad(ˆa) =TI (1−ν) 1/4 ˆa(1−ν)

1 + ˆa4(1−ν)1/2 ,(141)
where we have defined the temperatureT I throughρ I = π2
30 g∗ T 4
I . The maximum of the above
radiation temperature is readily found to be at the crossover point ˆa= 1 (a=a ∗) and takes the
value (cf. the notation in Sec.4.2)
Tmax = TI√
2 (1−ν) 1/4 ∼
45m2
Plm2
16π3g∗ϵ
1/4
=
 45
8π2g∗ (ξ−1/6)
1/4
mPl .(142)
We have neglected corrections of order|ν| ≪1 in the final result. From the estimates ong ∗ andξ
mentioned above, one can easily check that this temperature remains at most about one order of
magnitude belowm Pl (the Planck mass), which is consistent with our field theory approach. On
the other hand, for ˆa≫1 (i.e.,a≫a ∗, which means deep into the radiation-dominated epoch)
the scaling law of the temperature with the scale factor is the following:
Trad a1−ν = const.(143)
Again this is meaningful since|ν| ≪1 and hence we recover in very gpod approximation the
canonical scaling law of the radiation temperature in the adiabatic regime:T rad ∝1/a.
Finally, consider now the issue of entropy production in the RVM context. In our case, entropy
refers only to the comoving radiation entropy associated with the above heat-bath temperature, and
therefore the traditional notion of entropy inherent to the co-moving volumeV∼a 3. We do not
address here the entropy contribution from the horizon, which is associated with the Generalized
Second Law. For a proper discussion, this would require taking into consideration the so-called
cosmological apparent horizon. The interested reader, however, may wish to look up Ref. [70] for
its calculation in the RVM case. In the mentioned reference it is explicitly demonstrated that the
RVM fully satisfies the Generalized Second Law.
59

Coming back to the (comoving) radiation entropy corresponding to the radiation temperature
(141), it can be easily computed fromS r = (4ρr/3Trad)a 3 [200]. Therefore,
Sr(ˆa) =2π2
45 g∗T 3
rada3 = 2π2
45 g∗ T 3
I a3
∗ (1−ν) 3/4 ˆa6−3ν
h
1 + ˆa4(1−ν)
i3/2 .(144)
Since|ν| ≪1, it is easy to see that this formula saturates into an approximate plateau for a
sufficiently large value of ˆa. During the heating-up period the comoving entropy increases as the
sixth power of the scale factor,S∼ˆa (6−3ν) ∼ˆa6, until the aforementioned saturation regime occurs.
The plateau signals the entrance in the radiation-dominated phase and the (causally produced)
entropy injected into this phase is
Sr(ˆa≫1)≃ 2π2
45 g∗ T 3
I a3
∗(1−ν) 3/4ˆa3ν ≡S r0ˆa3ν .(145)
This entropy stands for the (approximate) asymptotic value of the comoving entropy. Forν= 0 the
expansion is assumed to be isentropic and the quantityg ∗T 3
rada3 remains invariable (i.e. entropy
is conserved) during the adiabatic phase and therefore must equal the current valueg s,0 T 3
γ0 a3
0.
Note thatT γ0 ≃2.725 K≃2.3×10 −13GeV is the CMB temperature now, andg s,0 = 2 + 6×
(7/8) (Tν,0/Tγ0)3 ≃3.91 is a well-known entropy factor corresponding to the number of light d.o.f.
today, calculated from the ratio of the present neutrino and photon temperatures [200]. We are
now in position to check if the huge entropy enclosed in the horizon today,H −1
0 , namely
S0 = 2π2
45 gs,0 T 3
γ0
 
H −1
0
3
≃2.3h −31087 ∼10 88 (h≃0.7),(146)
can be explained from the predicted value (145) in the RVM 13. We can perform the check within
order of magnitude. In fact, it is easy to convince oneself that to reproduce the above entropy
value in the context of RVM-inflation, the following condition must be met:g ∗T 3
I a3
∗ ∼g s,0T 3
γ0a3
0
(witha 0 = 1 at present). It is a nontrivial condition to be satisfied, sinceT γ0 is an experimentally
measured quantity at present, whileT I anda ∗ are theoretical parameters predicted by the the
RVM scenario in the very early universe. To check if the above condition is fulfilled, we need to
numerically estimatea ∗ from Eq. (100). The latter depends onρ I = 3H 2
I m2
Pl/8πand ultimately
onH I, which is given by Eq. (101). If we take into account the estimateν eff ∼10 −4 −10 −2 given
in Sec. 5.2, which is obtained from fitting the low energy data (i.e. from the current cosmological
observations [73, 74]), we find from (123) thatϵ∼10 −6 −10 −4. Thus, for particle masses near
the GUT scale,m∼M X ∼10 16GeV, Eq. (101) yieldsH I ∼10 17−18 GeV and as a resultρ I =
3H2
I m2
Pl
8π ∼10 73 GeV4.
Combining the previous estimate with the measured quantities Ω 0
rad ∼10 −4 andρ 0
c ∼10 −47
GeV4 in Eq. (100), we find
a∗ ∼

10−4 10−47
1073
1/4
∼10 −31 .(147)
13This formula is to be understood as follows. The physical volume of the universe is related to the comoving
volume byV=a 3L3, whereL 3 is the coordinate volume at present (a 0 = 1). In the previous fomulas we implicitly
assumed thatL 3 = 1. Now the current horizon isL=H −1
0 , and hence the physical volume at present isV0 =
 
H −1
0
3
,
which leads to Eq. (146).
60

From the aforementioned matching condition for the entropy, and using the previous numerical
values we find the following estimate for the temperature at which the bulk of the radiation entropy
was produced:
TI ∼
 gs,0
g∗
1/3 Tγ0
a∗
≲0.1m Pl ,(148)
wherem Pl ≃1.22×10 19 GeV. This temperature agrees in order of magnitude with the theoretically
predicted value in Eq.(142), which is also of order 0.1mPl at most. This demonstrates the numerical
consistency of our result within the rough order of magnitude, and hence the ability of the RVM
framework to accommodate the huge entropy value (146) causally, whence solving the entropy and
horizon problems of the standard model.
Needless to say, a more detailed calculation should take into account the multiplicity of fields in
the theory and other considerations. It is nevertheless rewarding to see that the order of magnitude
is in place. Similar successful calculations can be carried out for the unstable de Sitter vacuum
scenario [72] using the formulae of Sec.4.3, thus providing full consistency of these unification
models between the physics of inflation and the predicted entropy in the current universe.
We should emphasize that the above discussion of RVM inflation has been derived within the
general QFT formulation of the running vacuum framework [14], which goes well beyond previous
phenomenological considerations on these matters. Our approach provides a theoretical basis for
a possible solution to these cosmological problems within fundamental physics. As noted in [68],
the clues to the cosmological problems of the present may well have profound roots in the past!
6 Running vacuum and cosmic drift of the fundamental ‘con-
stants’
Almost a decade and a half ago, in the work [76] a possible explanation for the running or ‘drift’
(as it is called in the field) of the fundamental constants of Nature was first pointed out with
the help of the theoretical framework of the running vacuum model (RVM). The author had the
privilege to make these intriguing and exciting considerations with the invaluable collaboration of
the late Harald Fritzsch. I summarize very briefly these findings here.
The history of this recurrent scientific subject traces back mainly to Dirac’s pioneering work in
the thirties, when he formulated the “large number hypothesis” [228], and also to Jordan’s work
in the same year on the possible variation of both the QED fine structure (Sommerfeld’s) constant
α=e 2/4πandG[229]. About a quarter of a century later the Brans-Dicke (BD) approach to
gravity [79] was formulated, in which General Relativity (GR) was extended to accommodate a
dynamical scalar fieldφ(t) playing the role of time-evolving 1/G(t). It spurred further speculations
by Gamow [230] and others on the possible variation ofα, which continued till the present time 14.
14Unfortunately, we cannot make justice here to the extensive literature on the subject; see e.g. [76–78] for essential
bibliography particularly related to the approach proposed here, and [80–83, 231–234] (and references therein) for
general reviews of the subject.
61

However, for all the exciting phenomenology that these developments may entail a fundamental
framework is needed to encompass a possible time variation of the fundamental ‘constants’. For
example, the BD approach can, of course, provide a deeper meaning to the possible time variation
ofG, but it is ultimately a classical approach and, moreover, there is no clue in it as to the
meaning of Λ since there is no Λ in it [79]. As a matter of fact, BD extensions with constant
Λ̸= 0 (and even variable Λ) are possible, see e.g. [110–114] and references therein. Besides, the
relation between Λ and quantum vacuum energy is a major issue for the CCP, as we have seen
in the previous chapters. This can have groundbreaking implications for the other fundamental
‘constants’ of Nature.
In fact, it may well be that there are no fundamental constants at all in an strict sense. A rich
program of investigations on the possible time (and space) variation of the physical ‘constants’
(VPC) is under way since long, both in the lab (through high precision quantum optic techniques
applied to atomic and molecular clocks, see e.g. [231–234]), as well as in the sky, i.e. in the
astrophysical domain (e.g. using absorption systems in the spectra of distant quasars. [231]). In
the last decades various astrophysical observations of this sort have suggested positive evidence on
the cosmic time evolution of the fine structure constant [235], i.e. Sommerfeld’sα. At the same
time, indications have appeared of a possible spatial variation ofα[236]. Claims in the literature
have been made about such driftings in time and space at a level of a few standard deviations,
although unfortunately the confirmation by other groups is lacking at the moment [231]. There
are also claims about the drifting of the dimensionless ratioµ≡m p/me (between proton and
electron masses). This ratio has been accurately monitored (using quantum optic techniques in
the lab and quasar absorption lines). Significant relative time variations ( ˙µ/µ) have been reported
in some cases [237], but remain to be confirmed by independent observations [238]. Despite this
inconclusive situation, exciting news are foreseen in this enthralling field of research at some point
in the future. If so, it would lead to a significant modification of our current scientific views and
paradigms on the ‘constants’ of Nature. Needless to say, experiments in this field are difficult and
must be contrasted by independent observational teams.
The large number of fundamental constants can be felt as unsatisfactory from the theoretical
point of view, especially when we consider our most cherished theories such as the standard model
(SM) of particle physics, the scientific domain of excellence in our understanding of the microscopic
laws of Naure. Nevertheless, we do not have at present an explanation for the large variety of
couplings, masses, and mixing angles in the SM. The total number of parameters in it is quite
large (in total, 27, if the neutrino masses are Majorana masses, and hence two additional CP-
violating phases are added). If we were to apply ‘von Neumann’s elephant criterion’, the ability of
the SM to describe the fundamental interactions would become somewhat diminished 15. However,
if cosmic evolution enters, there is plenty of motivation for the VPC approach to the fundamental
‘constants’, since they might all be running parameters with the cosmic expansion.
15As recounted by F. Dyson in conversations with E. Fermi, J. von Neumann made the famous claim that ‘With
four parameters I can fit an elephant, and with five I can make him wiggle his trunk’ [239].
62

It is expected that the underlying physical laws put restrictions to the drift of the physical
‘constants’. For example, GR is widely accepted as a fundamental theory for describing the
geometric properties of spacetime. Thus, we should expect that if such VPC occurs, variations
should be correlated in such a way as to preserve the principle of general covariance. This was
actually the guiding principle of Jordan’s approach to the subject almost nine decades ago [229].
Consider the field equations of GR in the presence of the cosmological term:
Rµν − 1
2 gµνR+g µνΛ = 8πG Tµν ,(149)
withT µν the energy-momentum tensor of matter in the universe, treated as a perfect fluid. If we
assume that the Cosmological Principle is satisfied [6], the possibility that the parametersG=G(t)
and Λ = Λ(t) could be functions of the cosmic time – as it is the case with the scale factora=a(t)
of the FLRW metric – is perfectly compatible with that principle.
Whether constant or time-evolving, the (physical) Λ term on thel.h.s.of Einstein’s equations
can be absorbed on ther.h.s.after introducing the quantityρ vac = Λ/(8πG N), which represents
the VED associated to the cosmological term, as noted in the introduction. Einstein’s equations
can then be rewritten as follows:
Rµν − 1
2 gµνR= 8πG ˜Tµν ,(150)
i.e. formally replacing the ordinary EMT of matter by the total EMT, which includes both matter
and vacuum energy:
Tµν → ˜Tµν ≡T µν −g µν ρvac = (Pm −ρ vac)g µν +
 
ρm +P m

uµ uν ,(151)
ρm andp m being the proper density and pressure of the homogeneous and isotropic cosmic matter
fluid, andu µ its 4-velocity (uµuµ =−1). Because the Cosmological Principle is still to be preserved,
the above total EMT must maintain the form of a perfect fluid.
Notice that in (151) we have assumed that the equation of state (EoS) of the vacuum is the
traditional one,P vac =−ρ vac. Although this equation is subject to quantum effects in the QFT
approach [35], as we have seen in Sections 3.3 amd 5.1, for the sake of simplicity we do not modify
the canonical vacuum EoS at this point, since it does not change the main conclusions within the
present VPC context.
Let us describe a few scenarios within the VPC phenomenology that preserve the general
covariance of GR. We assume flat three-dimensional space (K= 0). Friedmann’s equation and the
acceleration equation are not altered by the possible time evolution of the vacuum energy,ρ vac,
nor ofG(Newton’s ‘constant’):
 ˙a
a
2
≡H 2 = 8πG
3 (ρm +ρ vac) (152)
and
¨a
a =H 2 + ˙H=− 4π G
3 (ρm + 3pm −2ρ vac).(153)
63

In the current universe, the pressure of matter is negligible (Pm ≃0) and its energy density dilutes
in the standard formρ m ∼a −3. In the long run,ρ vac dominates overρ m and this causes the
universe to speed up (¨a >0) forρ vac >0. This holds irrespective of whetherρ vac is constant or
mildly variable. In addition, the Bianchi identity∇ µGµν = 0, involving the Einstein tensor on the
l.h.s.of the field equations, implies the following generalized conservation law for the full EMT
times Newton’sG:
∇µ

G ˜Tµν

=∇ µ [G(T µν −g µν ρvac)] = 0.(154)
This equation can be evaluated using the FLRW metric, leading to the following “mixed” local
conservation law:
d
dt [G(ρm +ρ vac)] + 3G H(ρ m +P m) = 0,(155)
in which bothGand/orρ vac can be both functions of the cosmic time. Only for relativistic matter
Pm ̸= 0 (namely,P r = 1/3) in (155). Although the above equation is not independent of (152)
and (153), it is useful to understand the possible transfer of energy between vacuum and matter.
For example, if the VED is not constant ( ˙ρvac ̸= 0), the matter is not conserved, since the vacuum
could decay into matter, or the matter could disappear into the vacuum. In the process, one could
also have a possible contribution from a variableG(if ˙G̸= 0). The conservation law (155) allows
for a general situation characterized by a transfer of energy between matter-radiationρ m, vacuum
energyρ vac and at the same time accompanied by a possible running ofG.
Four specific scenarios can be highlighted:
•i)G=const. andρ vac =const. It corresponds to the standard (or ‘concordance’) ΛCDM
model [6,7] with a rigid cosmological term Λ =const. It leads to the usual local conservation
law of matter-radiation:
˙ρm + 3H(ρ m +P m) = 0.(156)
Using the chain ruled/dt=aHd/da, it can be written in terms of the scale factora. Using
prime ford/da, we have
ρ′
m(a) + 3
a(1 +ω m)ρ m(a) = 0,(157)
whereω m =P m/ρm is the EoS of matter (0 for non-relativistic and 1/3 for relativistic
matter). The solution of (157) reads
ρm(a) =ρ 0
m a−3(1+ωm) =ρ 0
m (1 +z) 3(1+ωm) ,(158)
z= (1−a)/abeing the cosmological redshift, andρ 0
m the current matter density (i.e. its
value ata= 1, or equivalently atz= 0).
•ii)G=const and ˙ρ vac ̸= 0. In this case, Eq.(155) leads to a mixed conservation law which is
independent ofG:
˙ρvac + ˙ρm + 3H(ρ m +P m) = 0.(159)
In this scenario, an exchange of energy between matter and vacuum is mandatory in order
to fulfill the Bianchi identity, so that neither matter nor vacuum energy are conserved in this
64

case. However, equation (159) cannot be solved unless a specific ansatz is proposed forρ m
(other than (158)) or for a variableρ vac. As an example, the RVM makes a theoretically well
motivated proposal forρ vac =ρ vac(H), see Eq. (125), which was originally tested in [240] and
in many subsequent analyzes, e.g. [91–97], including variants of it in recent works [73–75].
Alternatively, one can start directly from an anomalous conservation law of matter [241,242],
although it is a more phenomenological approach.
•iii) ˙G̸= 0 andρ vac =const. Again, a mixed conservation law is involved, but now dependent
onGand its time derivative:
˙G(ρ m +ρ vac) +G[ ˙ρm + 3H(ρm +P m)] = 0.(160)
Here, matter is not conserved at the expense of a variableG. To solve it forGin a nontrivial
case we need a non-conservative ansatz forρm. Specific examples of this scenario are discussed
e.g. in [76,243].
•iv) ˙G̸= 0 and ˙ρ vac ̸= 0. The simplest implementation of this scenario is by assuming
covariant conservation of matter-radiation, i.e Eq. (156). Then Eq. (155) reduces to
(ρm +ρ vac) ˙G+G˙ρ vac = 0.(161)
In this case we have a dynamical interplay betweenGandρ vac. To solve the model, we need
an ansatz or some theoretical proposal for the time variation ofGorρ vac. Different variants
of this kind of scenario are considered e.g. in [43,44,76–78,244,245].
Apart from the standard model scenario i), which is always compared to, herein we shall
focus briefly on scenarios ii) and iv) for which the vacuum is ‘running’ in both cases. The VPC
pattern associated with these scenarios is naturally linked with the RVM, although connections
with quantum gravity or string theory are also possible [122,123].
6.1 The micro and macro connection in the laws of Nature
Let us now focus in more detail on class ii) in the list of scenarios given in the previous section. It
leads to an anomalous matter conservation law along with dynamical vacuum energy. We assume
thatρ vac evolves with the Hubble rate according to the canonical RVM expression [11] (see the
formal part of our presentation, specifically Eq. (125) of Sec.5):
ρvac(H) =ρ 0
vac + 3ν
8π m2
Pl (H2 −H 2
0),(162)
where, as alwaysG N = 1/m2
Pl, andρ 0
vac is the present value of the VED, i.e., its value atH=H 0.
As we have seen in the previous sections, the above form (162) for the VED evolution can be
derived from explicit QFT calculations [33, 34]. These calculations show that in the current
universe the VED evolves as the powerH 2 of the Hubble rate, which is the lowest order power
being consistent with general covariance. The same QFT calculations show that the parameterν
65

in (162) is theβ-function coefficient of the runningρ vac. It is a small (dimensionless) parameter
whose nonvanishing value receives loop contributions from boson and fermion fields [36] and makes
possible the renormalization group running of the VED as a function ofH 2 (cf. Sec. 5).
Taking as a starting point the evolution law of the VED as in (162), the cosmological equations
can be solved under different assumptions on the conservation or non-conservation of matter, see
the four scenarios described in the previous section. In the particular case of scenario ii), matter
is interacting with vacuum and this determines the anomalous conservation law of matter, which
in terms of the cosmological redshift reads
ρm(z;ν) =ρ 0
m (1 +z) 3(1−ν) .(163)
Here,ρ 0
m is the current matter density, which is mostly non-relativistic. As we can see, there is a
tiny departure from the standard conservation lawρ m ∼a −3 = (1 +z) 3, which is parameterized
by a nonvanishing value ofν. On the other hand, for the VED we find
ρvac(z) =ρ 0
vac + ν ρ0
m
1−ν
h
(1 +z) 3(1−ν) −1
i
.(164)
The matter density parameter at present is Ω 0
m =ρ 0
m/ρ0
c ≃0.3, whereρ 0
c is the critical density
today. We also need Ω 0
vac =ρ 0
vac/ρ0
c ≃0.7, i.e. the current normalized vacuum energy density. A
nonvanishing value of the parameterνintroduced in Eq. (162) is clearly responsible for the time
evolution of the vacuum energy density. As we have seen,νalso determines the anomalous conser-
vation of matter, since the exchange between matter and vacuum is governed by this parameter,
and indeed we recover the standard law (158) for the present universe (ω m ≃0) only forν= 0.
This deviation from the conventional matter conservation law is admissible because it is small and
is offset by a corresponding small change of the VED. The two compensating changes duly take
care of covariance, since∇ µ ˜Tµν = 0 is satisfied, with ˜Tµν given by (151).
Next we define the amount of violation of the standard matter conservation law at a given
redshift:δρ m ≡ρ m(z;ν)−ρ m(z). This expression must be proportional toν, as we subtract the
usual density of matter (corresponding toν= 0). We can easily confirm this, since to orderν,
Eq.(163) givesδρ m =−3ν ρ 0
m(1 +z) 3 ln(1 +z). Thus, the relative time variation of the matter
density is easily found:
δ˙ρm
ρm
= 3ν(1 + 3 ln(1 +z))H+O(ν 2),(165)
where we used ˙z= (dz/da)˙a= (dz/da)aH=−(1 +z)H. In practice, measurements aimed at
detecting VPC are carried out for relatively small values of the redshift, so we can neglect the log
term in the above formula and in good approximation we have
δ˙ρm
ρm
≃3ν H .(166)
The corresponding result for the VED is obtained from (164):
˙ρvac
ρvac
≃ −3ν Ω0
m
Ω0vac
(1 +z) 3 H+O(ν 2).(167)
66

For small redshift,it is of the same order of magnitude as (166) but exhibits the opposite sign, as
could be expected from the fact that there is energy transfer between vacuum and matter.
The canonical RVM form (162) for the running vacuum energy has been extensively scrutinized
in the literature by fitting it to the main sources of cosmological data. This means e.g. type Ia
supernovae (SNIa), the Cosmic Microwave Background anisotropies (CMB), data on Baryonic
Acoustic Oscillations (BAO), data on the large scale structure (LSS) formation and also the so-
called cosmic chronometer values of the Hubble rate (CCH), see e.g. [73,74,92–97] and references
therein. The range of values pinned down forνis the following:
|ν|cosm. ≲O(10 −5 −10 −3),(168)
depending on particular realizations of the RVM. In the above range, the fit quality of the RVM is
comparable or superior to that of the ΛCDM, as shown in the aforementioned references. Moreover,
values ofνof this order are completely in accordance with old theoretical estimates [44] and modern
BBN bounds [203].
An immediate application within the VPC program now follows. If we use the cosmological
limit (168) in eq.(166), we can predict a relative cosmic drift of the matter density (that is, a gain
or loss of matter density per unit time in the universe, depending on the sign ofν) at the level of

δ˙ρm
ρm
 ≃2×
 
10−15 −10 −13
yr−1 ,(169)
where the current value of the Hubble parameter readsH 0 = 1.0227h×10 −10 yr−1 withh≃0.7.
Matter leakages as tiny as (169) are not irrelevant. They are correlated with a time evolution of
the vacuum energy and hence produce a time variation of the cosmological ‘constant’ Λ = 8πGρvac
through (167). Furthermore, as the golden rule of the field says, once a fundamental constant is
found to vary, all constants can vary! The obtained result, therefore, aligns perfectly well with the
sought-for connection of the RVM formulation of the expansion history with the VPC search, and
in a way fully consistent with general covariance. Additional hints are given in the next section.
6.2 Cosmic drift of Newton’sGand Sommerfeld’sα
We can also estimate the phenomenological impact of the predicted variation ofGwithin the
RVM. Consider the model type iv) listed in Sec.6. In it, matter is conserved in the standard way
(156). This is possible thanks to the simultaneous dynamical change ofρ vac andGencoded in
Eq. (161). This equation can be solved using the RVM vacuum running law (162) and the relation
ρm +ρ vac = 3H 2/(8πG) from Friedmann’s equation (152). It is easy to see thatGmust satisfy
the equation
dG
G2 =− ν
GN
dH2
H2 .(170)
which can be integrated at once using the boundary conditionG(H 0) =G N:
G(H) = GN
1 +νln H2
H2
0
.(171)
67

The obtained result implies a very mild running ofGwith the expansion, since it entails a logarith-
mic evolution with the Hubble rateH, and in additionνis small in absolute value. The relative
variation ofGwith the cosmic time immediately follows from Eq. (171). To orderν, it gives
˙G
G =−2ν
˙H
H = 2 (1 +q)ν H ,(172)
where use has been made of ˙H=−(1 +q)H 2, withq=−¨a/(aH 2) the standard deceleration
parameter. Typically, the existing bounds on the relative time variation ofGyield| ˙G/G|≲
10−12 yr−1 [80, 81]. The value in our time of the deceleration parameter for a flat universe with
Ω0
m = 0.30 isq 0 = 3Ω0
m/2−1 =−0.55. Therefore,

˙G
G
 ≲0.9|ν|H .(173)
From the current valueH=H 0 (given above) of the Hubble parameter, which we mentioned
before, we find|ν|≲10 −2. This bound, however, can be improved one order of magnitude. In
fact, using more recent data based on the double pulsar PSR J0737–3039A/B [246] a more stringent
range of variation forGcan be extracted:
˙G
G = (−0.8±1.4)×10 −13 1
FAB
yr−1 ,(174)
in whichF AB ≃1 for weakly self-gravitating bodies, see [246]. The above measurement translates
immediately into a tighter bound for the running parameter of the RVM:|ν|≲10 −3. It is rewarding
to see that this bound is fully consistent with the BBN bound on this parameter, as shown in [203]16
There are many other observables which are interesting to look at from the point of view of the
VPC program. As mentioned previously, much attention has been paid to the proton-to-electron
mass ratioµ≡m p/me [80–82, 231]. Here, for lack of space, we shall not address this subject and
refer the reader to [76] and to the aforementioned reviews.
However, we would not like to close this short tasted of the phenomenological implications
of the RVM on the VPC program without mentioning another aspect that involves the possible
variation of the proton mass, specifically its possible cosmic drift and correlation with that of
Sommerfeld’s electromagnetic fine structure constant,α, whose possible variation with time and
space has also been under extensive surveillance over the years [235,236]. A few observations will
suffice to demonstrate that the RVM framework can also have a bearing on this important topic
in the pursuit of the variation of the physical constants.
The connection of the RVM and the time variation ofα, however, is a bit more subtle since
gravitation and particle physics are still not part of the same ‘super-grand GUT’ comprising really
16The attentive reader may have compared equations (171) and (74). In fact, the most rigorous one is the latter,
which was derived from explicit QFT calculations within the RVM. These calculations actually introduce a pressure
correction (85) which amounts to a modification of the Bianchi identity(161) into the more complete one (133). The
latter has been discussed in Sec.5.3 and from it we have rederived the more correct form (137), which reconfirmed
Eq. (74). Notwithstanding, for the present discussion this does not make much difference, ifνis considered as a
mere phenomenological parameter to be fitted against the cosmological data.
68

all of the fundamental interactions of Nature. However, an indirect connection can be established
in the context of conventional GUT’s [76,247] if we assume that all particle masses are susceptible
to evolve with cosmic expansion owing to its possible interaction with the vacuum. To better
understand how this may come about in the RVM context, let us consider the baryonic density in
the universe. It essentially consists of the mass density of protons, hence we can writeρ B
m =n p mp,
wheren p is the number density of protons andm 0
p = 938.272013(23) MeV is the current proton
mass. Now, if this mass density is not conserved, two possibilities can be conceived:
•1) Eithern p does not follow the normal dilution law with the expansion, i.e.n p ∼a −3 =
(1 +z) 3, but the anomalous law
np(z) =n 0
p (1 +z) 3(1−ν) (at fixed proton massm p =m 0
p),(175)
and/or
•2) the proton massm p does not stay constant with time and redshifts with the cosmic
evolution:
mp(z) =m 0
p (1 +z) −3ν (with normal dilutionn p(z) =n 0
p (1 +z) 3).(176)
Within the RVM context, the vacuum can offset the difference originating from any of these two
options sinceρ vac =ρ vac(z) “runs with the expansion” (see the previous section). Possibility
1) implies that during the expansion a certain number of particles (protons, in this case) are
transferred into the vacuum (ifν <0; or ejected from it, ifν >0). Possibility 2), in contrast,
implies that the number of particles is strictly conserved. Here, the number density follows the
normal dilution law with the expansion, but the mass of each particle changes slightly (decreases
forν <0, or increases forν >0) with the cosmic evolution.
For the sake of the present argument, in what follows we adopt Possibility 2), i.e. Eq. (176).
It is known that the bulk of the proton mass is proportional to the fundamental QCD parameter
ΛQCD ≃332±17 MeV [248], that is,m p ≃c QCD ΛQCD, up to small corrections from the light
quark masses (which we will neglect) [76]. Thus, if there is a cosmic evolution of the proton
mass through an energy exchange with vacuum, the QCD scale will also evolve with expansion
ΛQCD = ΛQCD(H). Now the QCD scale is well-known to be related at 1-loop with the strong fine
structure constantα s =g 2
s /(4π) as follows [248]
αs(µR) = 4π
(11−2n f /3) ln

µ2
R/Λ2
QCD
 ,(177)
whereµ R is the renormalization point andn f is the number of quark flavors. Thus, if Λ QCD =
ΛQCD(H), the strong coupling will also inherit this feature and it will run not only with the ordinary
renormalization scaleµ R but also with the cosmic scaleH[76].α s =α s(µR, H). If we assume
a GUT scenario, it is now a simple matter to uncover the connection with the cosmic running
of Sommerfeld’s constantαand conclude that the latter also runs with the cosmic evolution. In
69

fact, in a typical GUT, the gauge couplingsα i meet at a unification point at very high energy,
MX ∼10 16 GeV. The scaling of the SM gauge couplings (g 1, g2, g3 ≡g s) can be given in terms of
the respective fine structure constantsα 2
i =g 2
i /4π. In the 1-loop approximation, the scaling laws
are
α−1
i (µR) =α −1
U + bi
2π ln µR
MX
.(178)
Hereα U =α i(MX) is the common unification point of the three couplings atµ R =M X, andb i
are the coefficients of theβ-functions. Forb i >0 we have asymptotic freedom (viz.α i decreases
with increasingµ R). Obviously, these coefficients do not depend on the cosmic expansion. Thus,
from (178) we infer thatdα −1
i /dHis independent ofµ R. Finally, bearing in mind that in the EW
theory the guage couplings can be related toαasα 1 = 5α/(3 cos2 θW ) andα 2 =α/sin 2 θW (θW
being the weak mixing angle), one can easily show that the cosmic running ofαis connected to
that of the QCD scale Λ QCD precisely as follows [76,247]:
1
α
dα(µR;H)
dH = 8
3
α(µR;H)/α s(µR;H)
ln (µR/ΛQCD)
 1
ΛQCD
dΛQCD(H)
dH

.(179)
The measured values of the couplings at theZ-pole massµ R =M Z ≃91.18 GeV are well-known,
α(MZ)≃1/128.9 andα s(MZ)≃0.118. Using ln (M Z/ΛQCD)≃5.61, we finally arrive at the
desired relation interconnecting the running of Sommerfeld’s fine structure constant with that of
the proton mass [76]:
1
α
dα(µR;H)
dH ≃0.031
 1
ΛQCD
dΛQCD(H)
dH

≃0.031
 1
mp
dmp(H)
dH

.(180)
Thus, if there is a GUT supporting the unification of the gauge couplings, the cosmic running of
Sommerfeld’sαshould be some 30 times slower than that of the proton massm p. The upshot is
that searching for the cosmic drift ofαis more difficult than searching for the cosmic drift ofm p,
but there is a precise connection between the two. For other interesting implications of the VPC
searches on different sectors of particle and nuclear physics, including dark matter, Higgs bosons,
ultralight scalar dark matter models, proton-to-electron mass ratio, strong-field gravity tests etc,
see e.g. [76–78,113,246,247,249–252] and the reviews [83,231–234,253], and references therein.
70

7 Discussion and outlook
In this review, I summarize the Running Vacuum Model (RVM) approach to cosmology, which
nowadays can be considered a unification paradigm for Dark Energy (DE) and Inflation formulated
within one and the same Quantum Field Theory (QFT) framework in curved spacetime. This
means that these two central concepts of modern cosmology are two sides of the same coin, and
there is, in principle, no need to introducehad hocfields to explain DE in the current universe
and inflation in the very early universe. In the RVM context, Dark Energy and Inflation originate
from quantum effects on the dynamical background stemming from the quantized matter fields
in Grand Unified Theories (GUT’s). This does not exclude, of course, the possible existence
of quantum gravity (QG) effects which should be added up on top of the present semiclassical
approach. However, while QG is still under construction, I have focused on the quantized matter
fields alone as the prime actors.
The fast and fruitful theoretical developments undergone by the RVM framework over time
can easily be traced in the literature by considering the derivation of its basic equations for the
vacuum energy density (VED), originally guessed from old semiqualitative arguments based on
the renormalization group (RG) approach to cosmology – see [11, 41–48, 50, 65, 67] and references
therein – until reaching its mature status at present through explicit renormalization calculations
within QFT in curved spacetime [14]. These calculations were first put forward in [33–36]. The
most recent theoretical studies on the subject have, on the one hand, built upon theH4 inflationary
mechanism of inflation in the RVM [71], and on the other on a comparison with the scenario of
unstable de Sitter vacuum decaying into FLRW spacetime in the radiation-dominated epoch [72].
This is a very fruitful comparison since both scenarios can produce a period of inflation triggered
by the powerH 4 during a short period of time where the Hubble rateHremains constant, followed
by a fast decay of vacuum into the standard radiation epoch of the ΛCDM model. As with the
aforementioned general running Λ ideas, which are slightly more than a quarter of century old, the
first studies on∼H 2n(n= 2,3...) -inflation trying to extend the RVM to include the inflationary
period, were essentially of phenomenological nature [62–70] until they have been integrated into the
QFT unification paradigm presented here, which is only a little over five years old [33–36,71,72].
There is no inflaton field at all in RVM-inflation (nor in the unstable de Sitter vacuum ap-
proach), since inflation is here the pure work of gravity under the vacuum fluctuations of the
quantized matter fields. In both of these scenarios, the graceful exit transition is automatically
guaranteed due to the subleading powerH 2 of the VED, which is again predicted to exist as
a quantum vacuum effect. This means that there is no such thing as a highly non-adiabatic
event represented by the reheating mechanism, which is typical in inflaton-like scenarios [200–202].
Furthermore, despite naive resemblances, RVM-inflation is also very different from Starobinsky’s
inflation [227], since in the latter there is a reheating period associated with scalaron decay and
moreover there is no period for whichHcan remain approximately constant, so these are entirely
different inflationary mechanisms. The effectiveness of RVM-inflation is similar to that of usual
71

models based on inflaton fields, but without any real inflaton at all. In fact, RVM-inflation predicts
an approximate de Sitter period where the VED remains essentially constant, which substitutes
the postulated existence of an effective potential for a scalar field triggering inflation while the
field remains approximately constant in its ground state. Finally, we find that after the RVM
inflationary epoch, a remnant of vacuum energy remains in the late universe which is mildly dy-
namical and can provide a natural (and fundamental) explanation for the dark energy (DE) that
we observe in the current universe, as well as for its dynamical character recently favored by DESI
measurements [37–40]. That prediction of dynamical DE is also shared by the unstable de Sitter
vacuum scenario [72].
From the foregoing, it is clear that the RVM approach emphasizes the notion of quantum
vacuum in the context of fundamental physics. This applies, in particular, to QFT in curved
spacetime and suggests that the VED should play a relevant role in the description of the cosmo-
logical evolution from first principles. Not surprisingly, the quantum dynamics of vacuum inherent
to the RVM naturally predicts the dynamics of the DE in the present universe and a mechanism
of inflation in the early universe. As we should reiterate, the QFT approach within the RVM is
semiclassical in that only the quantized matter fields determine the quantum vacuum energy. QG
considerations can wait for a final quantum theory of the gravitational field, which unfortunately
does not exist at present notwithstanding the numerous efforts devoted to it.
Renormalization is, of course, necessary in the RVM approach since QFT is involved. As a
distinctive characteristic of the modern RVM formulation, we adopt what we have called the “off-
shell adiabatic prescription” to renormalize the energy-momentum tensor, following the proposal of
[33,34]. The renormalized VED in that context depends, as in any renormalization calculation, on a
floating scaleM. The existence of such a scale is characteristic of QFT due to the intrinsic breaking
of conformal invariance by quantum effects. The value ofMplays the role of renormalization point.
The various epochs of the cosmic history (mapped out by the value of the Hubble rate,H) are
explored by setting the scaleMprecisely to the value ofHat each epoch. This is, after all, in the
very spirit of the RG methods in ordinary gauge theories but applied to cosmology. The setting
M=Hdefines the characteristic energy scale of the FLRW metric in natural units andH 2 defines
the degree of 4-curvature of the geometric background in each cosmic era. The VED emerges as
an expansion in an even number of time derivatives of the scale factor, as demanded by general
covariance of the effective action.
The expansion may conveniently be rephrased in terms ofHand its time derivativesρ vac =
ρvac(H, ˙H, ¨H, ...). The obtained expression for the VED can then be used to explore the entire
history of the universe from the very early times where inflation occurs (triggered by the quantum
vacuum effects), going through the radiation- and matter-dominated epochs until reaching the
current DE epoch. Despite the fact that the RG methods in cosmology are old enough [49], the
RVM approach equipped with an off-shell renormalization prescription to explore cosmic evolution
is unprecedented in the literature [33, 34]. Thanks to it, a unified QFT paradigm for DE and
inflation becomes possible. In fact, what we call the dark energy density can be thought of as
72

the remnant tail of the huge VED that brought about the exponential inflation at the very early
times and is still decaying very slowly at present. In this sense, the RVM predicts the existence
of the DE as vacuum energy from QFT origin, and also that the DE we observe today is mildly
dynamical.
In a number of phenomenological studies, the RVM has been successfully confronted with a
large set of cosmological observations over the years. We have illustrated this fact only very briefly
in this review (Sec. 5.2). It was long established that the RVM can be a serious competitor to
the purely phenomenological description of the ΛCDM with a rigid (andad hoc) cosmological
constant [91–97, 103–108]. This fact has recently been reconfirmed in [73–75]. The currently
preferred fitting values for the parameterν eff that controls the running of the VED fall in the
ballpark of∼10 −4 −10 −3 (depending on particular realizations, see the aforementioned papers).
Such analyses also show that theH 0 and growth tensions [90] can both be significantly alleviated
in the RVM context.
On top of these positive phenomenological implications, perhaps the principal message of the
RVM picture of the cosmic expansion is one of profound conceptual nature: viz. neither the VED
at the present time,ρ 0
vac =ρ vac(H0), nor the associated cosmological ‘constant’ Λ = 8πG ρ 0
vac that
we have measured are really constants of nature in a fundamental QFT context. And this applies
to the gravitational coupling as well,G. In fact, at any cosmic time, the VED is given by the
above mentioned function ofHand its time derivatives, and the associated cosmological term is
dynamical too: Λ(H) = 8πG(H)ρ vac(H), withG=G(H) a very mild (logarithmic) function of the
expansion. The dynamics is smooth enough so as to make them appear as approximately constant
and hence preserve the basic properties of the ΛCDM. In this sense the RVM behavior around the
present time (and for that matter during the entire post-inflationary epoch) is essentially ΛCDM-
like. The VED change between two nearby epochs in recent history isδρ vac ∝ν effm2
PlH2, where
the small parameter|ν eff| ≪1 is calculable in QFT and plays the role ofβ-function coefficient of
the VED running [14].
Another no less remarkable fact is that the VED evolution is free of the undesired quartic mass
contributions∼m 4 from any quantum matter field with a nonvanishing rest mass [33, 34]. If
they were present, these contributions would recreate the need for extreme fine-tuning, and hence
would reproduce such an ugly feature of the cosmological constant problem [10]. Obviously, this
theoretical property of the RVM is much welcome and remarkable.
One more aspect on which we have dwelled upon in this review is the possibility that the
so-called fundamental constants of Nature are not really constant throughout the cosmic history
(cf. Sec. 6). The pursuit of the possible variation of the physical ‘constants’ (VPC) program has
a long scientific history until now, and it may eventually be able to prove the reality of such a
variation. It includes not only the cosmological ‘constants’ such as Λ andG, but also those from
the subatomic particle physics world, such as the electromagnetic and strong couplings as well
as the ratio of the proton mass to the electron mass. It is difficult to believe that the set of
physical parameters was fixed once and forever since the beginning of time. Barring anthropic
73

considerations [24], the fate of the mankind should have no bearing whatsoever on the ultimate
design of the laws of Nature. Tiny changes in the values of the fundamental ‘constants’ should
be possible, even if fully imperceptible at the human scale. These minute changes can only be
perceived by extremely accurate experiments made in the lab using sophisticated quantum optics
techniques, atom interferometry, optomechanical devices, atomic and nuclear clocks using quantum
entanglement strategies [231–234]; and at the same time, alternatively, through the observation of
binary pulsars [246] or even by tracking the values of the relevant ‘constants’ over cosmological
spans of time, what requires gathering information on their values in the depths of our cosmic past
(using e.g. absorption systems in the spectra of distant quasars [235–238]).
If signs of VPC are eventually collected, we need to be prepared to understand them within the
framework of our fundamental theories, or at least be ready to refine our theories appropriately
to accommodate the new features. Such a refinement may be more than that, it could be the
firsts steps into a pathway leading to a new physical paradigm. We should recall once more that
the possible change of a single fundamental constant in Nature opens the Pandora box for many
other changes. For example, a change inGcan be offset by an appropriate change of the vacuum
energy density such that the Bianchi identity is still preserved, and with it the general covariance
of the theory. In actual fact, the RVM under study proves to be a specific QFT framework where
such a correlated change between Λ (or VED,ρ vac) andGreally occurs (cf. Sec. 5.3 ). The
dynamical nature of the VED, and hence of Λ, calls either for the corresponding dynamics ofG
and/or the presence of new interactions leading to the non-conservation of the number of matter
particles and/or the non-conservation of the particle masses themselves at the expense of the
vacuum dynamics.
Overall, general covariance isalwayspreserved, but a rich VPC phenomenology may nonethe-
less ensue, which gives hope for a deeper understanding of the laws of Nature. This was indeed the
essence of the running vacuum approach to the VPC program as formulated in [76]. The RVM
framework studied here, therefore, provides not only a unified paradigm for understanding infla-
tion and dark energy, but also a possible solution to the cosmological tensions and a fundamental
approach to understanding scenarios of VPC, which have already given many hints of potentially
new exciting physics over the years.
In an even more ambitious vein, the RVM gives a clue to solving the fine tuning trouble
inherent to the CCP and it may even shed light on the kernel aspect of the CCP, namely the “old
cosmological constant problem” mentioned in the Introduction. To start with, the fact that the
VED (and the corresponding Λ term) scales with the renormalization pointMmakes it dynamical
through the associationM=Hand this leads to a gentle connection between any two points
of the cosmological expansion. The connection is smooth due to the cancellation of the quartic
mass contributions∼m 4, a nontrivial property that expresses the naturalness of our off-shell
renormalization procedure. Therefore, although we cannot compute the value of the VED at a
given scaleM=H, since after all this is not the final aim of the renormalization group program
- which (let us refresh our memory) consists of interrelating values of a given quantity at different
74

scales – we can nevertheless observe from the smoothness of the scaling evolution of the VED that
all of its contributions in the current universe should naturally lie in the ballpark ofO(m 2
PlH2)
rather than taking inordinately large values of order∼m 4
Pl. This should possibly offer a viable
pathway not only to a solution of the fine tuning problem but a final clue into the hard core aspect
of the cosmological constant problem, to wit: the value itself of Λ.
In a nutshell: the Running Vacuum Model framework discussed in this review furnishes a
unification paradigm for Dark Energy and Inflation that can be formulated within first principles
of QFT and GR. As a result, it offers important clues for understanding the dynamics of vacuum,
gravity, and matter in an overarching formulation of the expansion history of the universe from
the very early times to our day. At the same time, it provides intriguing clues as to the micro and
macro connection between the laws of physics, i.e. between the subatomic world of the particle
interactions and the large scale structure of the universe. It suggests that all ‘constants’ of Nature
actually drift with the expansion, but always preserving the general covariance principle inherent
to GR.
Acknowledgements
The author thanks Prof. K.K. Phua for the invitation to contribute to this special issue to cel-
ebrate the 40th anniversary of IJMPA and MPLA. The special volume is edited by Professors I.
Antoniadis, K.K. Phua, and G. Shiu. I am funded in part by PID2022-136224NB-C21 (MICIU),
2021-SGR-249 (Generalitat de Catalunya) and CEX2024-001451-M (ICCUB). I also acknowledge
participation in Cost Association Actions CA21136 “Addressing observational tensions in cosmo-
logy with systematics and fundamental physics (CosmoVerse)”” and CA23130 ”Bridging high and
low energies in search of QG (BridgeQG)”. Last but not least, it is my pleasure to thank J. de
Cruz P´ erez, A. G´ omez-Valent, A. Gonz´ alez-Fuentes and C. Moreno-Pulido for fruitful collabora-
tion in works exploring different phenomenological and theoretical aspects and implications of the
RVM paradigm on the hot problems of modern cosmology. The author extends his gratitude to N.
E. Mavromatos for discussions and common work on the StRVM version of the the RVM, which,
however, has not been covered here, see the forthcoming [145] for a comprehensive exposition.
75

Appendices
A Off-shell adiabatic expansion of the mode functions
In this appendix, we provide some details of the calculation on the adiabatic expansion of the
solution of the WKB equation (13) in the context of the off-shell ARP (cf. Sec.2.2) up to adiabatic
order fourth. We summarize the derivation of the expansion terms in Eq. (16). At the same time we
illustrate the connection between this expansion and the effective action approach used in Sec .3.
Recall that our starting point is the action (4) for a quantum fieldϕof physical massmnon-
minimally coupled to gravity. Since there is no closed-form solution to the mode functions (12) in
FLRW spacetime, we use the adiabatic expansion introduced in Sec.2.2:
Wk =ω (0)
k +ω (2)
k +ω (4)
k +· · ·(A.1)
In the first two steps of this expansion, two important quantities will appear and deserve a com-
ment, namely the arbitrary mass scaleMand the mass squared difference with respect to the
actual particle mass, ∆ 2 =m 2 −M 2. These quantities then propagate to all higher adiabatic or-
ders owing to the recursive WKB series. Let us start with the first (zeroth order, i.e. the leading)
term of the above expansion (A.1). We take it asω (0)
k =ω k(τ, M)≡
p
k2 +a 2(τ)M 2, where the
physical massmhas been replaced by an arbitrary mass scaleM. This is licit insofar as it respects
the order of adiabaticity since both termsω k(τ, M) andω k(τ, m) are of zeroth adiabatic order. In
fact, the crucial point of the initialization process is that the leading term of the WKB expansion
need not be defined on mass-shell, but can be taken off-mass shell and in this sense the adiabatic
expansion is not a mere WKB series. This sort of ‘ambiguity’ at the initial step is the clue to
the off-shell adiabatic renormalization prescription (ARP) and reflects the fact that it should be
perfectly possible to renormalize the theory at an arbitrary scale or ‘renormalization point’M
rather than on mass-shell. In more formal terms, we can say that the presence of a floating scale
Min the adiabatic prescription is nothing but the practical implementation of the renormalization
group (RG) wisdom in this formulation. An alternative justification is obtained at the level of the
effective action formalism (cf. Sec.3 and Appendix B) where all the renormalized couplings of the
theory, including the VED,ρ vac(M), and Newton’s gravitational couplingG(M), appear explicitly
as ‘running’ quantities scaling withM. The consistency between the two calculational procedures
to renormalize the EMT at the arbitrary scaleMis nontrivial and was first proven in [34]. In
Appendix B, we comment on the connection between the two methods.
But let us come back to our zeroth order adiabatic ‘seed’W k =ω k(τ, M) defined at the
arbitrary mass scaleM. We can proceed straightforwardly to compute the next adiabatic order,
namelyω (2)
k . To this end, we substituteW k =ω (0)
k +ω (2)
k =ω k(τ, M) +ω (2)
k ≡ω k +ω (2)
k on both
sides of Eq. (13), where we used again the abridged notationω k forω k(τ, M), as we did in the
76

main text, Eq. (15). Now the derivative terms have to be considered, and we have

ωk +ω (2)
k
2
= Ω2
k − 1
2
ω′′
k +ω (2)′′
k
ωk +ω (2)
k
+ 3
4
 
ω′
k +ω (2)′
k
ωk +ω (2)
k
!2
.(A.2)
Using Eq. (11) for Ω 2
k and bearing in mind that now the scalar of curvatureRenters as a second
order adiabatic contribution, we can expand the above expression on both sides consistently up to
this order and we find
k2 +a 2M 2 + 2ωkω(2)
k ≃ω 2
k(m) +a 2 (ξ−1/6)R− 1
2
ω′′
k
ωk
+ 3
4
ω′2
k
ω2
k
.(A.3)
or
2ωkω(2)
k ≃a 2(m2 −M 2) +a 2 (ξ−1/6)R− 1
2
ω′′
k
ωk
+ 3
4
ω′2
k
ω2
k
.(A.4)
Finally, dividing out through 2ω k and taking into account that ∆ 2 =m 2 −M 2 we obtain
ω(2)
k =a 2 ∆2 +R(ξ−1/6)
2ωk
− ω′′
k
4ω2
k
+ 3ω′2
k
8ω3
k
,(A.5)
which is exact up to second adiabatic order. In this way we have just proven the result quoted in
the second row of Eq. (16). To compute the fourth order adiabatic termω (4)
k , we can just iterate
the above procedure usingW k =ω (0)
k +ω (2)
k +ω (4)
k on both sides of Eq. (13) and expand it while
keeping only terms up to fourth adiabatic order. Rearranging, we find
2ωkω(4)
k ≃a 2(m2 −M 2) +a 2 (ξ−1/6)R−2ω kω(2)
k −

ω(2)
k
2
− ω′′
k +ω (2)′′
k
2ωk
 
1− ω(2)
k
ωk
!
+
3

ω′2
k + 2ω′
kω(2)′
k

4ω2
k
 
1−2 ω(2)
k
ωk
! (A.6)
Next we insert the expression for the second order result (A.5) in the third term−2ω kω(2)
k on the
r.h.s.of the above expression and some cancellations take place. We obtain
2ωkω(4)
k ≃ ω′′
k
2ωk
− 3ω′2
k
4ω2
k
−

ω(2)
k
2
− ω′′
k
2ωk
+ ω(2)
k ω′′
k
2ω2
k
− ω(2)′′
k
2ωk
+ 3ω′2
k
4ω2
k
−3 ω′2
k ω(2)
k
2ω3
k
+ 3ω′
kω(2)′
k
2ω2
k
=−

ω(2)
k
2
+ ω(2)
k ω′′
k
2ω2
k
− ω(2)′′
k
2ωk
− 3ω(2)
k ω′2
k
2ω3
k
+ 3ω′
kω(2)′
k
2ω2
k
.
(A.7)
Dividing through 2ω k, we finally get the fourth order term of the adiabatic expansion:
ω(4)
k =− 1
2ωk

ω(2)
k
2
+ ω(2)
k ω′′
k
4ω3
k
− ω(2)′′
k
4ω2
k
− 3ω(2)
k ω′2
k
4ω4
k
+ 3ω′
kω(2)′
k
4ω3
k
.(A.8)
which is just the one given by the third row of Eq. (16) (q.e.d.). The adiabatic expansion can
continue with the sixth-, eighth-order terms, and so on, but calculations become more and more
77

difficult. For example, the sixth adiabatic orderω (6)
k was explicitly computed in [34] and it is
already a rather cumbersome task, especially because right next one has to use the result to
subsequently compute theh k field modes in Eq. (12) and then, of course, the EMT components
from which to derive the VED and vacuum pressure. However, let us note that the adiabatic
expansion is an asymptotic expansion, which means that its truncation is mandatory after a few
relatively low adiabatic orders, beyond which its convergence gets degraded.
B Mode expansion versus effective action method
We can see from Eq. (A.5) that the sum of terms ∆ 2 +R(ξ−1/6) behaves effectively as a block
of adiabatic order 2 sinceRis indeed of order 2. This explains why the quantity ∆ 2 must also be
treated as being of second adiabatic order, although in what follows we can provide a more formal
reason17
The above result can also be motivated as follows. We start from the Green’s functionGF (x, x′)
of the fieldϕassociated with the sourced KG equation
 
□x −m 2 −ξR(x)

ϕ(x) =−J(x).(B.1)
The Green’s function then satisfies
 
□x −m 2 −ξR(x)

GF (x, x′) =−(−g(x)) −1/2 δ(4)(x−x ′).(B.2)
It is readily verified that the solution of equation (B.1) is
ϕ(x) =
ˆ
d4x′ √−g G F (x, x′)J(x ′).(B.3)
The initialization procedure indicated above by which we introduce an off-shell scaleMin the
WKB expansion translates in the Green’s function language into rewriting Eq. (B.2) as follows:
 
□x −M 2 −∆ 2 −ξR(x)

GF (x, x′) =−(−g(x)) −1/2 δ(4)(x−x ′),(B.4)
where again ∆ 2 =m 2 −M 2. If such quantity is to be used to explore the off-shell regime it must
be dealt with as being of adiabatic order higher thanM(which is of order zero). Hence ∆ 2 must
be considered as being of adiabatic order 2, which is the next-to-leading order compatible with
general covariance. Bearing in mind thatξRin (B.4) is also of adiabatic order 2, the combination
∆2 +ξRcan be treated as a block of adiabatic order 2. This adiabaticity assignment for ∆ 2 is
consistent with the WKB method outlined above. Taking into account that the adiabaticity order
of the terms must be hierarchical respected, the fact that the mass scaleMis of adiabatic order
zero whilst the special quantity ∆ 2 is of adiabatic order 2 is just what makes that the solution to
the Green’s function equation (B.4) will be different from the solution to the original (on-shell)
17The fact thatm 2 andM 2 are of zeroth adiabatic order whereas ∆ 2 ≡m 2 −M 2 is of adiabatic order 2 can
naively and very roughly be compared to the following situation: 1 and cosx, both are finite quantities forx→0
(hence of zeroth infinitesimal order), whereas their difference 1−cosx∼x 2/2 is an infinitesimal quantity of order 2.
78

equation (B.2). In fact, the adiabatic expansion of the solution to Eq. (B.4) will generate new
(∆2-dependent) terms which are genuinely distinct as compared to the adiabatic expansion of
the solution to the original Eq. (B.2). The solution of the propagator equation (B.4) using the
DeWitt-Schwinger expansion fully confirms the consistency of the two approaches, as shown in
Sec. 3.
In practice, obtaining the renormalized vacuum Lagrangian (61) from which to construct the
effective action (76) and then retrieve the vacuum EMT (77), is not difficult, but is quite laborious.
In the on-shell case, the method is described e.g. in [169–171]. But in the off-shell case, which
is crucial in our RVM approach, we have to carefully trace the corrections introduced by the
term ∆ 2 ≡m 2 −M 2. Details are given in [34]. Here we shall only indicate that to obtain
the adiabatic solution of the off-shell Green’s function equation (B.4), the calculation can be
conveniently performed in Riemann normal coordinates, up to four derivatives of the metric (hence
up to fourth adiabatic order). In these coordinates, the metric admits the following local expansion
up to 4thorder around flat spacetime [254]:
gµν(y) =ηµν − 1
3 Rµανβ yαyβ − 1
6 Rµανβ;γ yαyβyγ
+

− 1
20 Rµανβ;γδ + 2
45 RαµβλRλ
γνδ

yαyβyγyδ +. . .
(B.5)
Hereystands for the difference between the spacetime coordinatexand the source pointx ′ taken
as a reference point in normal coordinates, i.e.y=x−x ′. The various curvature tensors and their
derivatives that appear in the expansion are to be computed at the pointx=x ′ (i.e. aty= 0). A
simplification in normal coordinates is that we can raise and lower indices with the Minkowskian
metric, as easily shown from the expansion (B.5).
The solution of the off-shell propagator equation (B.4) in curved spacetime can be obtained –
not without some computation effort [34] – in the form of an adiabatic series based on counting the
number of time derivatives of the metric. The different adiabatic orders will be denotedG (i)
F (k),
and the series reads as follows:
GF (k) =G (0)
F (k) +G (1)
F (k) +G (2)
F (k) +G (3)
F (k) +G (4)
F (k) +· · ·(B.6)
Here, for convenience, we have definedG F (x, x′) = (−g(x)) 1/4 GF (x, x′). Introducing this expan-
sion in the propagator equation (B.4) one can generate a recurrent solution for the different terms.
79

Only the even adiabatic orders survive. The results, up to 4th-order, are the following:
G(0)
F (k) = 1
k2 +M 2 ,G (1)
F (k) = 0,
G(2)
F (k) =− 1
(k2 +M 2)2

ξ− 1
6

R+ ∆ 2

,
G(3)
F =− i
2

ξ− 1
6

R;α
∂
∂kα
 1
(k2 +M 2)2

,
G(4)
F = 1
3 Qαβ
∂2
∂kα∂kβ
 1
(k2 +M 2)2

+
"
ξ− 1
6
2
R2 + ∆4 + 2∆2R

ξ− 1
6

− 2
3 Qλ
λ
#
1
(k2 +M 2)3 ,
(B.7)
where we have defined
Qαβ ≡1
2

ξ− 1
6

R;αβ + 1
120 R;αβ − 1
40 Rαβ;λ λ + 1
30 RαλRλβ
− 1
60 Rκα
λ
βRκλ − 1
60 RλµκαRλµκβ.
(B.8)
We can easily recognize that the nonvanishing termsG (i)
F (k) obtained are of adiabatic orders
i= 0, ,2,4, respectively. They represent successive corrections to the propagator solution up to
4thadiabatic order. We remark that all these terms are evaluated at the off-shell scaleM.
Using standard Fourier integral formulas in normal coordinates (withky≡η αβyαkβ), e.g.
GF (x, x′) = 1
(2π)n
ˆ
dnkeikyGF (k),(B.9)
iηαβyβGF (x, x′) = 1
(2π)n
ˆ
dnkeiky ∂
∂kα
GF (k),(B.10)
we can convert the above solution in momentum space into position space. Integrating by parts
and neglecting the boundary terms, we find:
GF (x, x′) = 1
(2π)n
ˆ
dnkeiky

ˆa0(x, x′) + ˆa1(x, x′)

− ∂
∂M 2

+ˆa2(x, x′)

− ∂
∂M 2
2
+· · ·
) 1
k2 +M 2

,
(B.11)
where the various ‘bilocal coefficients’ ˆai are given by
ˆa0(x, x′) = 1,
ˆa1(x, x′) =−

ξ− 1
6

R−∆ 2 − 1
2

ξ− 1
6

R;αyα − 1
3 Qαβyαyβ,
ˆa2(x, x′) = 1
2

ξ− 1
6
2
R2 + ∆4
2 + ∆2R

ξ− 1
6

− 1
3 Qλ
λ .
(B.12)
As we can see, these coefficients receive ∆ 2-dependent corrections in our case, in contrast to the
ordinary adiabatic expansion [169–171]. The quantityQ λ
λ in the coefficient ˆa2 can be found by
80

taking the trace of (B.8):
Qλ
λ =− 1
60 Rαβγδ Rαβγδ + 1
60 RαβRαβ + 1
2

ξ− 1
5

□R .(B.13)
This expression can then be rephrased, if desired, in terms of the standar Euler density and the
square of the Weyl tensor, see Eq. (59) in the main text.
The poles in (B.11) in the different terms are understood to be shiftedM 2 →M 2 −iϵin order
to have a time ordered product. Finally, using the standard Schwinger’s proper time representation
[178, 179, 255] of the zeroth order propagator, through the following identities and corresponding
derivatives with respect to the off-shell scaleM,
(k2 +M 2 −iϵ) −1 =i
ˆ ∞
0
dse−is(k2+M2−iϵ),

− ∂
∂M 2
j
(k2 +M 2 −iϵ) −1 =i
ˆ ∞
0
(is)je−is(k2+M2−iϵ)ds ,
(B.14)
we can interchange the order of integration and perform the following Gaussian integral in mo-
mentum space first: ˆ
dnkeiky−isk2
=i
 π
is
n/2
e−σ(x,x′)/(2is) ,(B.15)
where the characteristic functionσ(x, x ′) (sometimes called the world function [170]) is one-half
of the square of the geodesic distance betweenxandx ′, that is,σ(x, x ′) = 1
2 yαyα ≡ 1
2 (x−x ′)2.
At this point we are ready to finally reach the proper time representation of the Green’s function
that solves the above propagator equation. The final result is a bilocal expansion in the pointsx
andx ′:
GF (x, x′) = iD1/2(x, x′)
(4π)n/2
ˆ ∞
0
ids e−iM2s−σ(x,x′)/(2is)
(is)n/2
×

ˆa0(x, x′) +isˆa1(x, x′) + (is)2ˆa2(x, x′) +· · ·

,
(B.16)
whereD(x, x ′) = (−g(x)) −1/2 for normal coordinates. The limitx→x ′ of the bilocal coefficients
ˆai(x, x′) above is given in Sec. 3 – cf. Eq.(58) – where we should emphasize once more that in our
case they carry the important off-shell corrections, which depend on the term ∆2 ≡m 2−M 2. These
off-shell contributions are then reflected, of course, in the final result for the vacuum effective action
and Lagrangian given in Eq.(57) of the main text. We refer the reader once again to reference [34]
for more details.
81

C The quantum vacuum in QED: is the zero-point energy ‘real’?
Quantum Mechanics first emerged in the very short period 1925-26, one hundred years ago, out
of a trilogy of founding works headed by the famous “Umdeutung paper”, a truly epoch-making
scientific contribution made by Heisenberg alone in 1925 [256], in which a reinterpretation (‘Umdeu-
tung’) was made, without recourse anymore to the kind of ‘inspired guesswork’ that characterized
the Old Quantum Theory, into the incipient matrix language of quantum mechanics 18. It was fol-
lowed by an article coauthored by Born and Jordan [259]. The last paper in the trilogy (a rather
lengthy paper of 70 pages) involved the three authors [260], and in this landmark article the foun-
dations of the quantum theory of the free electromagnetic field in the absence of any sources were
put on firm ground. Thus, remarkably enough, the genesis of the theory that has subsequently
been called Quantum Electrodynamics (QED), entailed already from the very beginning a formal
approach to the quantum vacuum. For the first time, the existence of genuine electromagnetic fluc-
tuations of the quantum vacuum was predicted from first principles. The application of the theory
to the emission and absorption of radiation was made by Dirac shortly afterwards [261] who at the
same time made significant contributions to the developments of the theoretical QED framework.
In a sense, one could say that QED bestowed physical existence on the zero-point energy (ZPE) of
the electromagnetic field. Of course, the primary notion of ZPE had already appeared in the old
Planck formulation of the quantum theory, specifically in the so-called ‘second quantum theory’
(1912) [262], but it was not taken too seriously, namely as something really measurable. The first
suggestion that there might be a measurable ZPE filling out all space was actually made four years
later by Nernst [263], in fact 10 years before the breakthrough of quantum mechanics.
Notwithstanding the support received from the formal theory of QED, the ZPE is still a rather
subtle concept whose physical reality has been repeatedly questioned and, as a matter of fact, has
not been firmly settled beyond what could be called a heuristic interpretation; hence, it deserves
further consideration. After all, there is the theory of GR, which demands a place in this story,
and there is the CCP, which is currently alive and kicking (see the Introduction); in fact, after
innumerable efforts, we are still striving hard with this mind-boggling problem involving GR and
QFT at a time [10,11,14–23]. Here we retake our discussion on zero-point energies in the context
of QED, which we initiated in Sec.2.8. Although the issues we now outline are well-known, it may
be convenient to bring them forward explicitly as they are closely related to the main theme of
this review.
For simplicity, let us place ourselves in a non-ultrarelativistic regime, hence we assume that
particle velocities satisfyv 2/c2 ≪v/c. In this way, the electromagnetic field can essentially be
discussed in terms of the electric fieldE(t,x) alone, i.e. we neglect the magnetic field acting on the
moving particle. In Sec.2.8 we recalled the notion of normal ordering, which is so frequently used in
18According to S. Weinberg [257], “...Heisenberg’s 1925 paper was pure magic”. In fact, a paper not easy to follow.
And he adds: ‘If the reader is mystified at what Heisenberg was doing, he or she is not alone’. See [258] for some
help in the detailed ‘exegesis’ of Heisenberg’ Umdeutung paper, for which he received (alone) the Nobel Prize a few
years later.
82

QED as an artificial procedure to get rid of the quantum vacuum fluctuations. These vacuum-to-
vacuum effects produce an infinite, but constant, contribution which is usually discarded using the
normal ordering ‘trick’. Now the deletion of the ZPE through normal ordering does not completely
remove the vacuum field, i.e. the free field part ofE(t,x), which we will denoteE 0(t,x). The
latter is actually necessary for the formal consistency of the theory in flat spacetime. After all,
E0(t,x) is the complementary solution of the wave equation derived from Maxwell theory; or to
be more precise in the quantum mechanical context, the homogeneous solution of the operator
Maxwell equations in the Heisenberg picture.
Let us summarize the situation. If one considers the electromagnetic field in infinite free
space, one starts solving the wave equation for the vector potentialA(t,x) for a discrete spectrum
under periodic boundary conditions in a volumeVbefore setting the continuum limit (V→ ∞).
Following standard steps, the vector potential can be decomposed into a complete basis of mode
functionsA kλ(r) =V −1/2ekλeik·r that satisfy the Helmholtz equation
∇2A(r) +k 2A(r) = 0,(C.1)
wheree kλ (λ= 1,2) is the polarization vector for each mode, withe kλ ·e kλ′ =δ λ,λ′ andk·e kλ = 0.
The mode functions are normalized
ˆ
V
d3rA∗
kλ(r)·A k′λ′(r) =δ kk′δλλ′ (C.2)
since (2π) 3δ3(k−k ′) = (2π) 3δ3(0)δkk′ =V δ kk′. These functions are, as usual, accompanied by
Fourier coefficients, which in the proces of quantization are promoted into photon creation and
annihilation operatorsa †
k,λ anda k,λ, in this case also involving the polarization indexλcompared
to the scalar field case (10). These ladder operators satisfy standard commutation relations,
[ak,λ, a†
k′,λ′] =δ 3
kk′δλλ′,[a kλ, ak′λ′] = 0.(C.3)
After appropriate normalization, one has
A(r, t) =
X
kλ
ekλ
2πℏc2
ωkV
1/2h
akλ(t)eik·r +a †
kλ(t)e−ik·r
i
.(C.4)
The corresponding electric field obtains in the standard manner from the relationE=−(1/c)∂A/∂t,
which holds in the radiation gauge without sources, and the magnetic field fromB=∇ ×A(al-
though we already said that we will neglect the latter in our considerations). Now, as we know from
the standard QED wisdom, the free electromagnetic fields resulting from (C.4) are mathematically
equivalent, frequency by frequency, to a harmonic oscillator in quantum mechanics. Thus, the
free electromagnetic field can be described by an infinite collection of quantum mechanical har-
monic oscillators. It follows that the field Hamiltonian is given by the sum over all these quantum
mechanical oscillators with all possible frequencies and polarizations:
HF =
X
kλ
ℏωk

a†
kλakλ + 1
2

=
X
kλ
ℏωk

Nkλ + 1
2

.(C.5)
83

In the above field Hamiltonian,N kλ =a †
kλakλ is the number operator counting the number of
photons with a given momentum and polarization. The state|n⟩hasnphotons:N|n⟩=n|n⟩.
One can proceed similarly with the field momentum, with the result
PF =
X
kλ
ℏk

a†
kλakλ + 1
2

=
X
kλ
ℏka †
kλ akλ =
X
kλ
ℏkN kλ .(C.6)
The above formulas nicely embody what could be naturally expected from the quantum field theory
of the free electromagnetic field, in which stationary states of the field are described by photons
with energiesϵ k =ℏω k and linear momentap k =ℏk, with|k| ≡k=ω k/c. Clearly, the vacuum
state|0⟩has no photonN kλ|0⟩= 0 but has a nonvanishing zero-point energy 1
2
P
kλ ℏωk. These
are of course, the results before normal ordering, cf. Sec. 2.8, as otherwise e.g. the ZPE term would
be absent. We want to keep it here, though, as we wish to dwell on its possible physical meaning.
As for the zero-point momentum, P
kλ
1
2 ℏk, it obviously vanishes (even without normal ordering)
because free space is isotropic and the average of the wave vectorkis simply zero.
As mentioned, the electric field for the free theory can be easily obtained from (C.4) upon
usingE=−(1/c)∂A/∂t. Noting from the commutation relations that [N, a] =−a, [N, a †] =a †,
and then using Heisenberg equations for the ladder operators,iℏ˙a= [a, H F ] =ℏω[a, N] and its
hermitian conjugate, one immediately finds ˙a=−iωaand ˙a † =iωa †. Thus,
E(r, t) =i
X
kλ
ekλ
2πℏωk
V
1/2h
akλ(t)eik·r −a †
kλ(t)e−ik·r
i
.(C.7)
To further proceed, but now in the context of a nontrivial situation with sources (charges), let
us consider a practical computational example, e.g. in models of thermal equilibrium between
oscillating dipoles and electromagnetic radiation [264], and similarly for the nonrelativistic equation
of motion of the free electron [265]. Following this approach, consider the equation of motion of a
particle of chargee, massmand natural frequencyω 0 oscillating in vacuum. The total Hamiltonian
of this system is given by the sum of the kinetic energy, elastic potential energy and electromagnetic
energy:
H= 1
2m

p− e
c A
2
+ 1
2 mω2
0x2 +H F ,(C.8)
wherep=m ˙x+ e
mAis the canonical momentum andH F is the electromagnetic field contribution
(C.5).
As stated, in the non-ultrarelativistic regime we can just concentrate on the electric field
contribution and neglect the magnetic field effects. The corresponding Heisenberg equations of
motioniℏ ˙O= [O, H] for each quantum mechanical operatorO=x,pcan be combined to give
m¨x+mω 2
0x=eE(t,x),(C.9)
where we have neglected the Lorenz force (e/c)˙x×Bexerted by the magnetic field. However, what
is the electric fieldE(t,x) on ther.h.sof (C.9)? A reasonable ansatz can be the following:
E(t) =i
X
kλ
ekλ
2πℏωk
V
1/2h
akλ(t)−a †
kλ(t)
i
,(C.10)
84

which is inspired by the free field form of Eq.(C.7), but it should be noted that the spatial depen-
dence of the field has been neglected. This approximation is valid if e.g. the equation of motion
corresponds, as previously indicated, to a linear dipole oscillator, in which one neglects spatial
variations of the field over the distance separating the particles (it is called the electric dipole
approximation). This approximation notwithstanding, the above expression for the electric field
is nontrivial since now the ladder operators are to be determined from the Heisenberg equation of
motioniℏ˙a kλ = [akλ, H] with the full Hamiltonian (C.8). Because the solution must also involve
the free case (i.e. the vacuum component) considered before, it will be possible to decompose the
electric field in (C.9) into the vacuum part and the source part, i.e.E(t,x) =E 0(t,x) +E s(t,x).
The result indeed reads as follows:
akλ(t) =a kλ(0)e−iωkt +ie
 2π
ℏωkV
1/2 ˆ t
0
dt′ekλ · ˙x(t′)eiωk(t′−t) ,(C.11)
where the first term on ther.h.s.corresponds to the free theory. Substituting this expression in
(C.10), we can finally proceed to the mentioned decomposition ofE(t,x). On the one hand, we
have the free field part or vacuum component, which stems from the first term on ther.h.sof
(C.11), and hence has the same form as (C.7) but with the ladder operators att= 0 (andr= 0):
E0(t) =i
X
kλ
ekλ
2πℏωk
V
1/2h
akλ(0)e−iωkt −a †
kλ(0)eiωkt
i
.(C.12)
As for the source part, let us note that, in this case, the source electric field is caused by the
charge acting on itself, so we expect thatE s(t,x) should coincide, in the non-ultrarelativistic limit
under consideration, with the ‘radiation reaction field’ of classical electrodynamics in the same
limit [266], viz.E RR(t,x) = 2e
3c3
...x. In fact, it is so. This result can be obtained from the second
term on ther.h.sof (C.11). RelabelingE s ≡E RR, we find
ERR(t) =− 4πe
V
X
kλ
ekλ
ˆ t
0
dt′ekλ · ˙x(t′) cosωk(t′ −t).(C.13)
To check explicitly by direct calculation that this expression gives indeed the mentioned radiation
reaction part from classical electrodynamics, we recall that the sums over modes in all these
expressions are to be understood in the mode continuum limit:
X
kλ
→ V
(2π)3
X
λ
ˆ
d3k .(C.14)
For example, the ZPE density of the free theory in the continuum limit becomes
1
V
X
kλ
1
2 ℏωk → 2
(2π)3
ˆ
d3k 1
2 ℏωk = ℏc
2π2
ˆ
dkk3 .(C.15)
after trivially integrating the solid angle. This result for the ZPE of the photons coincides, as
could be expected, with Eq. (22) for the scalar field up to an additional factor of 2 (andc= 1), as
we have two polarizations for the photon, andm= 0. We can verify the consistency of this result
85

by recomputing it directly from the free field solution (C.12), whose associated energy density (the
ZPE) is
1
4π ⟨E2
0(t)⟩=
X
kλ
X
k′λ
2πℏωk
V
1/22πℏωk′
V
1/2
⟨akλ(0)⟩a†
k′λ′(0)⟩
= 1
V
X
kλ
1
2 ℏωk ,
(C.16)
where use has been made of the commutation relations (C.3). So, we have indeed obtained the
ZPE associated with the expression ofH F in Eq. (C.5). Notice that while the VEV of the square
of the vacuum field is nonvanishing and leads to the ZPE, the VEV of the field itself is zero, of
course,⟨0|E 0(t)|0⟩= 0, as it is obvious from the fact thata k,λ|0⟩= 0 (∀k, λ). This is once more
analogous to the situation with the scalar field studied in Sec. 2.2.
Next, let us apply the continuum limit to the calculation of the radiation reaction part given
by Eq.(C.13):
ERR(t) =− 4πe
V
V
(2π)3
ˆ
d3k
X
λ
ekλ
ˆ t
0
dt′ekλ · ˙x(t′) cosωk(t′ −t).(C.17)
Decomposing ˙xon the basis
n
ˆk,e kλ
o
, where ˆk=k/kis the unit propagation vector, we can write
the discrete sum in the integrand as P
λ( ˙x·e kλ)ekλ = ˙x−( ˆk· ˙x)ˆk, and we find
ERR(t) =− e
2π2
ˆ t
0
dt′
ˆ ∞
0
dkk2 cosω k(t′ −t)
ˆ
dΩk
h
˙x(t′)−( ˆk· ˙x(t′))ˆk
i
.(C.18)
We can easily integrate over the solid angles using standard formulae, and the result does not
depend onkbut only on the modulusk=ω/c:
ERR(t) =− 4e
3πc3
ˆ t
0
dt′ ˙x(t′)
ˆ ∞
0
dω ω2 cosω(t ′ −t).(C.19)
The integral involved in the above result is UV-divergent, but this can be handled without problem
since it just amounts to mass renormalization. In fact, by explicitly separating the infinite piece,
the final result can be cast as follows, after some calculations 19:
ERR(t) = 2e
3c3
...x− δm
e ¨x,(C.20)
where the last term is the infinite part, given by
δm= 4e2
3πc3
ˆ ∞
0
dω= 4e2
3c3 δ(0).(C.21)
The UV-divergent termδmacts as a mass counterterm and can be absorbed into the initial
coefficient of ¨xin Eq. (C.9), which is to be treated as a bare mass. Then the summ+δm
becomes the new coefficient and constitutes the renormalized (observed) mass, which we call again
19Using e.g.
´ ∞
0 dω ω2 cosω(t ′ −t) =π ∂2
∂t′2 δ(t′ −t) and then integrating
´
dt′...twice by parts.
86

m, i.e. we setm+δm→m. In this way, the UV-divergent part of the self reaction radiation
field can be removed by means of the renormalization of the electron mass. As noted, this mass
renormalization procedure is also invoked in the classical radiation theory [266, 267], although it
gains plenty more significance in the QED context, of course. As promised, the final common result
is indeedE RR(t,x)→ 2e
3c3
...xafter removing the divergent term, and with the tacit understanding
that in the QED casex(t) is the Heisenberg position operator, of course. Hence, the net outcome
upon mass renormalization isE(t,x) =E 0(t,x) +E s(t,x)→E 0(t,x) + 2e
3c3
...xand the above
equation of motion (C.9) can be restated as follows:
¨x+ω 2
0x−τ ...x= e
mE0(t,x),(C.22)
where
τ≡ 2e2
3mc3 = 2r0
3c (C.23)
is a well-known fundamental time scale in classical radiation theory (of orderτ∼10 −23 sec),
which we have also expressed in terms of the classical radius of the electron (r 0 =e 2/mc2, in
Gaussian units, which we are using here, orr 0 =e 2/(4πmc2) in Heaviside-Lorentz units). As we
shall see in a moment,τplays a crucial role in what follows. Apart from the oscillatory term
ω2
0x, equation (C.22) is the so-called Abraham-Lorentz equation of motion of the electron [266].
Again, we remark that in QED this equation must be considered as an operator equation in the
Heisenberg representation. The key point for our discussion is to have the nonvanishing vacuum
field component on itsr.h.s., which, as mentioned, is the homogeneous solution of the field PDE’s,
and hence a fully legitimate contribution.
The importance of keepingE 0(t,x) alive in the equation of motion of the electron is almost
evident. For simplicity, let us consider just thez-component of Eq. (C.22) in our discussion. Let
E0z(t) be the component of the vacuum field in this direction. As advanced in Sec.2.8, failing to
includeE 0z(t) would be fatal for the internal consistency of the theory, since the radiation reaction
term, which was transferred to thel.h.s.of the equation of motion, would exponentially damp
the oscillation. This is obvious from the fact that the equation of motion without the vacuum
field reads ¨z+ω 2
0z−τ ...z= 0 . That the oscillations are damped can be seen by considering the
small-damping approximationτ ω 0 ≪1, for which ¨z≃ −ω 2
0z, thus ...z≃ −ω 2
0 ˙zand as a result the
previous equation becomes ¨z+τ ω 2
0 ˙z+ω 2
0z= 0, which is the standard equation of the damped
oscillator. Its solutions carry a damping factore − 1
2 τ ω2
0t. Therefore, in the absence of the vacuum
field, the oscillations become quickly suppressed after a timet≫(τ ω 2
0)−1.
This feature, if present in the QED description of the particle motion, would kill the quantum
commutator [z(t), p(t)] = [z(t), m˙z(t)] in the same short period of time. Here we used the canon-
ical momentump z(t) =m˙z(t) + e
m Az(t) and the equal-time commutativity of particle and field
operators, [z(t), A z(t)] = 0. If such a breaking of the commutation relations were to happen, it
would result in a blunt violation of the unitarity of quantum theory. In contrast, in the presence
of the vacuum field, the commutation relations are preserved at all times [264,265]. We can verify
this nontrivial property by formally solving the equation of motion (C.22) by means of standard
87

Fourier techniques, using the explicit form of the vacuum field (C.12) in the continuum limit and
with the help of the commutation relations (C.3). The following exact result emerges after some
calculations, valid∀t:
[z(t), p(t)] =
 iℏe2
2π2mc3
 8π
3
 ˆ ∞
0
dω ω4
(ω2 −ω 2
0)2 +τ 2ω6 =iℏ,(C.24)
where the integral can be worked out exactly using the residue theorem and recalling thatτis
given by Eq. (C.23). However, one can better grasp the physical meaning of the result by using
again the small-damping approximation (τ ω 0 ≪1), which turns out to give the same result. In
that approximation, the integrand of (C.24) is sharply peaked atω=ω 0. After a simple change
of variable (ζ=ω 2 −ω 2
0, withdζ≃2ω 0dω) and using
´ ∞
0 = 1
2
´ ∞
−∞ since the integrand is an even
function, we get
[z(t), p(t)]≃
2iℏe2ω3
0
3πmc3
 ˆ ∞
−∞
dζ
ζ2 +τ 2ω6
0
=
2iℏe2ω3
0
3πmc3
 π
τ ω3
0

=iℏ,(C.25)
where in this case the integration is elementary. As we can see, the same result (C.24) is obtained
with a clearer physical meaning. Thus, thanks to the vacuum field, unitarity is preserved in QED,
this being true even if the ZPE of QED is retained and takes an infinite value without normal
ordering.
This implies that a charged particle in the Minkowski vacuum must always ‘feel’ the zero-
point electromagnetic field to avoid the breakdown of unitarity in QED. However, if we have to
be consistent also with GR (which is mandatory, of course), the total contribution of QED to
the vacuum energy (density) must be kept to zero so as not to induce any cosmological term in
Einstein’s equations. Otherwise, QED would bluntly contradict the assumed flatness of spacetime.
However, the vanishing of the vacuum energy may pose a serious difficulty in our understanding
of basic facts of the early history of quantum theory. Indeed, let us recall that the primeval notion
of the ZPE emerges from Planck’s ‘second quantum theory’ for the black-body radiation [262].
According to Planck, the average energy of an oscillator of frequencyωin equilibrium with radiation
at temperatureT, is the following:
Eω = ℏω
eℏω/kBT −1 + 1
2 ℏω .(C.26)
ForT→0,E ω →(1/2)ℏω. This is the zero-point energy of the oscillator, which Planck put
forward. However, the most significant limit is actually the opposite, the classical limitk BT≫ℏω
(in which the Boltzmann constantk B matters). Indeed, upon expansion of the denominator up
to second order, it yieldsE ω ≃k BT−(1/2)ℏω+ (1/2)ℏω=k BT, as can be easily checked.
The obtained result is the correct classical limit (mathematically it is equivalent to take the limit
ℏ→0 of the above formula). Therefore, the isolated ZPE term on ther.h.s.of (C.26), which is a
pure quantum effect, seems crucial to recover the expected classical result for the average energy
of an oscillator in thermal equilibrium at temperatureT. This notable observation was made not
by Planck (who was already quite skeptical even about the first limitT→0) but by Einstein
88

and Stern [268], who with this insight provided additional support to the possibility that the ZPE
could have some physical meaning. As mentioned above, a few years later Nernst [263] further
exploited the idea of ZPE by proposing that the ‘empty’ space is actually a reservoir of zero-point
electromagnetic radiation, that he quantitatively estimated at a level of an energy density of order
1023erg/cm3. In natural units, such a VED lies in the ballpark of 10 −15GeV4, which is not small
at all if we compare it with the current value of the VED (ρ vac ∼10 −47GeV4).
From different perspectives, one would like the ZPE of the quantized electromagnetic field to
be there, at least within the right order of magnitude. Whether these contributions are a reality
or not is not a settled issue. Let us note that it is not just a matter of QED considerations, as
gravity is also there and imposes a toll fee to be paid, which is, of course, to require consistency
with the spacetime geometry that is used and Einstein’s equations. For example, as previously
noted, the ZPE is frequently adduced as an explanation for the Casimir effect [269]. Recall that
for two uncharged, perfectly conducting parallel plates, there exists a force per unit area (F/A)
on the plates which is a pure quantum effect (proportional toℏ) that goes as the inverse of the
quartic power of the separationaof the plates. The (nowadays well-measured) force between the
plates is attractive and is given by
F
A =− 1
A
dE
da =−ℏc π2
240a 4 ,(C.27)
where
ϵ(a) = E(a)
V =−ℏc π2
720a 4 (C.28)
is the finite ‘binding’ energy per unit volume (V=Aa) that causes the mutual attraction of the
plates. It results from subtracting the potential energy densityU(a) in the presence of the plates
and the energy density in the absence of them,U(∞). The energy differenceϵ(a) =U(a)−U(∞)
is the work needed to bring the plates from a very large (a→ ∞) separation to a short separation
a. The two contributions are actually divergent, but the difference turns out to be a finite quantity
given by the above formulas, the final result being always the same no matter what regularization
you use to perform the calculation; see the standard literature for details, e.g. [264, 269, 270] and
references therein. The distinctive vibrational vacuum modes left from the difference ofUvalues,
can be associated to the presence of the boundaries and should be responsible for the Casimir
force. In Sec. 2.4, we traced an analogy with the vacuum energy in the universe, except that in the
universe we do not have plates. We may still have them somehow, though, through 3-dimensional
boundary effects ifK̸= 0; but even ifK= 0 the 4-dimensional curvature is there since the universe
is expanding and that spacetime curvature is associated with a (time-evolving) VED.
The quantum vacuum interpretation of the standard Casimir effect with parallel plates was
originally put forward by H. B. G. Casimir himself in 1948 [271]. It seems to work pretty well
and provides the simplest calculational approach to the above formulas. Nevertheless, it has been
repeatedly disputed that the observed Casimir force is not direct evidence of quantum vacuum
energy since other interpretations are perfectly possible, for example in terms of van der Waals
molecular forces between dielectrics, which lead exactly to the same quantitative prediction for
89

the Casimir formula [264, 270]. Such is the case of Lifshitz theory of the macroscopic molecular
forces between solids [272], or in Schwinger’s approach from source field theory [273], “where the
vacuum is regarded as truly a state with all physical properties equal to zero” [274].
Does this severe dispute mean that the ZPE notion must be abandoned in QED? It is hard
to say. The derivation of the Casimir force is so straightforward with the help of the quantum
vacuum fluctuations as compared to the other approaches that makes the ZPE almost ‘real’.
However, despite it being the most economic computational method, the existence of alternative
interpretations make the quantum vacuum approach ultimately questionable, as it could just be a
heuristic explanation. In point of fact, we should honestly recognize that there is no experimental
evidence for the reality of zero point energies in QFT without gravity [275]. This fact alone should
give us a strong hint that in order to endow the VED of physical significance we should really go
beyond flat spacetime (cf. Sec. 2.4). For example, in the context of our non-minimally coupled
scalar field calculation within the RVM, we have shown that the VED is zero in Minkowski space
(cf. Sec. 2.7). In fact, otherwise the VED calculations (31) and (44) for curved and flat spacetimes,
respectively, would not match; the latter must indeed be zero, as it must coincide with the limit
of the former whenH→0, and such a limit must also be zero:ρ vac →0.
Now a vanishing VED in Minkowski space is not synonymous of vanishing renormalized ZPE.
If we writeρ vac =ρ Λ+ZPE we can still haveρ vac = 0 at the expense of having the ZPE value
and the renormalizedρ Λ(M) value equal and with opposite signs, see Sec. 2.7. In such a scenario,
the classical limit of Planck’s equation (C.26) and the explanation of the Casimir effect could
both still rely on nonvanishing zero-point energies of the electromagnetic field. However, this
is not necessarily true in the case of the Casimir effect, because of the alternative explanations
mentioned.
That the full VED is exactly zero in QFT in Minkowski spacetime is out of question if GR
is to prevail as the correct theory of the gravitational field. Whether this still leaves room for a
nonvanishing ZPE that can help explain the aforementioned physical effects cannot be presently
asserted with certainty, unfortunately. Therefore, the physical role of the quantum vacuum in
QED is inconclusive. While it is necessary for the formal internal consistency of the theory, as we
have seen in some detail above, we cannot identify specific physical effects that are unambiguously
attributable to it at present.
In truth, the situation with standard QED and the vacuum energy is rather peculiar. For,
if we consider QED in infinite space without boundaries, the electromagnetic ZPE is constant
and infinite, but it is rendered zero after renormalization or normal ordering. If we instead set
boundaries, then finite differences of ZPE can be computed, which could be responsible for the
Casimir effect. But, as we know, not even this fact can be considered as its ultimate explanation.
On the other hand, the ZPE in the standard QED context does not have any obvious relation with
the vacuum energy in cosmology. Gravity cannot be just sensitive to the ZPE part of the VED if
the latter must be zero in flat spacetime. We may imagine ourselves doing standard QED in a local
inertial frame where we have made the artificial adjustmentρvac =ρ Λ+ZPE= 0 (cf. Sec. 2.4). This
90

is no fine tuning at all, it is nothing but a formal mathematical declaration that we are imposing
Minkowsi space in that neighborhood, and only in that neighborhood. However, at no time will
we be able to detect a single trace of vacuum energy that is responsible for any physical effect
related to cosmology since we cannot compare Minkowskian neighborhoods (tangent spaces) in
global cosmological spacetime.
As a matter of fact, standard QED cannot produce any significant contribution to the cos-
mological term, even if the electromagnetic field is formulated in curved spacetime, because the
photon is massless, so it is impossible to obtain a soft vacuum electromagnetic contribution of the
type∼m 2H2 (cf. Sec. 5). Under normal conditions, one can expect at most∼H 4 effects from
QED in cosmological spacetime, which are completely negligible in the current universe, except
for possible∼H 2 terms in chiral models with KR axions in string theory [125–127].
From the foregoing discussion, the only safe thing we can assert at this point about the role
played by the vacuum field in QED is that it must remain to ensure the internal consistency of
the theory. However, this is not tantamount to saying that the vacuum energy fluctuations of the
electromagnetic field are there. If we have to be scientifically honest, we have to admit that there
is no empirical evidence that they are ultimately responsible for the Casimir effect, and much less
that they have a definite impact on the value of Λ in cosmology – if the basic principles of QED
are to be preserved; in particular, the fundamental principle of gauge invariance. If this principle
were to be violated, nothing can prevent the existence of an effective mass termm 2
AAµAµ for the
photon field and a corresponding soft contribution∼m 2
AH2 to the vacuum energy, which would
anyway be extremely tiny; and there is no replacement for that in pure QED. It is hard to obtain
sizable soft effects∼H 2 for the current universe from standard QED alone in curved spacetime
without compromising fundamental aspects of the theory. They are not impossible [125–127], but
would lead us too far astray from the standard lore of QED 20.
Fortunately, in contexts much wider than pure QED, such as in generic GUT’s with a large
number of massive boson and fermion fields, we have seen that the ZPE can appear as a full-
fledged function of the cosmological expansion. Such is the case in our RVM calculation for a
non-minimally coupled massive scalar field in cosmological spacetime (cf. Sec. 2, particularly 2.5),
which leads to physical consequences that can be cosmologically tested [73–75]. The RVM affords
a better fit to the cosmological data than the concordance ΛCDM model – as first hinted a decade
ago in [91–97] using large sets of observational data.
In our RVM framework, a nonvanishing renormalized VED emerges as a function of the Hubble
rate and its time derivatives, which include contributions at two hierarchical levels: on the one
hand, vacuum effects of orderH 4, which can be the physical triggers of a period of inflation in the
20Another valuable attempt, not exempt however of the mentioned difficulties [276], points to VED contributions
of order∼A 2
0H2, which turn out to behave as an effective cosmological constant during the cosmic evolution. Here,
A0 is the time component of the 4-vector potentialA µ. However, this mechanism obviously relies on the hypothesis
that gauge invariance is broken at cosmological scales. It also assumes that the primordial QED quantum fluctuations
were produced during inflation at the electroweak scale, as then one has (A2
0H2)EW ∼H 4
EW ∼
 
M2
EW/mPl
4
∼10 −47
GeV4 ∼ρ 0
vac, if taking a ballpark estimate [277] of the EW scale aroundM EW ∼4×10 3 GeV.
91

early universe; and, on the other hand, soft contributionsm 2H2 ((formof order of a typical GUT
scale), which may provide an explanation of the observed dark energy in the current universe. Such
a result acquires full physical significance only in curved spacetime, as only in a curved spacetime
context the VED can be unambiguously associated with the existence of a nonvanishing Λ-term
in full consistency with Einstein’s equations.
At the end of the day, we have to admit that the possible existence of physical quantum
vacuum effects can only be meaningfully attributed to the presence of the gravitational field. In
its absence, there is no nontrivial geometry, and hence there is no consistent support from Einstein’s
equations. Intriguingly enough, the fact that the VED, and hence the Λ-term, become dynamical
quantities in the RVM context, and that any two nearby cosmic epochs display VED differences
of orderδρ vac ∝m 2
PlH2, might be the clue for an explanation of the observed Dynamical Dark
Energy [37–40] on fundamental QFT grounds.
References
[1] A. Einstein,Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allgemeinen Relativit¨ atstheorie, Sitzungsber.
K¨ onigl. Preuss. Akad. Wiss., phys.-math. Klasse VI (1917) 142.
[2] A. Einstein,Zum kosmologischen Problem der allgemeinen Relativit¨ atstheorie, Sitzungsber.
K¨ onigl. Preuss. Akad. Wiss., phys.-math. Klasse, XII, (1931) 235.
[3] E. Hubble,A relation between distance and radial velocity among extra-galactic nebulae,
Proc.Nat.Acad.Sci.15(1929) 168.
[4] Adam G. Riesset al.,Observational evidence from supernovae for an accelerating universe and
a cosmological constant, Astron.J.116(1998) 1009 [arXiv:astro-ph/9805201]; S. Perlmutter
et al.,Measurements ofΩandΛfrom 42 High Redshift Supernovae, Astrophys.J.517(1999)
565 [arXiv:astro-ph/9812133].
[5] N. Aghanimet al.(Planck Collaboration),Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters,
Astron. Astrophys.641(2020) A6 [arXiv:1807.06209].
[6] P. J. E. Peebles,Principles of physical cosmology, Princeton University Press, 1993.
[7] M.S. Turner,The Road to Precision Cosmology, Annu. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci.72(2022) 1
[arXiv:2201.04741].
[8] G. Lemaˆ ıtreEvolution of the expanding universe, Proc.Nat.Acad.Sci.,20, 1 (1934) 12.
[9] Y. Zel’dovich,The cosmological constant and the theory of elementary particles, Sov. Phys.
Ups.11(1968) 381;Cosmological constant and elementary particles, Sov. Phys. JETP. Lett.
6(1967) 3167.
[10] S. Weinberg,The Cosmological Constant Problem, Rev. Mod. Phys.,61(1989) 1.
92

[11] J. Sol` a,Cosmological constant and vacuum energy: old and new ideas, J. Phys. Conf. Ser.
453(2013) 012015 [arXiv:1306.1527].
[12] S.J. Brodsky and R. Shrock,Condensates in Quantum Chromodynamics and the Cosmological
Constant, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.108(2011) 45 [arXiv:0905.1151].
[13] S.J. Brodsky, C. Roberts, and A. Deur,Artificial dynamical effects in quantum field theory,
Nature Rev.Phys.4(2022) 7, 489.
[14] J. Sol` a Peracaula,The cosmological constant problem and running vacuum in the expanding
universe,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A380(2022) 20210182 [arXiv:2203.13757].
[15] V. Sahni and A.A. Starobinsky,The Case for a Positive Cosmological Lambda-term, Int. J.
Mod. Phys.D9(2000) 373 [astro-ph/9904398].
[16] S.M. Carroll,The Cosmological Constant, Living Rev.Rel.4(2001) 1 [astro-ph/0004075].
[17] P.J.E. Peebles and B. Ratra,The cosmological constant and dark energy, Rev. Mod. Phys.75
(2003) 559 [arXiv:astro-ph/0207347].
[18] T. Padmanabhan,Cosmological constant—the weight of the vacuum, Phys. Rept.380(2003)
235 [arXiv:hep-th/0212290].
[19] S. Nobbenhuis,Categorizing Different Approaches to the Cosmological Constant Problem,
Found.Phys.36(2006) 613 [arXiv:gr-qc/0411093].
[20] E.J. Copeland, M. Sami and S. Tsujikawa,Dynamics of dark energy, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D15
(2006) 1753 [arXiv:hep-th/0603057].
[21] I. J. R. Aitchison,Nothing’s plenty. The vacuum in modern quantum field theory. Contempo-
rary Physics50, 1 (2009) 261.
[22] F. Bauer, J. Sol` a and H. Stefancic,Dynamically avoiding fine-tuning the cosmological constant:
the ‘Relaxed Universe’, JCAP12(2010) 029 [arXiv:1006.3944];The Relaxed Universe: towards
solving the cosmological constant problem dynamically from an effective action functional of
gravity, Phys.Lett.B688(2010) 269 [arXiv:0912.0677].
[23] C.P. Burgess,The Cosmological Constant Problem: Why it’s hard to get Dark Energy from
Micro-physics, Contribution to: 100e Ecole d’Ete de Physique: Post-Planck Cosmology, 149
[arXiv:1309.4133].
[24] S. Weinberg,Anthropic Bound on the Cosmological Constant, Phys.Rev.Lett.59(1987) 2607.
[25] A.D. Dolgov,An attempt to get rid of the cosmological constant, Nuffield Workshop on the
Very Early Universe, pp 449-458. Ed. G. Gibbons, S.W. Hawking, S.T. Tiklos (Cambridge U.,
1982).
93

[26] L. Abbott,A Mechanism for Reducing the Value of the Cosmological Constant, Phys. Lett.
B150(1985) 427.
[27] T. Banks,T C P, Quantum Gravity, the Cosmological Constant and All That...,Nucl.Phys.
B249(1985) 332.
[28] L.H. Ford,Cosmological Constant Damping by Scalar Fields, Phys.Rev. D (1987) 2339.
[29] J. Sol` a,The Cosmological Constant and the Fate of the Cosmon in Weyl Conformal Gravity,
Phys. Lett. B228(1989) 317;Scale gauge symmetry and the standard model, Int.J. Mod. Phys.
A5(1990) 4225.
[30] R. D. Peccei, J. Sol` a, and C. Wetterich,Adjusting the Cosmological Constant Dynamically:
Cosmons and a New Force Weaker Than Gravity, Phys. Lett. B195(1987) 183.
[31] I. Oda,Weinberg’s no go theorem in quantum gravity, Phys.Rev.D96(2017) 124012
[arXiv:1706.05804].
[32] J. Sol` a Peracaula (invited contribution prepared for the public in Cosmoverse website):
Quantum vacuum: the cosmological constant problem,https://cosmoversetensions.eu/
learn-cosmology/quantum-vacuum-the-cosmological-constant-problem/.
[33] C. Moreno-Pulido and J. Sol` a,Running vacuum in quantum field theory in curved spacetime:
renormalizingρ vac without∼m 4 terms, Eur. Phys. J. C80(2020) 692. [arXiv:2005.03164].
[34] C. Moreno-Pulido and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Renormalizing the vacuum energy in cosmological
spacetime: implications for the cosmological constant problem, Eur. Phys. J. C82(2022) 551
[arXiv:2201.05827].
[35] C. Moreno-Pulido and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Equation of state of the running vacuum, Eur. Phys.
J. C82(2022) 1137 [arXiv:2207.07111].
[36] C. Moreno-Pulido, J. Sol` a Peracaula, and S. Cheraghchi,Running vacuum in QFT in FLRW
spacetime: the dynamics ofρ vac(H)from the quantized matter fields, Eur. Phys. J. C83637,
(2023) 637 [arXiv:2301.05205].
[37] A. G. Adame et al. [DESI],DESI 2024 VI cosmological constraints from the measurements of
baryon acoustic oscillations, JCAP 02 (2025), 021 [arXiv:2404.03002].
[38] R. Calder´ on et al. (DESI),DESI 2024: reconstructing dark energy using crossing statistics
with DESI DR1 BAO data, JCAP10(2024) 048, [arXiv:2405.04216].
[39] M. Abdul Karim et al. [DESI],DESI DR2 Results II Measurements of Baryon Acoustic Os-
cillations and Cosmological Constraints, Phys.Rev.D112(2025) 083515 [arXiv:2503.14738].
[40] K. Lodha et al. (DESI),Extended dark energy analysis using DESI DR2 BAO measurements,
Phys. Rev. D112(2025) 083511, [arXiv:2503.14743].
94

[41] I. Shapiro and J. Sol` a,On the scaling behavior of the cosmological constant and the possi-
ble existence of new forces and new light degrees of freedom, Phys.Lett. B475(2000) 236
[arXiv:hep-ph/9910462].
[42] I. Shapiro and J. Sol` a,Scaling behavior of the cosmological constant: Interface between quan-
tum field theory and cosmology, JHEP,02(2000) 6 [arXiv:hep-th/0012227].
[43] I.L. Shapiro, J. Sol` a and H. Stefancic,Running G and Lambda at low energies from physics at
MX: Possible cosmological and astrophysical implications, JCAP01(2005) 012 [arXiv:hep-
ph/0410095].
[44] J. Sol` a,Dark energy: A Quantum fossil from the inflationary Universe?, J. Phys. A41(2008)
164066 [arXiv:0710.4151].
[45] I. Shapiro and J. Sol` a,On the possible running of the cosmological ’constant’, Phys.Lett. B682
(2009) 105 [arXiv:0910.4925].
[46] A. Babic, B. Guberina, R. Horvat and H. Stefancic,Renormalization group running of the
cosmological constant and its implication for the Higgs boson mass in the standard model,
Phys.Rev. D65(2002) 085002 [arXiv:hep-ph/0111207].
[47] B. Guberina, R. Horvat, H. Stefancic,Renormalization group running of the cosmological
constant and the fate of the universe, Phys.Rev. D67(2003) 083001 [arXiv:hep-ph/0211184].
[48] A. Babic, B. Guberina, R. Horvat and H. Stefancic,Renormalization-group running cosmolo-
gies. A Scale-setting procedure, Phys.Rev. D71(2005) 124041 [arXiv:astro-ph/0407572].
[49] B.L. Nelson and P. Panangaden,Scaling behavior of interacting quantum fields in curved
spacetime, Phys.Rev.D25(1982) 1019.
[50] J. Sol` a,Cosmologies with a time dependent vacuum, J.Phys.Conf.Ser.283(2011) 012033
[arXiv:1102.1815].
[51] S. Tsujikawa,Quintessence: A Review, Class.Quant.Grav.30(2013) 214003
[arXiv:1304.1961].
[52] L. Amendola and S. Tsujikawa,Dark Energy: Theory and Observations, Cambridge U. Press
(2010) & (2015), and references therein.
[53] O. Avsajanishvili, G. Y. Chitov, T. Kahniashvili, S. Mandal and L. Samushia,Observational
Constraints on Dynamical Dark Energy Models, Universe10(2024) 3, 122 [arXiv:2310.16911].
[54] M. Ozer and M.O. Taha,A Model of the Universe with Time Dependent Cosmological Con-
stant Free of Cosmological Problems, Nucl.Phys.B287(1987) 776;A Solution to the Main
Cosmological Problems, Phys.Lett. B171(1986) 363.
95

[55] K. Freese, F. C. Adams, J. A. Frieman and E. Mottola,Cosmology with Decaying Vacuum
Energy, Nucl. Phys. B287(1987) 797.
[56] J. C. Carvalho, J. A. S. Lima and I. Waga,Cosmological consequences of a time-dependentΛ
term, Phys.Rev. D46(1992) 2404.
[57] J. M. Overduin and F. I. Cooperstock,Evolution of the Scale Factor with a Variable Cosmo-
logical Term, Phys.Rev.D58(1998) 043506 [arXiv:astro-ph/9805260].
[58] H. A. P. Macedo, L. S. Brito, J. F. Jesus, and M. E. S. Alves,Cosmological constraints on
Λ(t)CDM models, Eur. Phys. J. C83(2023) 1144 [arXiv:2305.18591].
[59] H. Chaudhary, R. Mandal, M. Bashir, V. Kumar Sharma and U. Debnath, Λ(t)model: Cos-
mological Implications and Dynamical System Analysis, Chin.Phys. C50(2026) 045103
[arXiv:2602.14269].
[60] O. Avsajanishvili,Background dynamics and observational constraints of flat and non-flat
Λ(t)CDM models fromH(z)and DESI DR2 BAO measurements, arXiv:2603.03468.
[61] I. Shapiro and J. Sol` a,Massive fields temper anomaly induced inflation, Phys.Lett. B530
(2002) 10 [arXiv:hep-ph/0104182].
[62] S. Basilakos, J. A. S. Lima and J. Sol` a,Expansion History with Decaying Vacuum: A Complete
Cosmological Scenario, Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc.431(2013) 923 [arXiv:1209.2802].
[63] E. L. D. Perico, J. A. S. Lima, S. Basilakos and J. Sol` a,Complete Cosmic History with a
dynamicalΛ(H)term, Phys.Rev.D 88 (2013) 063531 [arXiv:1306.0591].
[64] S. Basilakos, J. A. S. Lima and J. Sol` a,From inflation to dark energy through a dynamical
Lambda: an attempt at alleviating fundamental cosmic puzzles, Int.J.Mod.Phys.D22(2013)
1342008 [arXiv:1307.6251].
[65] J. Sol` a,Vacuum energy and cosmological evolution, AIP Conf. Proc.1606(2015) 19
[arXiv:1402.7049].
[66] J. A. S. Lima, S. Basilakos and J. Sol` a,Nonsingular Decaying Vacuum Cosmology and Entropy
Production, Gen.Rel.Grav.47(2015) 40 [arXiv:1412.5196].
[67] J. Sol` a and A. G´ omez-Valent,The¯ΛCDMcosmology: From inflation to dark energy through
runningΛ, Int. J. Mod. Phys.D 24(2015) 1541003 [arXiv:1501.03832].
[68] J. Sol` a,The cosmological constant and entropy problems: mysteries of the present with pro-
found roots in the past, Int.J.Mod.Phys.D24(2015) 12, 1544027 [arXiv:1505.05863].
[69] J. A. S. Lima, S. Basilakos and J. Sol` a,,Thermodynamical aspects of running vacuum models,
Eur.Phys.J.C76(2016) 228 [arXiv:1509.00163].
96

[70] J. Sol` a Peracaula and H. Yu,Particle and entropy production in the Running Vacuum Uni-
verse, Gen. Rel. Grav.52(2020) 17 [arXiv:1910.01638].
[71] J. Sol` a Peracaula, C. Moreno-Pulido and A. Gonz´ alez-Fuentes,Running Vacuum andH 4
Inflation, Universe11(2025) 4, 118 [arXiv:2503.01041].
[72] J. Sol` a Peracaula, C. Moreno-Pulido and A. Gonz´ alez-Fuentes,Towards a unified quantum
field theory of dark energy and inflation: unstable de Sitter vacuum and running vacuum
[arXiv:2601.05218].
[73] J. Sol` a Peracaula, A. G´ omez-Valent, J. de Cruz P´ erez, and C. Moreno-Pulido,Running
vacuum against theH 0 andσ 8 tensions, EPL134(2021) 19001 [arXiv:2102.12758].
[74] J. Sol` a Peracaula, A. Gomez-Valent, J. de Cruz P´ erez, and C. Moreno-Pulido,Running
Vacuum in the Universe: Phenomenological Status in Light of the Latest Observations, and
Its Impact on theσ 8 and H0 Tensions, Universe9(2023) no.6, 262 [arXiv:2304.11157].
[75] J. de Cruz P´ erez, A. G´ omez-Valent and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Dynamical dark energy models in
light of the latest observations, Phys.Rev.D113(2026) 083521 [arXiv:2512.20616].
[76] H. Fritzsch and J. Sol` a,Matter Non-conservation in the Universe and Dynamical Dark Energy,
Class. Quant. Grav.29(2012) 215002 [arXiv:1202.5097].
[77] H. Fritzsch and J. Sol` a,Fundamental constants and cosmic vacuum: the micro and macro
connection, Mod. Phys. Lett. A30(2015) 22, 1540034 [arXiv:1502.01411].
[78] H. Fritzsch, J. Sol` a and R. Nunes,Running vacuum in the Universe and the time variation of
the fundamental constants of Nature, Eur. Phys. J. C77no. 3 (2017) 193 [arXiv:1605.06104].
[79] C. Brans and R. H. Dicke,Mach’s principle and a relativistic theory of gravitation, Phys.Rev.
124(1961) 925.
[80] J.-P. Uzan,Varying Constants, Gravitation and Cosmology, Living Rev. Rel.14(2011) 2
[arXiv:1009.5514].
[81] T. Chiba,The Constancy of the Constants of Nature: Updates, Prog. Theor. Phys.126
(2011) 993 [arXiv:1111.0092].
[82] C. J. A. P. Martins,The status of varying constants: a review of the physics, searches and
implications, Rep. Prog. Phys.80(2017) 126902 [arXiv:1709.02923].
[83] J.-P. Uzan,Fundamental constants: from measurement to the universe, a window on gravita-
tion and cosmology, Living Rev. Rel.28(2025) 1 [arXiv:2410.07281].
[84] E. Di Valentino et al.,Cosmology Intertwined II: The Hubble Constant Tension, As-
tropart.Phys.131(2021) 102605 [arXiv:2008.11284].
97

[85] E. Di Valentino et al.,Cosmology Intertwined III:f σ 8 andS8, Astropart.Phys.131(2021)
102604 [arXiv:2008.11285].
[86] L. Perivolaropoulos and F. Skara,Challenges forΛCDM: An update, New Astron. Rev.95
(2022) 101659 [arXiv:2105.05208].
[87] E. Abdallaet al.,Cosmology intertwined: A review of the particle physics, astrophysics,
and cosmology associated with the cosmological tensions and anomaliesJHEAp34(2022)
49 [arXiv:2203.06142].
[88] S. Vagnozzi,Seven hints that early-time new physics alone is not sufficient to solve the Hubble
tensionUniverse9(2023) 393 [arXiv:2308.16628].
[89] S. Vagnozzi,New physics in light of the H0 tension: An alternative viewPhys.Rev.D102
(2020) 023518 [arXiv:1907.07569].
[90] E. Di Valentinoet al.,The CosmoVerse White Paper: Addressing observational tensions
in cosmology with systematics and fundamental physics, Phys.Dark Univ.49(2025) 101965
[arXiv:2504.01669].
[91] J. Sol` a, A. G´ omez-Valent, and J. de Cruz P´ erez,Hints of dynamical vacuum energy in the
expanding Universe, Astrophys.J.Lett.811(2015) L14 [arXiv:1506.05793].
[92] J. Sol` a, A. G´ omez-Valent, and J. de Cruz P´ erez,First evidence of running cosmic vacuum:
challenging the concordance model, Astrophys.J.836(2017) 43 [arXiv:1602.02103].
[93] J. Sol` a, J. de Cruz P´ erez, and A. G´ omez-Valent,Dynamical dark energy vs.Λ =const. in
light of observations, EPL121(2018) 39001 [arXiv:1606.00450].
[94] J. Sol` a, A. G´ omez-Valent, and J. de Cruz P´ erez,Dynamical dark energy: scalar fields and
running vacuum, Mod.Phys.Lett.A32(2017) 1750054 [arXiv:1610.08965].
[95] J. Sol` a,Cosmological constant vis-a-vis dynamical vacuum: bold challenging theΛCDM,
Int.J.Mod.Phys. A31(2016) 1630035 [arXiv:1612.02449].
[96] J. Sol` a, A. G´ omez-Valent, and J. de Cruz P´ erez,TheH0 tension in light of vacuum dynamics
in the UniversePhys. Lett.,B774(2017) 317 [arXiv:1705.06723].
[97] J. Sol` a Peracaula, J. de Cruz P´ erez, and A. Gomez-Valent,Possible signals of vacuum dy-
namics in the UniverseMon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.478(2018) 4357 [arXiv:1703.08218];
[98] J. Sol` a Peracaula, A. Gomez-Valent and J. de Cruz P´ erez,Vacuum dynamics in the Universe
versus a rigidΛ =const., Int.J.Mod.Phys.A32(2017) 19 [arXiv:1709.07451].
[99] A. Gomez-Valent and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Relaxing theσ 8-tension through running vacuum in
the Universe, EPL120(2017) 39001 [arXiv:1711.00692].
98

[100] A. Gomez-Valent and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Density perturbations for running vacuum: a suc-
cessful approach to structure formation and to theσ 8-tension, Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc.478
(2018) 126 [arXiv:1801.08501].
[101] J. Sol` a Peracaula, A. Gomez-Valent and J. de Cruz P´ erez,Signs of Dynamical Dark Energy
in Current Observations, Phys.Dark Univ.25(2019) 100311 [arXiv:1811.03505].
[102] M. Rezaei, M. Malekjani and J. Sol` a,Can dark energy be expressed as a power series of the
Hubble parameter?, Phys. Rev. D100(2019) 023539 [arXiv:1905.00100].
[103] S. Basilakos, M. Plionis and J. Sol` a,Hubble expansion and Structure Formation in Time
Varying Vacuum Models, Phys.Rev.D80(2009) 083511 [arXiv:0907.4555].
[104] S. Basilakos, M. Plionis and J. Sol` a,The spherical collapse model in time varying vacuum
cosmologies, Phys.Rev.D82(2010) 083512 [arXiv:1005.5592].
[105] J. Grande, J. Sol` a, S. Basilakos and M. Plionis,Hubble expansion and structure formation in
the ’running FLRW model’ of the cosmic evolution, JCAP08(2011) 007 [arXiv:1103.4632].
[106] A. G´ omez-Valent, J. Sol` a and S. Basilakos,Dynamical vacuum energy in the expanding Uni-
verse confronted with observations: a dedicated studyJCAP01(2015) 004 [arXiv:1409.7048].
[107] A. G´ omez-Valent and J. Sol` a,Vacuum models with a linear and a quadratic term in H:
structure formation and number counts analysisMon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc.448(2015) 2810
[arXiv:1412.3785].
[108] A. G´ omez-Valent, E. Karimkhani and J. Sol` a,Background history and cosmic perturbations
for a general system of self-conserved dynamical dark energy and matter, JCAP12(2015) 048
[arXiv:1509.03298].
[109] M. Rezaei and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Cosmographic approach to Running Vacuum dark
energy models: new constraints using BAOs and Hubble diagrams at higher redshifts,
Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc.509(2021) 2593 [arXiv:2108.06255].
[110] J. Sol` a Peracaula, A. G´ omez-Valent, J. de Cruz P´ erez, and C. Moreno-Pulido,Brans–Dicke
cosmology with aΛ-term: a possible solution toΛCDM tensionsClass.Quant.Grav. 37 (2020)
24, 245003 [arXiv:2006.04273].
[111] J. Sol` a Peracaula, A. G´ omez-Valent, J. de Cruz P´ erez, and C. Moreno-Pulido,Brans–Dicke
Gravity with a Cosmological Constant Smoothes OutΛCDM TensionsAstrophys.J.Lett.886
(2019) 1, L6 [arXiv:1909.02554].
[112] J. de Cruz P´ erez and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Running vacuum in Brans-Dicke theory: a possible
cure for theσ 8 andH 0 tensions, Phys.Dark Univ.43(2024) 101406 [arXiv:2302.04807].
99

[113] J. Sol` a Peracaula,Brans–Dicke gravity: From Higgs physics to (dynamical) dark energyInt.
J. Mod. Phys. D27(2018) 1847029 [arXiv:1805.09810].
[114] J. de Cruz P´ erez and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Brans–Dicke cosmology mimicking running vacuum,
Mod. Phys. Lett. A33(2018) 101406 [arXiv:1809.03329].
[115] J. Grande, J. Sol` a and H. Stefancic, ΛXCDM: a cosmon model solution to the cosmological
coincidence problem?, JCAP08(2006) 011 [arXiv:gr-qc/0604057];Composite dark energy:
Cosmon models with running cosmological term and gravitational coupling, Phys.Lett. B645
(2007) 236 [arXiv:gr-qc/0609083].
[116] A. G´ omez-Valent and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Phantom matter: a challenging solution to the
cosmological tensions, Astrophys.J. 975 (2024) 1, 64 [arXiv:2404.18845].
[117] A. G´ omez-Valent and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Composite Dark Energy and the Cosmological Ten-
sions, Phys.Lett.B 864 (2025) 139391 [arXiv:2412.151245].
[118] A. G´ omez-Valent and Alex Gonz´ alez-Fuentes,Effective Phantom Divide Crossing with Stan-
dard and Negative Quintessence, Phys.Lett. B872(2026) 140096 [arXiv: 2508.00621].
[119] O. Akarsu, E. Di Valentino, S. Kumar, R. C. Nunes, J. Alberto V´ azquez and A.
Yadav, Λ sCDM model: A promising scenario for alleviation of cosmological tensions,
arXiv:2307.10899.
[120] O. Akarsu, J. D. Barrow, L. A. Escamilla, J. Alberto V´ azquez,Graduated dark energy:
Observational hints of a spontaneous sign switch in the cosmological constant, Phys. Rev. D
101(2020) 063528 [arXiv:1912.08751].
[121] O. Akarsu, S. Kumar, E. ¨Oz¨ ulker, J. Alberto V´ azquez, Anita Yadav,Relaxing cosmological
tensions with a sign switching cosmological constant: Improved results with Planck, BAO, and
Pantheon data, Phys. Rev. D108(2023) 023513 [arXiv::2211.05742].
[122] N. E. Mavromatos and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Stringy-running-vacuum-model inflation: from
primordial gravitational waves and stiff axion matter to dynamical dark energyEur. Phys. J.
ST230(2021) 2077 [arXiv:2012.07971].
[123] N. E. Mavromatos and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Inflationary physics and transplanckian conjecture
in the Stringy Running-Vacuum-Model: from the phantom vacuum to the true vacuum, Eur.
Phys. J. Plus136(2021) 1152 [arXiv:2105.02659].
[124] A. G´ omez-Valent, N. E. Mavromatos, and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Stringy Running Vacuum Model
and current Tensions in CosmologyClass.Quant.Grav.41(2024) 015026 [arXiv:2305.15774].
[125] S. Basilakos, N. E. Mavromatos and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Do we Come from a Quantum
Anomaly?, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D28(2019) 1944002 [arXiv:1905.04685].
100

[126] S. Basilakos, N. E. Mavromatos and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Gravitational and Chiral Anomalies in
the Running Vacuum Universe and Matter-Antimatter Asymmetry, Phys. Rev. D101(2020)
045001 [arXiv:1907.04890].
[127] S. Basilakos, N. E. Mavromatos and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Quantum Anomalies in String-
Inspired Running Vacuum Universe: Inflation and Axion Dark Matter, Phys. Lett. B803
(2020) 135342 [arXiv:2001.03465].
[128] N. E. Mavromatos, Phil.Trans.Roy.Soc.Lond. A380(2022) 20210188Geometrical origins
of the Universe dark sector: string-inspired torsion and anomalies as seeds for inflation and
dark matter, [arXiv:2108.02152].
[129] P. Dorlis, N.E. Mavromatos and S-N, Vlachos,Condensate-Induced Inflation from Primordial
Gravitational Waves in String-Inspired Chern-Simons Gravity, Phys. Rev. D110(2024) 6,
063512 [arXiv:2403.09005].
[130] P. Dorlis, N.E. Mavromatos and S-N, Vlachos,Quantum-Ordering Ambiguities in Weak
Chern-Simons 4D Gravity and Metastability of the Condensate-Induced Inflation, Universe 11
(2025) 1 [arXiv:2411.12519].
[131] P. Dorlis, N. E. Mavromatos, S. Sarkar and S.-N. Vlachos,Superradiant Axionic Black-
Hole Clouds as Seeds for Graviton Squeezing, Phys.Rev.Lett.135(2025) 15, 151501
[arXiv:2507.01689].
[132] P. Dorlis, N. E. Mavromatos, S. Sarkar and S.-N. Vlachos,Squeezed gravitons from
superradiant axion fields around rotating black holes, Phys.Rev.D113(2026) 026023
[arXiv:2507.23475].
[133] N.E. Mavromatos and G. Panagopoulos,The most general four-derivative Unitary String
Effective Action with Torsion and Stringy-Running-Vacuum-Model Inflation: Old ideas from
a modern perspective, arXiv:2602.16076.
[134] Y-F. Cai, S. Capozziello, M. De Laurentis and E. N. Saridakis,f(T)teleparallel gravity and
cosmology, Rept.Prog.Phys.79(2016) 10, 106901 [arXiv¿1511.07586].
[135] A. Errahmani, M. Magracha, S. Dahmani, A. Bouali and T. Ouali,Emergence of running
vacuum energy inf(R, T)gravity: Observational constraints, Phys.Lett.B872(2026) 140040
[2502.18193].
[136] S Basilakos, D. Polarski and J. Sol` a,Generalizing the running vacuum energy model and
comparing with the entropic-force models, Phys.Rev. D86(2012) 043010 [arXiv:1204.4806].
[137] S. Basilakos and J. Sol` a,Entropic-force dark energy reconsidered, Phys. Rev. D90(2014)
023008 [arXiv:1402.6594].
101

[138] N. Komatsu and S. Kimura,Entropic cosmology for a generalized black-hole entropy, Phys.
Rev. D88(2013) 083534 [arXiv:1307.5949];Evolution of the universe in entropic cosmologies
via different formulations, Phys. Rev. D89(2014) 123501 [arXiv:1402.3755].
[139] M. Rezaei and J. Sol` a Peracaula,Running vacuum versus holographic dark energy: a cosmo-
graphic comparison, Eur. Phys. J. C82(2022) 765 [arXiv:2207.14250].
[140] H. Gohar,Addressing the Hubble Tension: Insights from Reversible and Irreversible Ther-
modynamic Processes, Phys.Rev.D113(2026) 063569 [arXiv:2507.05854].
[141] H. Gohar and V. Salzano,Generalized mass-to-horizon relation: A new global approach
to entropic cosmologies and its connection toΛCDM, Phys. Rev. D109, 084075 (2024)
[arXiv:2307.06239].
[142] I. Y. Park,Finite-temperature renormalization of Standard Model coupled with gravity, and
its implications for cosmology, Annals Phys.481(2025) 170134 [arXiv:2404.07335].
[143] A. Hatefi, E. Hatefi and I. Y. Park,Stochastic analysis of finite-temperature effects on cos-
mological parameters by artificial neural networks, arXiv:2505.02223.
[144] M. Dai, W. Freeman, J. Laiho, M. Schiffer and J. Unmuth-Yockey,Dynamical Dark Energy
from Lattice Quantum Gravity, Phys. Rev. D111(2025) 3, 034514 [arXiv:2408.08963].
[145] N. E. Mavromatos and J. Sol` a Peracaula,A Running Vacuum Fundamental Approach to
Modern Cosmology, Phys. Rep. in preparation.
[146] J. Collins,Renormalization, Cambridge U. Press (1984).
[147] L.S. Brown,Quantum Field Theory, Cambridge U. Press (1992).
[148] M. E. Peskin and D. V. Schroeder,An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, Addison-
Wesley (1995).
[149] E.K. Akhmedov,Vacuum energy and relativistic invariance, hep-th/0204048.
[150] G. Ossola and A. Sirlin,Considerations concerning the contributions of fundamental particles
to the vacuum energy density, Eur. Phys. J. C31(2003) 165 [arXiv:hep-ph/0305050].
[151] J. Martin,Everything You Always Wanted To Know About The Cosmological Constant Prob-
lem (But Were Afraid To Ask), Comptes Rendus Physique13(2012) 566 [arXiv:1205.3365].
[152] B.F.L. Ward,On the Running of the Cosmological Constant in Quantum General Relativity,
Mod. Phys. Lett. A25(2010) 607 [arXiv:0908.1764].
[153] J. F. Koksma and T. Prokopec,The Cosmological Constant and Lorentz Invariance of the
Vacuum State, arXiv:1105.6296.
102

[154] M. Visser,Lorentz invariance and the zero-point stress-energy tensor, Particles1(2018) 138
[arXiv:1610.07264].
[155] O. Antipin and B. Melic,Revisiting the decoupling effects in the running of the Cosmological
Constant, Eur.Phys.J. C77(2017) 583 [arXiv:1703.10967].
[156] J. F. Donoghue,Cosmological constant and the use of cutoffs, Phys. Rev. D104(2021) 045005
[arXiv:2009.00728].
[157] M. Reuter,Nonperturbative evolution equation for quantum gravity, Phys.Rev. D57(1998)
971 [arXiv:hep-th/9605030].
[158] A. Bonanno, M. Reuter,Cosmology of the Planck Era from a Renormalization Group for
Quantum Gravity, Phys.Rev.D65(2002) 043508 [arXiv:hep-th/0106133].
[159] J. F. Donoghue,A Critique of the Asymptotic Safety Program, Front.in Phys.8(2020) 56
[arXiv:1911.02967].
[160] J. F. Donoghue,DoΛ CC andGrun?, Acta Phys.Polon.B55(2025) 12, 12-A1
[arXiv:2412.08773].
[161] H. Kawai and N. Ohta,Standard Running, ‘Physical Running’, Cosmological Constant and
Newton Coupling, Phys.Lett. B868(2025) 139781 [arXiv:2505.16578].
[162] S.M. Christensen and M.J. Duff,Quantizing Gravity with a Cosmological ConstantNucl.
Phys. B170(1980) 480.
[163] J. F. Donoghue,General relativity as an effective field theory: The leading quantum correc-
tions, Phys. Rev. D50(1994) 3874 [arXiv:gr-qc/9405057].
[164] K. S. Stelle,Renormalization of Higher Derivative Quantum Gravity, Phys. Rev. D16(1977)
953.
[165] L. Buoninfante,Strict renormalizability as a paradigm for fundamental physics, JHEP07
(2025) 175 [arXiv:2504.05900].
[166] T. Jacobson,Thermodynamics of space-time: The Einstein equation of state, Phys. Rev.
Lett.75(1995) 1260 [arXiv:gr-qc/9504004].
[167] T. Padmanabhan,Gravity and the thermodynamics of horizons, Phys. Rep.406(2005) 49
[arXiv:gr-qc/0311036].
[168] T. Padmanabhan,Gravity as an emergent phenomenon: A conceptual description, AIP
Conf.Proc.939(2007) 114 [arXiv:0706.1654].
[169] N. D. Birrell and P. C. W. Davies,Quantum Fields in Curved Space, Cambridge Univ. Press,
1984.
103

[170] W. Fulling,Aspects of Quantum Field Theory in Curved Space-Time, Cambridge U. Press,
(1989).
[171] L. E. Parker and D. Toms,Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime: Quantized Fields
and Gravity. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[172] V.F. Mukhanov and S. Winitzki,Quantum Effects in Gravity, Cambridge U. Press (2007).
[173] C.-I. Kuo and L. H. Ford,Semiclassical gravity theory and quantum fluctuations, Phys. Rev.
D47(1993) 4510 [arXiv:gr-qc/9304008].
[174] I. Antoniadis, P. O. Mazur and E. Mottola,Cosmological dark energy: Prospects for a dy-
namical theory, New J.Phys.9(2007) 11 [arXiv:gr-qc/0612068].
[175] N. Bilic,Vacuum fluctuations in a supersymmetric model in FRW spacetime, Phys. Rev.
D83(2011) 105003 [arXiv:1104.1349]; N. Bilic, S. Domazet and B. Guberina,Vacuum
fluctuations of the supersymmetric field in curved background, Phys.Lett.B707(2012) 221
[arXiv:1110.2393]; N. Bilic, B. Guberina, R. Horvat, H. Nikolic and H. Stefancic,On
Cosmological Implications of Gravitational Trace Anomaly, Phys.Lett.B657(2007) 232
[arXiv:0707.3830].
[176] S. Capozziello and M. De Laurentis,Extended Theories of Gravity, Phys. Rept.509(2011)
167. [arXiv:1108.6266].
[177] E. Mottola,The Effective Theory of Gravity and Dynamical Vacuum Energy, JHEP11
(2022) 037 [arXiv:2205.04703].
[178] B.S. DeWitt,Quantum field theory in curved spacetime, Phys. Rep.19(1975) 295.
[179] L. Parker,Aspects of quantum field theory in curved spacetime: effective action and energy
momentum tensor, in: Recent Developments in Gravitation, Carg` ese 1978, ed. M. L´ evy and
S. Deser (Plenum press, New York), 219-273.
[180] C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorn and J. A. Wheeler,Gravitation, Freeman, San Francisco (1973).
[181] L.H. Ford,Cosmological Particle Production: A Review, Rept.Prog.Phys.84(2021) 11,
116901 [arXiv:2112.02444].
[182] E.W. Kolb and A.J. Long,Cosmological gravitational particle production and its implications
for cosmological relicsRev.Mod.Phys.96(2024) 4, 045005 [arXiv:2312.09042].
[183] A. Ferreiro and J. Navarro-Salas,Running couplings from adiabatic regularizationPhys. Lett.
B792(2019) 81 [arXiv 1812.05564].
[184] M. Maggiore,Zero-point quantum fluctuations and dark energy, Phys. Rev. D83(2011)
063514 [arXiv:1004.1782].
104

[185] T. S. Bunch,On renormalisation of the quantum stress tensor in curved space-time by di-
mensional regularisation, J. Phys. A12(1979) 517.
[186] E.V. Gorbar and I.L. Shapiro,Renormalization group and decoupling in curved space, JHEP
02(2003) 021 [hep-ph/0210388].
[187] N. D. Birrell,The application of adiabatic regularization to calculations of cosmological in-
terest, Proc. R. Soc. London, B361(1978) 513.
[188] P. R. Anderson and L. Parker,Adiabatic regularization in closed Robertson-Walker universes,
Phys. Rev. D36(1987) 2963.
[189] G. ’t Hooft and M. J. G. Veltman,One loop divergencies in the theory of gravitation, Ann.
Inst. H. Poincare Phys. Theor. A20(1974) 69.
[190] M. H. Goroff and A. Sagnotti,Quantum gravity at two loops, Phys. Lett. B160(1985) 81;
The Ultraviolet Behavior of Einstein Gravity, Nucl.Phys. B266(1986) 709.
[191] R. Carballo-Rubio, L. J. Garay and G. Garc´ ıa-Moreno,Unimodular gravity vs general rela-
tivity: a status report, Class.Quant.Grav.39(2022) 243001 [arXiv:arXiv:2207.08499].
[192] R. Erdem,Resolution of the cosmological constant problem by unimodular gravity and signa-
ture reversal symmetry, Phys.Lett.B876(2026) 140420 [arXiv:2603.29918].
[193] B. S. DeWitt,Quantum Theory of Gravity. 2. The Manifestly Covariant Theory, Phys.Rev.
162(1967) 1195.
[194] K. Kohri and H. Matsui,Cosmological Constant Problem and Renormalized Vacuum Energy
Density in Curved Background, JCAP06(2017) 006 [arXiv:1612.08818].
[195] B.L. Nelson and P. Panangaden,Scaling behavior of semiclassical gravity, Gen.Rel.Grav.16
(1984) 625.
[196] A. Bonanno and M. Reuter,Entropy signature of the running cosmological constant, JCAP
08(2007) 024 [arXiv:0706.0174 ].
[197] A.H. Guth,The Inflationary Universe: A Possible Solution to the Horizon and Flatness
Problems, Phys. Rev. D23(1981) 347.
[198] A.D. Linde,A New Inflationary Universe Scenario: A Possible Solution of the Horizon,
Flatness, Homogeneity, Isotropy and Primordial Monopole Problems, Phys. Lett. B108(1982)
389.
[199] D. V. Nanopoulos, K. A. Olive and M. Srednicki,After Primordial Inflation, Phys.Lett.B
127(1983) 30.
105

[200] E. W. Kolb and M. S. Turner,The Early Universe, (1990), Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company.
[201] A.R. Liddle and D.H. Lyth,Cosmological Inflation and Large Scale Structure, (2000), Cam-
bridge. U. Press.
[202] R. Kallosh and A. Linde,On the Present Status of Inflationary Cosmology, Gen.Rel.Grav.
57(2025) 10, 135 [arXiv:2505.13646].
[203] P. Asimakis, S. Basilakos, N. E. Mavromatos, and E. N. Saridakis,Big bang nucleo-
synthesis constraints on higher-order modified gravities, Phys. Rev. D105(2022) 084010
[arXiv:2112.10863].
[204] N. A. Chernikov and E. A. Tagirov,Quantum theory of scalar field in de Sitter space-time,
Ann. Inst. H. Poincare9(1968) 43.
[205] P. Candelas and D.J. Raine,General Relativistic Quantum Field Theory-An Exactly Soluble
Model, Phys.Rev. D12(1975) 965.
[206] J.S. Dowker and R. Critchley,Effective Lagrangian and Energy Momentum Tensor in de
Sitter Space, Phys.Rev.D13(1976) 3224.
[207] L.S. Brown,Stress Tensor Trace Anomaly in a Gravitational Metric: Scalar Fields,
Phys.Rev. D15(1977) 1469.
[208] T. S. Bunch, P. C. W. Davies,Quantum Field Theory in de Sitter Space: Renormalization
by Point Splitting, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A360(1978) 117.
[209] L.H. Ford,Quantum instability of de Sitter spacetime, Phys.Rev. D31(1985) 710.
[210] E. Mottola,Particle Creation in de Sitter Space, Phys.Rev.D31(1985) 754.
[211] A. Dolgov and D. N. Pelliccia,Scalar field instability in de Sitter space-time, Nucl.Phys.B734
(2006) 208-219 [arXiv:hep-th/0502197].
[212] A. Y. Kamenshchik, A. A. Starobinsky and T. Vardanya,Massive scalar field in de Sitter
spacetime: a two-loop calculation and a comparison with the stochastic approach, Eur.Phys.J.
C82(2022) 4, 345 [arXiv:2109.05625];Scalar fields in the de Sitter spacetime, J.Phys.Conf.Ser.
2531(2023) 1, 012007.
[213] A. Landete, J. Navarro-Salas and F. Torrenti,Adiabatic regularization for spin-1/2 fields,
Phys.Rev.D88(2013) 061501 [arXiv:1305.7374];Adiabatic regularization and particle creation
for spin one-half fields, Phys.Rev.D89(2014) 044030 [arXiv:1311.4958].
[214] H. Firouzjahi,Cosmological constant problem on the horizon, Phys. Rev. D106(2022)
083510 [arXiv: 2201.02016].
106

[215] H. Firouzjahi and H. Sheikhahmadi,Vacuum zero point energy and its statistical correlations
in dS background, Phys. Rev. D108, (2023) 065002 [arXiv:2307.00977].
[216] E.V. Arbuzova and A.D. Dolgov,Dynamical mechanism of vacuum energy compensation,
Eur.Phys.J.C85(2025) 8, 912 [arXiv:2502.05581].
[217] C-G. Park, J. de Cruz P´ erez and B. Ratra,Using non-DESI data to confirm and strengthen
the DESI 2024 spatially-flatw 0waCDM cosmological parameterization result, Phys. Rev. D110
(2024) 123533 [arXiv:2405.00502].
[218] C-G. Park, J. de Cruz P´ erez and B. Ratra,Is thew 0waCDM cosmological parameterization
evidence for dark energy dynamics partially caused by the excess smoothing of Planck CMB
anisotropy data?, Int.J.Mod.Phys.D34(2025) 13, 2550058 [arXiv:2410.13627].
[219] J. de Cruz P´ erez, C-G. Park and B. Ratra,Is thew 0waCDM cosmological parameterization
evidence for dark energy dynamics partially caused by the excess smoothing of Planck PR4
CMB anisotropy data?, arXiv:2604.03756.
[220] A. Gonz´ alez-Fuentes and A. G´ omez-Valent,Reconstruction of dark energy and late-time
cosmic expansion using the Weighted Function Regression method, JCAP12(2025) 049
[arXiv:2506.11758].
[221] A. Gonz´ alez-Fuentes and A. G´ omez-Valent,Exploring the interplay of late-time dynamical
dark energy and new physics before recombination, arXiv:2603.26560.
[222] J. Sol` a and H. Stefancic,Effective equation of state for dark energy: mimicking quintessence
and phantom energy through a variable Lambda, Phys.Lett.B624(2005) 147 [astro-
ph/0505133].
[223] J. Sol` a and H. Stefancic,Dynamical dark energy or variable cosmological parameters?
Mod.Phys.Lett.A21(2006) 479 [astro-ph/0507110].
[224] S. Das, P. S. Corasaniti, and J. Khoury,Super-acceleration as signature of dark sector inter-
action, Phys. Rev. D73(2006) 083509 [arXiv:astro-ph/0510628].
[225] S. Basilakos and J. Sol` a,Effective equation of state for running vacuum: ‘mirage’
quintessence and phantom dark energy,Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 437, 3331 (2014),
arXiv:1307.4748 [astro-ph.CO].
[226] M. S. Turner and M. J. White,CDM models with a smooth component, Phys. Rev. D56
R4439 (1997) [arXiv:astro-ph/9701138].
[227] A.A. Starobinsky,A New Type of Isotropic Cosmological Models Without Singularity,
Phys.Lett.B91(1980) 99.
[228] P. A. M. Dirac, “The Cosmological constants,” Nature,139(1937) 323.
107

[229] P. Jordan,Die physikalischen WeltkonstantenNaturwissenschaften,25(1937) 513;The
present state of Dirac’s cosmological hypothesis, Z.Phys.157(1959) 112.
[230] G. Gamow,Electricity, Gravity, and CosmologyPhys. Rev. Lett.,19(1967) 759.
[231] M.S. Safronova, D. Budker, D. F. Jackson Kimball, and A. Derevianko,Search for New
Physics with Atoms and MoleculesRev.Mod.Phys.90(2018) 025008 [arXiv:1710.01833].
[232] G. Barontiniet al.,Measuring the stability of fundamental constants with a network of clocks,
EPJ Quant. Technol.9(2022) 12 [arXiv:2112.10618].
[233] S.D. Bass and M. Doser,Quantum sensing for particle physics, Nature Rev.Phys.6(2024)
329 [arXiv:2305.11518].
[234] J.S.M. Ginges and V.V. Flambaum,Violations of fundamental symmetries in atoms
and tests of unification theories of elementary particles, Phys. Rept.397(2004) 63
[arXiv:physics/0309054].
[235] M.T. Murphyet al.,Possible evidence for a variable fine structure constant from QSO
absorption lines: Motivations, analysis and results, Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc.327(2001)
1208 [arXiv:astro-ph/0012419]; M. T. Murphy, J. K. Webb and V. V. Flambaum,Further
evidence for a variable fine-structure constant from Keck/HIRES QSO absorption spectra,
Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc.345(2003) 609 [arXiv:astro-ph/0306483].
[236] J.K. Webbet al.,Indications of a spatial variation of the fine structure constant,
Phys.Rev.Lett.107(2011) 191101 [arXiv:1008.3907].
[237] E. Reinholdet al.,Indication of a Cosmological Variation of the Proton - Electron Mass
Ratio Based on Laboratory Measurement and Reanalysis of H(2) Spectra, Phys.Rev.Lett.,96
(2006) 151101.
[238] W. Ubachset al.,Search for a drifting proton–electron mass ratio from H 2 Rev. Mod. Phys.
88(2016) 021003 [arXiv:1511.04476].
[239] F. Dyson,A meeting with Enrico Fermi, Nature,427(2004) 297.
[240] C. Espa˜ na-Bonet, P. Ruiz-Lapuente, I.L. Shapiro and J. Sol` a,Testing the running of the
cosmological constant with Type Ia Supernovae at high z, JCAP02(2004) 006 [arXiv:hep-
ph/0311171]; I.L. Shapiro and J. Sol` a, C. Espa˜ na-Bonet and P. Ruiz-Lapuente,Variable
Cosmological Constant as a Planck Scale Effect, Phys.Lett. B574(2003) 149 [arXiv:astro-
ph/0303306].
[241] P. Wang and X. Meng,Can vacuum decay in our universe?, Class. Quant. Grav. 22 (2005)
283 [arXiv:astro-ph/0408495].
108

[242] J. S. Alcaniz and J. A. S. Lima,Interpreting Cosmological Vacuum Decay, Phys.Rev. D72
(2005) 063516 [arXiv:astro-ph/0507372].
[243] B. Guberina, R. Horvat and H. Nikolic,Dynamical dark energy with a constant vacuum
energy density, Phys.Lett.B636(2006) 80 [arXiv:astro-ph/0601598].
[244] E. T. Hanimeli, B. Lamine, A. Blanchard, and I. Tutusaus,Time-dependent G in Einstein’s
equations as an alternative to the cosmological constantPhys.Rev. D101(2020) 063513
[arXiv:1910.08325].
[245] G. Montani, G. Maniccia, E. Fazzari and A. Melchiorri,Running Einstein constant and a
possible vacuum state of the universe, Eur.Phys.J. C85(2025) 8, 881 [arXiv:2412.14747].
[246] M. Krameret al.,Strong-Field Gravity Tests with the Double PulsarPhys. Rev. X112021
041050 [rXiv:2112.06795].
[247] X. Calmet and H. Fritzsch,The Cosmological evolution of the nucleon mass and the elec-
troweak coupling constants,” Eur.Phys.J. C24(2002) 639 [arXiv:hep-ph/0112110].
[248] A. Deur, S. J. Brodsky and G. F. de Teramond.The QCD Running Coupling, Prog. Part.
Nuc. Phys.90(2016) 1 [arXiv:1604.08082].
[249] Y. V. Stadnik and V. V. Flambaum,Can dark matter induce cosmological evolution of the
fundamental constants of Nature?, Phys. Rev. Lett.115(2015) 201301 [arXiv:1503.08540].
[250] J. Sol` a, E. Karimkhani, and A. Khodam-Mohammadi,Higgs potential from extended
Brans–Dicke theory and the time-evolution of the fundamental constantsClass. Quant. Grav.
34(2017) 02500 [arXiv:1609.00350].
[251] X. Calmet,Cosmological evolution of the Higgs boson’s vacuum expectation valueEur. Phys.
J. C77(2017) 729 [arXiv:1707.06922].
[252] S. Chakrabarti,Cosmic variation of proton-to-electron mass ratio with an interacting Higgs
scalar field, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.,506(2021) 2518 [arXiv:2107.00543].
[253] J. Sol` a Peracaula,The dynamics of vacuum, gravity and matter: Implications on the funda-
mental constants, Int.J.Mod.Phys.A39No.09n10 (2024) 2441016 [arXiv:2308.13349].
[254] T. S. Bunch and L. Parker,Feynman Propagator in Curved Space-Time: A Momentum Space
Representation,Phys. Rev. D20(1979) 2499.
[255] J. S. Schwinger,On gauge invariance and vacuum polarization, Phys. Rev.82(1951) 664;
The Theory of quantized fields. 1Phys. Rev. 82 (1951) 914.
[256] W. Heisenberg, ¨Uber quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer
Beziehungen, Zeitschrift f¨ ur Physik33(1925) 879.
109

[257] S. Weinberg,Dreams of a Final Theory, Vintage Books, Penguin Random House, UK Lim-
ited, London (1993). (See particularly Chapter IV for these passages).
[258] I. J. R. Aitchison, D. A. MacManus and T. M. Snyder,Understanding Heisenberg’s “magical”
paper of July 1925: A new look at the calculational details, Am.J.Phys.72(2004) 11, 1370
[arXiv:quant-ph/0404009].
[259] M. Born and P. Jordan,Zur Quantenmechanik, Z. Phys.34(1925) 858.
[260] M. Born, W. Heisenberg and P. Jordan,Zur Quantenmechanik II, Z. Phys.35(1926) 557.
[261] P.A.M. Dirac,Quantum theory of emission and absorption of radiation, Proc.Roy.Soc.Lond.
A114(1927) 243.
[262] M. Planck, ¨Uber die Begr¨ undung des Gesetzes der schwarzen Strahlung, Ann.d. Phys.
37(1912) 642.
[263] W. Nernst, ¨Uber einen Versucht von quantentheoretischen Betrachtungen zur Annahme
stetiger Energie¨ anderungen zur¨ uckzukehren, Verhandl. Deut. Phys. Gen.18(1916) 83.
[264] P.W. Milonni,The Quantum Vacuum. An Introduction to Quantum Electrodynamics, Aca-
demic Press, Inc. 1994.
[265] P.W. Milonni,Radiation Reaction and the Nonrelativistic Theory of the Electron, Phys. Lett.
A82(1981) 225.
[266] J.D. Jackson,Classical Electrodynamics, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1999.
[267] K. Lechner,Classical Electrodynamics. A Modern Perspective, Springer, 2018.
[268] A. Einstein and O. Stern,Einige Argumente f¨ ur die Annahme einer molekularen Agitation
beim absoluten Nullpunkt, Annelen der Physik, bf 345 (3) (1913) 551.
[269] M. Bordag, U. Mohideen and V.M. Mostepanenko,New developments in the Casimir effect,
Phys. Rept.353(2001) 1 [arXiv:quantph/0106045].
[270] M. Bordag, G.L. Klimchitskaya, U. Mohideen and V.M. Mostepanengo,Advances in the
Casimir Effect, Oxford U. Press, 2009.
[271] H.B.G. Casimir,On the attraction between two perfectly conducting plates,
Kon.Ned.Akad.Wetensch.Proc.51(1948) 7, 793.
[272] E.M. Lifshitz,The Theory of Molecular Attractive Forces between Solids, Sov.Phys.JETP2
(1956) 73.
[273] J. Schwinger, Particles, Sources and Fields I,II, and III (Addison-Wesley).
110

[274] J. Schwinger, L. L DeRaad Jr. and K. A Milton,Casimir Effect in Dielectrics, Annals Phys.
115(1978) 1.
[275] R. L. Jaffe,The Casimir effect and the quantum vacuum, Phys.Rev. D72(2005) 021301
[arXiv:hep-th/0503158].
[276] J. Beltr´ an Jim´ enez and A. L. Maroto,Cosmological electromagnetic fields and dark energy,
JCAP03(2009) 016 [arXiv:0811.0566].
[277] Arkani-Hamed, L. J. Hall, C. Kolda and H. Murayama,A New perspective on cosmic coin-
cidence problems, Phys.Rev.Lett.85(2000) 4434 [arXiv:astro-ph/0005111].
111