Title: The quenching time and timescale distribution of z~2 quiescent galaxies from precise colour distribution analysis
Authors: Vivienne Wild, Ho-Hin Leung, Adam Carnall, Maya Skarbinski
Published: 2026-06-04
Categories: astro-ph.GA

Version June 5, 2026
Preprint typeset using L ATEX style openjournal v. 09/06/15
THE QUENCHING TIME AND TIMESCALE DISTRIBUTION OFz∼2QUIESCENT GALAXIES FROM
PRECISE COLOUR DISTRIBUTION ANALYSIS
Vivienne Wild 1∗ , Ho-Hin Leung 2, Adam Carnall 2, Maya Skarbinski 3
1School of Physics & Astronomy, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews, KY16 9SS, U.K.
2Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, EH9 3HJ, U.K.
3William H. Miller III Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD21218, U.S.A.
Version June 5, 2026
ABSTRACT
Understanding when and how galaxies quench their star formation is crucial for understanding the
dominant physical processes at play. The spectral energy distribution (SED) of galaxies encodes
significant information on their past histories: the relative importance of different physical processes
influences the observed distribution of SED shapes in the galaxy population. We use a simulation
based inference (SBI) approach to directly constrain the distribution of formation times, quenching
times and quenching timescales within the massive galaxy population atz≳2from their broad
band photometric colour distribution at1.7< z <2. We demonstrate that a simple distribution of
double power-law star formation histories accurately fits the distribution of SED shapes of galaxies
withlog 10(M ∗/M⊙)>10.3. We measure a quenched galaxy fraction of0.24±0.02, with the number
density of quenched galaxies rising rapidly 2.5Gyr after the Big Bang (z≲2.6). Galaxies must quench
rapidly to achieve the precise bimodal colour distribution: defining the quenching timescale as the
time from peak star formation rate (SFRpeak) to0.5 SFR peak, the quenching timescale distribution
has a mode at97+31
−25Myr, a median of182±16Myr and a tail to∼700Myr. To achieve full quiescence
takes a median time of∼400Myr. Comparing to direct number density measurements of quenched
galaxies atz >2the combination of recent and rapid quenching inferred from the fossil record suggests
a substantial rejuvenation and/or merger rate for quenched galaxies observed directly atz >3.5.
Keywords:galaxies: evolution – galaxies: star formation – galaxies: starburst – galaxies: stellar
content.
1.INTRODUCTION
The existence of two distinct populations of galaxies in
UV/optical colour distributions leads to one of the most
well used galaxy classification systems: red, quiescent
and blue, star-forming. Atz <1galaxies can be sepa-
rated into star-forming and quiescent systems based on a
single rest-frame optical colour bi-modality (e.g. I. Strat-
eva et al. 2001; G. Kauffmann et al. 2003; E. F. Bell et al.
2004; I. K. Baldry et al. 2004), while the bi-modality in
the galaxy population is still visible toz≲5when com-
bining two colours (e.g. R. J. Williams et al. 2009; K. E.
Whitaker et al. 2011; J. Leja et al. 2019b; K. M. L. Gould
et al. 2023; A. van der Wel et al. 2025). The evolving
galaxy stellar mass functions of star-forming and quies-
cent galaxies, now well-constrained toz∼7, tell us the
fraction of galaxies at every redshift and mass that have
haltedtheirstarformation(become“quenched”, e.g.D.J.
McLeod et al. 2021; P. Santini et al. 2021; J. R. Weaver
et al. 2023).
Increasingly wide and deep surveys allow increasingly
accurate tracing of demographic trends, which showhow
the local galaxy population was built up. However, it
is not straightforward to inferwhy. Aggregated statis-
tics such as stellar mass functions, colour-mass relations
and quenched fractions do not uniquely constrain differ-
∗vw8@st-andrews.ac.uk
ent growth and quenching pathways (e.g. R. E. Skelton
et al. 2012; T. Naab & J. P. Ostriker 2017; H. Fu et al.
2025). Additionally, the existence of high-mass quenched
systems at the highest observed redshifts challenges our
current understanding of pathways to quiescent galaxy
formation (e.g. A. C. Carnall et al. 2024; S. D. Steven-
son et al. 2026; Y. Zhang et al. 2026a; Z. Ji et al. 2026).
To make further progress on understanding why galax-
ies quench their star formation, additional constraints
must be found. These could involve e.g. the impact of
starburst or Active Galactic Nucleus (AGN) phases on
growth and quenching (e.g. Y. Zheng et al. 2020; J. J.
Davies et al. 2022; L. Bugiani et al. 2025), the compact-
ness of the morphologies or evidence for recent mergers
in recently quenched galaxies (O. Almaini et al. 2017;
D. J. Setton et al. 2022; A. Nersesian et al. 2026; Y. Ni
et al. 2025; D. T. Maltby et al. 2026, e.g.), the result-
ing chemical enrichment (H.-H. Leung et al. 2024; N. M.
Gountanis et al. 2025), the level of residual gas and star
formation following a quenching process (e.g. K. Row-
lands et al. 2015; R. Bezanson et al. 2022; L. Lin et al.
2026) or the timescales over which growth and quenching
happens (see below for references). Generally, these ad-
ditional constraints require additional, expensive obser-
vations, such as high quality rest-frame optical spectra
or deep sub-mm measurements.
The timescales over which star-formation quenching
arXiv:2606.05971v1  [astro-ph.GA]  4 Jun 2026

2V. Wild et al.
occurs directly relates to the cause of the quenching (see
K. G. Iyer et al. 2020, for a recent comprehensive sum-
maryfigure). Detailedobservationalstudiesofindividual
objects demonstrate the power of measuring timescales
for understanding why galaxies stop forming stars (A. H.
Khoram et al. 2026; H.-H. Leung et al. 2026a). Ejec-
tive AGN feedback, supernova driven winds and galac-
tic mergers are all interrelated physical processes im-
plicated by recent cosmological hydrodynamic simula-
tions as causing rapid (≲1Gyr) quenching in high mass
(≳10 10.3M⊙) galaxies (e.g. J. W. Trayford et al. 2016;
D. Nelson et al. 2018; R. J. Wright et al. 2019; Y. Ni
et al. 2025; K. G. Iyer et al. 2025). In the simplest
picture, galactic interactions and mergers are expected
to funnel gas into the centre of the galaxies, which is
used up rapidly (∼100Myr) in a burst of star forma-
tion, leading to enhanced feeding of the central super-
massive black hole and associated AGN (e.g. T. Di Mat-
teo et al. 2005; P. F. Hopkins et al. 2008). Given suf-
ficient coupling of energy from supernovae and black
hole accretion to the cold gas, both may expel gas on
timescales of 10’s of Myr1. However, the exact interplay
between each of these processes and quenching are highly
complex and difficult to untangle even within simula-
tions (F. Rodríguez Montero et al. 2019; Y. Zheng et al.
2022; J. J. Davies et al. 2022). Halo mass, black hole
mass, local environment and galaxy morphology may all
work together to provide the conditions needed to in-
duce quenching, potentially resulting in wide ranges of
quenching timescales (J. J. Davies et al. 2024).
Unfortunately, extracting star formation quenching
timescales from observations of quenched galaxies is chal-
lenging, and is typically achieved with high quality spec-
troscopic observations, which limits sample sizes as well
as accessible redshifts and galaxy masses. Although av-
erage quenching timescales can be obtained from stacks
of either observations or resulting SFHs (e.g. C. Paci-
fici et al. 2016; K. G. Iyer et al. 2025), or models that
track quenched fraction with redshift (e.g. C. Hahn et al.
2017), these cannot accurately capture the full quenching
timescale distribution because stacks and quenched frac-
tions contain no information on the speed of quenching
of individual objects, smoothing out any rapid quenching
that happens at a wide range of lookback times.
At higher redshift, observing quenched galaxies closer
to their quenching epoch leverages a greater dynamic
range in the spectral energy distributions of their stel-
lar populations: A, F and G stars have distinctly differ-
ent spectral shapes, while G, K and M stars are much
more difficult to distinguish in integrated spectra. Typ-
ically, rest-frame optical spectra with sufficient signal to
observe the stellar continuum are combined with multi-
wavelength photometry and analysed with spectral syn-
1 It is worth nothing that such short quenching timescales are
below the time sampling resolution of most hydrodynamic simula-
tions when snapshots are used to reconstruct star formation histo-
ries (J. W. Trayford et al. 2016; D. Nelson et al. 2018; R. J. Wright
et al. 2019; D. Walters et al. 2022).
thesis models to measure star formation histories, includ-
ing formation and quenching timescales (A. C. Carnall
et al. 2019b; S. Belli et al. 2019; V. Wild et al. 2020;
S. Tacchella et al. 2022; M. Slob et al. 2024; M. Park
et al. 2024; M. L. Hamadouche et al. 2026; A. Nersesian
et al. 2026; H.-H. Leung et al. 2026b; M. Skarbinski et al.
2026). A range of quenching timescales are recovered
for quiescent galaxies, depending on redshift and stellar
mass of the sample, as well as methodology. Atz∼1,
∼20−50% of massive galaxies quenched very rapidly, on
timescales of 10’s-100’s of Myr (V. Wild et al. 2016; S.
Belli et al. 2019; V. Wild et al. 2020; S. Tacchella et al.
2022). Byz∼2−3the fraction of galaxies that are
found to have quenched very rapidly increases to≳60%
(M. Skarbinski et al. 2026; M. Park et al. 2024).
As well as understanding the physical mechanisms of
star-formation quenching, the distribution of quenching
timescales is crucial for understanding the implications
of early quiescent galaxy formation. Measurement of
the full distribution of quenching times and timescales
at Cosmic Noon (1≲z≲2) would allow us to pre-
dict the number density of quiescent galaxies in the
early Universe probed by the James Webb Space Tele-
scope (JWST), where data and models show some ten-
sion (e.g. C. Schreiber et al. 2018; A. C. Carnall et al.
2023;K.M.L.Gouldetal.2023;W.M.Bakeretal.2025;
S. D. Stevenson et al. 2026). If quenching timescales of
z∼2quenchedgalaxiesarefoundtohavebeenrapidand
recent, this would imply observed high redshift quenched
galaxies are not in their final evolutionary stage and will
rejuvenate. Alternatively, the fossil record star forma-
tion histories measured at a later epoch may agree with
those from direct measurements at earlier epochs; cur-
rently small spectroscopic sample sizes make this anal-
ysis challenging (M. Park et al. 2024; Y. Zhang et al.
2026b).
In this paper we develop a new approach to measuring
the distribution of quenching times and timescales in the
galaxy population atz∼2. Rather than fitting a small
number of individual galaxies with high quality spectra,
we make use of the constraints set by the distribution of
spectral energy distribution (SED) shapes in the popu-
lation. Although each galaxy in itself provides less in-
formation than would be recoverable from a high quality
spectrum, we can include a very large number of galaxies
from photometric catalogues. The use of colour distribu-
tions to constrain quenching has been tried before by J.
Lian et al. (2016), who obtained interesting constraints
on average quenching rates fromz∼0observations.
Population level modelling is becoming increasingly pop-
ular in extragalactic astronomy, as it allows errors to be
propagated correctly into scaling relations and degenera-
cies to be broken. Hierarchical Bayesian methods are one
such approach to modelling populations, and have been
applied to e.g. integral field datacubes to understand the
detailed propagation of star formation and quenching in
recent galaxy mergers (F. R. Ditrani et al. 2024; H.-H.
Leung et al. 2026a), or scaling relations such as the SFR-

Star formation histories from colour distributions3
M* relation to accurately propagate errors and robustly
measurethescatter(L.Sandlesetal.2022). However, for
spectral fitting in particular, sampling the full likelihood
surface is slow for large numbers of data points, mod-
els with large numbers of free parameters and complex
multi-modal likelihood surfaces. A faster approach can
be Simulation Based Inference (SBI) which uses neural
networks to map the highly non-linear relationship be-
tween population model parameters and data summary
statistics via large stochastically sampled model train-
ing sets. This approach has recently been used to fit
photometric galaxy catalogues to recover e.g. redshift
distributions, evolving stellar mass functions, scaling re-
lations and average star formation histories (J. Alsing
et al. 2024; J. Li et al. 2024; G. Aufort et al. 2025; S.
Deger et al. 2026; T. Harvey et al. 2026).
In Section 2 we present the UKIDSS Ultra-deep sur-
vey data that we aim to fit. In Section 3 we develop
and test the SBI method on mock datasets. In Section
4 we present the results of fitting the model to massive
galaxies at1.7< z <2, and in Section 5 we compare our
population analysis results to traditional methods to re-
cover quenched fractions and quenching timescales, and
discuss the implications of our results for understanding
why some galaxies stop forming stars.
Throughout the paper we assume a flatΛCDM cosmol-
ogy withΩ M = 0.3,Ω Λ = 0.7and H 0 = 70km/s/cm 2.
Magnitudes are on the AB system and we assume a G.
Chabrier (2003) initial mass function (IMF). Specific star
formationrates(sSFR)arecalculatedfromtheSFRaver-
aged over the last 100Myr since the time of observation,
and the current stellar mass. Metallicities are scaled to
the defaultbagpipesvalue ofZ ⊙ = 0.02.
2.DATA
We make use of ground-based imaging data from the
the UKIRT Infrared Deep Sky Survey (UKIDSS, A.
Lawrence et al. 2007) Ultra Deep Survey (UDS) Data Re-
lease 11 (DR11)2. Despite the recent arrival of new deep
imaging from the James Webb Space Telescope, the UDS
remainsthelargestareaimagingdatasetwithopticaland
near-infrared (NIR) coverage to a depth and calibration
quality required to characterise significant numbers of
massive quenched galaxies at cosmic noon. A new analy-
sisofthesurveymasksforthisworkgivesasurveyareaof
0.60 square degrees, after masking bright stars and cross
talk and combining with optical and mid-IR imaging.
UKIRT observations provide 2′′ diameter apertureJ,H
andKobservations to5σlimiting depths of 25.4, 24.8
and 25.3 AB magnitudes respectively. Optical observa-
tions come from the Subaru XMM-Newton Deep Survey
(SXDS, H. Furusawa et al. 2008), to depths of 27.2, 27.0,
27.0 and 26.0 inV,R,i ′,z ′ (5σ, 2′′).Y-band coverage
with a depth of 23.9 comes from the VISTA-Video sur-
vey (P.I. M. Jarvis). Mid-IR coverage (IRAC 3.6µmand
4.2µm) is provided by the Spitzer UDS Legacy Program
2 https://www.nottingham.ac.uk/astronomy/UDS/index.html
−50 −25 0 25 50 75 100
SC1
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
SC2
PSB
Q
Dusty
SF
1.7< z < 2.0
log10(M ∗/M⊙) >10.3
100
101
Number of galaxies
Figure 1.The super-colour distribution of 2,745 galaxies in the
UKIDSS Deep Survey with1.7< z <2.0andlog 10(M ∗/M⊙)>
10.3, with logarithmic colour scaling indicating the number of
galaxiesineachcellasshownbythecolourbar. Regionsaredemar-
cated by dashed lines for visual purposes only and labels indicate
where quiescent (Q), star-forming (SF), dusty and post-starburst
(PSB) galaxies are found.
(SpUDS, PI. J. Dunlop) to a depth of 24.2. Photometry
was extracted within 2′′ diameter apertures at the posi-
tion of theK-band sources, with an aperture correction
applied for the IRAC 3.6µmand 4.5µmimages. Details
of the photometric redshift estimation are provided in A.
Wilkinson et al. (2021). We use spectroscopic redshifts
where available as described in V. Wild et al. (2020).
We use an optimal linear combination of weighted ob-
served fluxes, termed super-colours, to parametrise the
shapes of the spectral energy distributions (SEDs) of the
galaxies, following the method presented in V. Wild et al.
(2014). The application of the method to the UDS DR11
data release is described in V. Wild et al. (2020) and A.
Wilkinson et al. (2021) and the catalogue is available as
part of the UDS DR11 data release. Although similar
in spirit to traditional colour-colour diagrams, the rela-
tiveweightingofdifferentbandsisoptimisedtomaximise
the variance in the dataset using a Principal Compo-
nent Analysis (PCA) of model SEDs, and the observed
data is not forced to fit model SEDs unlike when deter-
mining the rest-frame fluxes required for e.g.U V Jdia-
grams (e.g. R. J. Williams et al. 2009). The method in-
cludes all photometric filters with rest-frame wavelengths
2500Å−1.5µm, with the precise set of filters used de-
pendant on the galaxy redshift. The first and second
principal component amplitudes (termed SC1 and SC2)
describe the overall red/blue colour of the SED and the
strength of the Balmer or 4000Å break respectively. Er-
rors on the super-colours account for the correlated na-
ture of the PCA eigensystem due to the gappyness of
the observed dataset (i.e. we only observe a small frac-
tion of the full SED), as well as errors on the flux values
themselves (A. J. Connolly & A. S. Szalay 1999).
The SCs are fit to a large suite of G. Bruzual & S.

4V. Wild et al.
Charlot (2003) stochastic burst models in order to deter-
mine the median posterior stellar masses of the galaxies
(V. Wild et al. 2014). Stellar masses are only used to
define the sample and therefore have little impact on the
results. However, during the analysis described below
we verified that the SC derived stellar masses correspond
closely to those determined using the star formation his-
tory and dust priors assumed in this paper, with small
scatter and no significant offset.
For this initial study, we select all 2,745 galaxies from
the UDS DR11 catalogue with1.7< z <2.0,K AB <24
andlog 10(M ∗/M⊙)>10.3. Following the completeness
calculations in A. Wilkinson et al. (2021) this results in
an approximately mass complete sample. This redshift
range is optimal because the population of star forma-
tion histories is relatively simple to model at this epoch
due to the young age of the Universe, and the photomet-
ric redshifts and super-colours are well constrained with
small errors and minimal bias due to the good coverage
of the rest-frame SED by the available broad band filters.
Future studies will extend the analysis to different mass
and redshift ranges. Fig. 1 presents the joint distribution
of the first two super-colours for the dataset, with labels
to guide the reader in their interpretation in terms of
the position of galaxies with different recent star forma-
tion histories. This interpretation has been verified with
models (V. Wild et al. 2014) and comparison to spec-
troscopy (D. T. Maltby et al. 2016; V. Wild et al. 2020).
Demarcation lines match those derived in A. Wilkinson
et al. (2021), but are for visualisation purposes only. It
is the distribution in Fig. 1 that we aim to model in this
paper: the number of galaxies as a function of SC1 and
SC2.
3.METHODS
Simulation-based inference (SBI) allows the estimation
of posterior distributions for model parameters given ob-
served data in cases where the likelihood function is an-
alytically intractable, or slow to calculate, but forward
simulations are possible. K. Cranmer et al. (2020) pro-
vide a useful and concise review of the concepts and his-
tory behind SBI. In the subsections below we provide
precise details of our method; due to the relative nov-
elty of the SBI method to the field we first provide a
high-level overview. First we require a generative model,
which maps parametersθto simulated observablesxvia
a stochastic simulator, assuming a prior distributionp(θ)
which encodes initial parameter beliefs. In the specific
case of the rest-frame UV/optical/NIR colour distribu-
tions of galaxies, we know that the number of galaxies
as a function of colour arises from the underlying dis-
tribution of star formation history shapes, alongside the
distributions of dust attenuation, stellar metallicity and
measurement errors. We can set up a prior that encodes
the range of possible star formation histories, metallic-
ities and dust properties of the galaxies. Note that we
are not modelling the properties of individual galaxies,
but rather the properties of the population, i.e. the dis-
tribution of galaxy quenching and formation times, or
distribution of quenching rates etc.3.
Once a model has been defined, a training dataset is
constructed by repeatedly sampling thepopulation pa-
rametersθfrom the prior, which determine the distri-
bution ofmodel parameters, and using these model pa-
rameters to generate mock datasetsx, yielding paired
samples(θ i, xi). In this case, the mock datasets that
we wish the model to produce are the normalised num-
ber density of galaxies in colour space. These are gen-
erated via stellar population synthesis models to create
the spectral energy distributions, and therefore colours of
mock galaxies (subsections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2), with obser-
vational errors then applied to the colours (subsection
3.1.3). We compress these image-like colour distribu-
tions into summary statistics (“data features”,x′) using
a principal component analysis (PCA, subsection 3.2.1).
A neural density estimator is then trained to learn the
highly non-linear transformations between the popula-
tion parametersθand the summary statisticsx ′, which
encapsulate the colour distributions of the galaxies. In
this work we use an amortized Neural Posterior Estima-
tion (NPE) algorithm, which is well suited to the image-
like data we aim to fit and can be applied directly to
different observations without retraining. The resulting
trained model can then be applied to observed colour dis-
tributions of galaxies, which have been compressed into
summary statistics in the same way as the models (sub-
section 3.3). High probability is assigned to population
parameters that are consistent with both the data and
the prior, resulting in a posterior distribution for the ob-
served data.
The analysis code for this work combines the open
source python packagessbito perform the inference (A.
Tejero-Cantero et al. 2020)4 andbagpipesto model
galaxy star formation histories and photometric fluxes
(A. C. Carnall et al. 2018)5. In the following sections
we describe the model for the star formation history pa-
rameters and other parameters relevant to the colour dis-
tribution of galaxies, followed by details of the inference
process in which we fit the models to the data to deter-
mine the distribution of SFH properties.
3.1.Modelling the colour distributions of galaxies
The rest-frame UV/optical/NIR colour distributions of
galaxies are determined by their star formation histories
in which we are particularly interested in this paper, as
well as their dust contents and, to a lesser extent, stel-
lar metallicities. We address the modelling of each of
these in turn in this section. Finally, we address observa-
tionalerrorswhichareanimportantpartofthemodel, as
the training datasets will not resemble the true datasets
3 While these population parameters can be helpful in deter-
mining the individual properties of galaxies (e.g. S. Thorp et al.
2024), the method is more naturally suited to problems which are
focussed on the population parameters themselves.
4 https://sbi-dev.github.io/sbi/v0.23.3/
5 https://bagpipes.readthedocs.io/en/latest/(v1.3.4)

Star formation histories from colour distributions5
model galaxy
SFHsSFR
SEDmodel
SCmodel
SCobs
µtp σtp µlog β σlog β µτ1/2 στ1/2
tp β τ1/2
µcdust
σcdust
µϵ
σϵ
µZ∗
σZ∗
tbc
AV
ϵ
Z ∗
tobs(z)
⃗ σSC
Figure 2.Graphical representation of the model used to construct the colour distribution of a population of galaxies.Population
parameters(outwith the box) describe the distributions ofmodel parameters(inside the box). Parameters that determine the star formation
history are in green (subsection 3.1.1), while “nuisance” parameters are in orange (subsection 3.1.2) and observational effects in pink
(subsection 3.1.3). For conciseness we have omitted the limits on the truncated Gaussian distributions that additionally describe the
populations; these are fixed population parameter variables and would be solid dots outwith the box (i.e. as for the dust birth cloud
timescalet bc).
without their inclusion. Fig. 2 summarises the parame-
ters in our model, with the relationships between them6.
3.1.1.Star formation histories
Star formation histories (SFHs) of galaxies can be
modelled via so-called parametric or non-parametric ap-
proaches. In the former, the SFHs are parametrised into
simple functional forms, while in the latter the SFHs
are parametrised by (usually top-hat) fractions of stars
formed in fixed or variable time bin widths. In both
cases it is important to compare posterior distributions
to those directly or indirectly provided by the priors, in
order to ensure that the data is truly constraining the
quantities of interest. For the purposes of this paper we
focus on the former, which has fewer free parameters. We
demonstrate in Section 4 that this approach adequately
describes the galaxy population at these masses and red-
shifts. We model galaxy SFHs as a double power-law
6 Created bydaft.https://docs.daft-pgm.org/en/latest/.
functional form:
SFR(t)∝
" t
tp
α
+
 t
tp
−β#−1
(1)
where SFR(t)is the star formation rate at cosmic time
t,t p controls the time at which the star formation peaks,
αcontrols the rate of the decline in SFR andβcontrols
the rate of increase. Unless explicitly noted, all times
in this paper are measured forwards from the Big Bang.
Large values ofαandβindicate fast rates of change.
The double power-law SFH has been shown previously
to fit simulated galaxy SFHs well, including the rapid
decline in SFR experienced by many quiescent galaxies
(B. Diemer et al. 2017; A. C. Carnall et al. 2018; M.
Mosleh et al. 2025; K. G. Iyer et al. 2025), although can
lead to narrower specific star formation rate distributions
for star forming galaxies than more complex SFH models
(J. Leja et al. 2019a; A. C. Carnall et al. 2019a).
As we were particularly interested in the quenching

6V. Wild et al.
T able 1
Details of the priors on the population parameters that control the distribution of model parameters. The population parametersµand
σ, alongside the allowed limits of the model parameter, describe the truncated Gaussian distribution of model parameters in any given
simulation. We assume top hat distribution functions forµandσwithin the limits given. The final column gives a description, including
unit where relevant.
population parameters
model parameter limits µ σ Descriptor
tp (0.2,4.84)a (2,4) (0.5,2) approx. SFH peak (Gyr)
log10 γ (-2,1) (-2,1) (0.1,1) log of quenching timescale (Gyr)
log10 β (-1,2) (-1,3) (0.5,2) log of SFH rise parameter
cdust (0.8,2.0) (1.2,1.5) (0.1,0.2) intercept betweenlog 10(AV /mag)andlog 10(sSFR/yr−1)
ϵ (1,3) (1,2) (0.2,2) birth cloud dust factor
Z∗ (0.5,2.5) (0.5,2) (0.2,2) stellar metallicity (Z⊙)
a:The upper limit ont p is set to1.5×t obs(z=z max)wherez max is the maximum redshift of the observed sample. This matches the
limit imposed by thebagpipesdouble power-law function. We experimented with extending the limit, but this did not alter our results.
Thus, we keep the limit for consistency with the standardbagpipesdistribution.
timescale distribution, we found it more convenient to
directly fit for a parameter related to this, rather than
the parameterαin the double power-law. We defineγ
as the time taken for the SFR to drop from the value at
t=t p to half of this value.γandαare related via:
α=
log10

4−

1 + γ
tp
−β
log10(1 + γ
tp
) .(2)
We note that whileγcan be thought of as a quenching
timescale, and has the unit of time, it is not equivalent to
other timescales used in the literature to measure galaxy
quenching becauset p can be before or after the peak
SFR; it only corresponds to the peak SFR whenαand
βare equal. Therefore, we will define other more in-
tuitive quenching timescales below, that are also more
appropriate for comparisons to other work.
As we are interested in fitting the observed distribu-
tion of SFHs, rather than individual galaxy SFHs, our
model does not directly involve the SFH parameterstp,
βandγ, but ratherpopulation parameters that describe
the distribution of each of these SFH parameters. For
simplicity we assume the model parameter distributions
are described by truncated Gaussians. Population pa-
rameters are the means and standard deviations of these
Gaussians (e.g.µ tp andσ tp) which describe the distribu-
tion of model parameter values in any given simulation.
It is these means and standard deviations that we fit
for, and we set flat priors for each of them (i.e. top hat
distribution functions). Both the population parameters
and the respective model parameters are allowed to vary
within fixed ranges, which we set via experimentation to
ensure the prior space is small enough to allow efficient
training sample generation, while large enough to allow
the true data to not be overly constrained by the priors.
The SFH population parameters and their limits are
provided in the top half of Table 1. The priors on the
population parameters directly determine the distribu-
tions of model parameters, which are illustrated in the
top row (panelsa, b, c) of Fig. 3. In order to make this
figure we generate 1000 random galaxy populations, each
containing 1000 random galaxies with the same redshift
distribution as the UDS dataset described in Section
2. The population models have population parameters
that are drawn from the top hat priors given in Table 1;
these population parameters in turn determine the trun-
cated Gaussian distributions of model parameters for the
galaxies in that particular population. In Fig. 3 we then
take the median, 16th and 84th percentiles of the dis-
tributions, thus a broad orange shaded region indicates
a wide range of possible distribution shapes allowed by
the priors. The distributions of 10 random galaxy pop-
ulations are over-plotted, to also help visualise the pos-
sible range in distribution shapes. Note that the median
shown in these plots is not in itself a distribution, this is
the median value of all the distributions at a given model
value. For all of the SFH parameters, we set permissive
priors that allow a wide range of distributions.
Takinglog 10 γas an example in panelc, the prior given
in Table 1 allowsµlogγ to vary between -2 (rapid quench-
ing) and 1 (slow quenching) andσlogγ between 0.1 (nar-
row distribution) and 1 (wide distribution). The fixed
limits then truncate the Gaussian at -2 and 1. This re-
sults in a wide range of different possible distributions for
log10 γ, from a population that predominantly quenches
slowly, on timescales of∼10Gyr, to a population that
predominantly quenches fast (timescales of∼10Myr), or
a population with a quenching time distribution that is
relatively flat inlog10 γ. This can be seen either by look-
ing at the 10 random draws from the prior, or from the
rather flat median and wide shaded areas. We set the
limits onlog 10 γto encode our prior knowledge about
likely quenching timescales, while ensuring that when we
fit the model to real data our results are not strongly
constrained by the prior assumptions.
While the model SFH parameters shown in the top row
describe the model directly, it is useful to derive further
quantities that capture the SFH of the galaxies. For
each model we calculate the specific star formation rates
(sSFR = SFR/M∗), time of formation (tform) and time of
quenching (tquench), following A. C. Carnall et al. (2018).
As per the default inbagpipes, sSFRs are calculated

Star formation histories from colour distributions7
0 2 4
tp/Gyr
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(a)
0 2
log10 β
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
(b)
−2 0
log10 γ
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0 (c)
1 2 3
ϵ
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0 (d)
1.0 1.5 2.0
cdust
0
1
2
3
(e)
1 2
Z ∗/Z⊙
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(f)
−12.5 −10.0 −7.5
log10(sSFR/yr□1)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0 (g)
0 2
tform/Gyr
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(h)
0 2
tquench/Gyr
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2 (i)Quenched galaxies only
0 2 4
AV,ISM/mag
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5 (j)
0.0 0.5 1.0
Quenched fraction
0
1
2
3
4
5
(k)
Figure 3.The priors on the distributions of model parameters
(top two rows) and derived parameters (bottom two rows) result-
ing from draws from the population priors given in Table 1. The
median and 16th-84th percentile range of the prior distributions
are shown as a thick solid line and shaded area. Permissive priors
allow a wide range of distribution shapes, and therefore relatively
flat median lines and wide percentile ranges. 10 random draws
(thin lines) further illustrate some of the range in the shapes of
parameter distributions permitted by the population priors.Top
row:t p,βandγdescribe the shape of the double power-law SFH.
Second row:ϵandc dust describe the dust attenuation,Z ∗ is the
stellarmetallicity.Third row:thespecificstarformationrate(with
plotting range limited to>−14), formation time (mass weighted
age)andquenchingtime(timewhenSFRdecreasesto<10%ofthe
average past SFR; includes simulations with>10quenched galax-
ies only).Bottom row:the amplitude of dust attenuation in theV
band, and the fraction of quenched galaxies (wheretquench < t obs).
from the SFR averaged over the last 100Myr since the
time of observation, and the current stellar mass. The
time of formation is defined as the mass-weighted age
(although is expressed as a time forward from the Big
Bang) and quantifies when the bulk of the stellar mass
is being assembled. The time of quenching,t quench, is
defined as when the SFR decreases to 10% of the average
SFR across the past history of the galaxy:
SFR(tquench) = 0.1Mformed(tquench)
tquench
(3)
where SFR andM formed are the SFR and total formed
mass at the time of quenching.
Althought quench is formally defined for all SFHs, we
follow thebagpipesconvention and measure it only
when it is smaller than the age of the Universe at the
time of observation, i.e. only for quenched galaxies at
the time of observation. A. C. Carnall et al. (2018)
notes thatt quench defined in this way is broadly equiv-
alent to a UVJ selection, as well as the common sSFR
criterium of0.2/tU(z)(wheret U(z)is the age of the Uni-
verse at the time of observation). They also note that it
is preferable to both of these criteria, as it does not de-
pend on exact filter definitions, nor mass recycling rates.
We verified that the quenched galaxies in the dataset
fitted in Section 4 havelog 10(sSFR/yr−1)<−10.28,
which is marginally more conservative than−10.27<
log10(0.2/tU(z)/yr−1)<−10.21at the redshift limits of
the dataset.
The priors on the derived SFH parameter distributions
are visualised in panelsg, h, iof Fig. 37. It is important
to remember that derived (or indirect) priors are a re-
sult of the priors on the population parameters, rather
being directly imposed by the model. In some cases indi-
rect priors can be surprisingly peaked e.g. for the sSFR
of star-forming galaxies (panelg, see also A. C. Carnall
et al. 2019a). In panelhwe see the model allows for both
predominantly early or late formation time distributions,
together with flatter distributions8. The prior distribu-
tion of quenching times of quenched galaxies (paneli)
peaks at later times in our model due to the number
of quenched galaxies naturally increasing over time in
a double power-law SFH. However, the prior includes
models where galaxies quench only>2Gyr after the Big
Bang, or models where galaxies begin to quench immedi-
ately. The final panelkplots the prior on the quenched
fraction, i.e. the fraction of galaxies withtquench < t obs,
which we see allows for a galaxy population with any-
thingfrom0to100%quenchedgalaxies. Unliketheother
distributions, panelkis a simple histogram, as each of
our randomly generated populations results in a single
value for the fraction of quenched galaxies, rather than
a distribution of properties as in the other panels.
3.1.2.Dust and metallicity
There are additional galaxy physical parameters that
impact the UV/optical/NIR colour distribution of galax-
ies for which we must fit to avoid biasing the SFH param-
eters, but in which we are less interested for our results
(so-called “nuisance” parameters). The most important
of these is dust attenuation, which we model with a D.
Calzetti et al. (2000) dust law normalised in theVband
(AV/mag). We allow the attenuation of light from stars
7 Note thattquench andt form are calculated at the point of obser-
vation, thus these distributions depend on the redshift distribution
of the galaxies in our model.
8 The apparently bimodal prior intform is artificial, and caused
by the fact that thetform parameter is calculated only up to the
time of observation. Galaxies which will in fact form a significant
fraction of their mass in the future all havetform ∼t obs.

8V. Wild et al.
younger thant bc = 10 7 years to be larger by a factor
1< ϵ <3than from old stars, i.e.ϵ= 1implies equal
amounts of dust attenuation for old and young stars,
whileϵ= 3implies three times the amount of attenu-
ation for young stars in theVband to account for their
stellar birth clouds (S. Charlot & S. M. Fall 2000). We fit
for the distribution ofϵusing truncated Gaussian priors,
as for the SFH parameters.
Dustpresentsaninterestingcomplicationformodelling
galaxycolourdistributionsasthemixingofdifferentpop-
ulations of stars with different dust quantities and ge-
ometries means that attenuation impacting the stellar
continuum varies systematically with a galaxy’s stellar
population, and therefore position in colour space (e.g.
S. Charlot & S. M. Fall 2000; V. Wild et al. 2011; J.
Chevallard et al. 2013; S. H. Price et al. 2014). To ac-
curately reproduce the colour distribution of galaxies we
must capture this mutual dependency. In order to reveal
the functional form of the tied variation that is most
appropriate to the high mass dataset being fitted, we
usedbagpipesto fit the photometry of∼300individual
galaxies in the UDS data set described in Section 2. We
assumed SFH model and priors identical to those used
in the full population model (i.e. double power-law star
formation histories, a D. Calzetti et al. 2000 dust law
and two-component dust attenuation). We found that
the data was well fit by a linear relation with sSFR, with
little additional mass or redshift dependence within the
ranges used in this paper:
log10 AV =c dust +m×log 10 sSFR(4)
whereA V is the attenuation in theVband in the inter-
stellar medium (in magnitudes), sSFR is the specific star
formation rate inyr −1, and the slope (m) and intercept
(cdust) of the relation were fitted to the median posterior
values output bybagpipes. We further found, via fitting
galaxies at a wider range of redshifts and masses, that
the slope of this relation did not vary substantially with
galaxy sample, although the intercept and scatter on the
relation did. We therefore fix the slope in our model to
m= 0.13and fit for the shape parameters that describe
the distribution of the intercept using truncated Gaus-
sian distributions. Theµ cdust of this distribution can be
taken as the true intercept of the relation, while theσcdust
can be taken as the scatter inAV around the relation.
Stellar metallicity is poorly constrained by the colours
that we use in this paper (as we will see below), but we
allow it to vary to ensure its unknown distribution is ac-
counted for in the errors on the parameters of interest.
We do not allow metallicity to vary with time (see H.-H.
Leung et al. 2024), as the impact of this is not expected
to be significant for broadband photometric colour distri-
butions. We use the defaultbagpipesmetallicity scale
ofZ ⊙ = 0.02.
The dust and metallicity population parameters and
their limits are provided in the bottom half of Table 1
andthepriorsvisualisedintermsofmodelparameterdis-
tributions (panelsd, e, f) and derivedA V distributions
(panelj) in Fig. 3 using the same random sampling as
described above. The distribution ofcdust is very tightly
constrained by the colour distribution of galaxies; after
experimentation we decided on relatively restrictive lim-
its forµ cdust andσ cdust, in order to avoid the computa-
tion of large numbers of unrealistic simulations (panel
e). The priors allow metallicity distributions which are
either predominantly sub-solar, super-solar or relatively
flat (panelf). Dust attenuation in the ISM varies pre-
dominantly between1< A V /mag<2.5(panelj), with
the spike atA V = 0caused by quiescent galaxies with
very low ISM attenuations and positivity constraint on
AV .
3.1.3.Observational effects
The final important parameters that impact the colour
distribution of galaxies are observational: the redshift
distribution and the errors on the observations. The
redshift distribution impacts the colour distribution in
two ways. Firstly, the distribution of observation time
impacts at what point we catch the galaxies in the evo-
lution of the SFHs, e.g. for declining SFHs a later dis-
tribution of observation times results in lower sSFRs for
the same distribution of SFH parameters, and therefore
shifts galaxies to lower SC1. Secondly, the super-colours
show some trends with redshift which result from dif-
ferent filters moving in and out of the rest-frame wave-
length range used, as well as different sampling of the
Balmer/4000Å break region (see Fig. 6 in V. Wild et al.
2014). For both these reasons, we build model sets with
a matching redshift distribution to the data, by stochas-
tically sampling from the observed redshift distribution
each time we build a model set.
We use the errors on the super-colours to model the
error distribution in the data. Like with dust, the SC er-
rors vary systematically with galaxy colour, and we must
therefore take this into account in our model rather than
simply ensuring a matching overall error distribution as
we do for the redshifts. In bins of SC1 we calculate
the mean and standard deviation of the errors on SC1
and SC2 in the dataset described in Section 2. However,
the distribution of errors in bins of SC1 is not perfectly
Gaussian: an error floor is observed in the data which in-
creases linearly with SC1, which we fit for usingscipy’s
cur vefitroutine. The errors are then applied to the
model SC1 and SC2 values as a Gaussian random distri-
bution with mean, variance and error floor appropriate
for the model SC1 value9.
A limitation of using the observed redshift distribution
and error properties to define the model is that the model
becomes specific to the dataset, and a new training sam-
ple must be generated for datasets with different redshift
or noise properties. This reduces flexibility, but avoids a
large number of additional free parameters and potential
for mistaking noise-driven scatter for physical scatter in
9 A feature of PCA is that it does not see Gaussian errors on
the input values, therefore it is not possible to model errors on the
SCs by including Gaussian errors on the individual input fluxes.

Star formation histories from colour distributions9
the parameters of interest. Our light-weight approach
to modelling galaxy colour distributions means that it is
inexpensive to generate new training sets with different
redshift and observed error properties, re-train the neu-
ral network, and obtain posterior distributions for a new
dataset. We therefore prefer this simpler approach com-
pared to more complete and flexible approaches which
aim to model full photometric datasets, but require a
significantly larger training set and more analysis to un-
derstand potential covariances between fitted parameters
(e.g.J.Alsingetal.2024;J.Lietal.2024;G.Aufortetal.
2025).
3.2.Building, training and fitting the model
Now that the model is described, we detail the pro-
cess of fitting it to the data. We generate 10,000 train-
ing datasets of 7,000 galaxies each by drawing stochasti-
cally from the population priors given in Table 1 and the
redshift distribution of the dataset in Section 2, which
jointly determine the distribution of SFH, metallicity
and dust parameters for the galaxies. We experimented
with different numbers of training datasets and galaxies
within them to ensure that the final results were robust.
The observed photometric fluxes for each model galaxy
are calculated using thebagpipescode, employing the
updatemethod of themodel_galaxyclass to ensure
rapid generation of the models. We changed the default
bagpipesstellar population models to the latest 2019
version (CB19) of the G. Bruzual & S. Charlot (2003,
BC03) models10, which were originally published in A.
Plat et al. (2019) and described further in S. F. Sánchez
etal.(2022). Tomatchthesenewspectralsynthesismod-
els we update the defaultcloudygrids using the 2025
cloudysoftware (C. M. Gunasekera et al. 2025), which
bagpipesuses to calculate nebular line and continuum
emission. We fix the ionisation parameter for these nebu-
lar grids tologU=−3, and verified that allowing this to
vary does not impact our results. Early on in the project
we compared the resulting SC colour distributions be-
tween the default 2016 version of the BC03 models used
inbagpipes, the CB19 models used here, BPASS (E. R.
Stanway & J. J. Eldridge 2018) and FSPS (C. Conroy
et al. 2009), finding both the CB19 and FSPS models
provided the best overall fit to the super-colour data.
To calculate the super-colours of the models, the pho-
tometric fluxes are projected onto the same super-colour
eigenbasis set as used for the data, and errors are added
to match the dataset that we are modelling. The number
of mock galaxies as a function of SC1 and SC2 is calcu-
lated employing thef ast histogrammini package 11.
We bin the super-colour values into a 50x50 density ar-
ray with−50<SC1<100and−25<SC2<35, place a
floor on the number density of 0.0001 and take thelog10
of the image to ensure both the lower and higher density
regions contribute similarly to the variance. This results
10 https://www.bruzual.org/CB19/
11 https://pypi.org/project/fast-histogram/
−20
0
20
SC2
−20
0
20
SC2
−20
0
20
SC2
−50 0 50
SC1
−20
0
20
SC2
−50 0 50
SC1
−50 0 50
SC1
−50 0 50
SC1
−50 0 50
SC1
Figure 4.The PCA components used to reduce the dimensional-
ity of the super-colour distributions. Colour scaling is logarithmic
numberdensitywithafloorat0.0001percellandeachimagescaled
individually to best visualise the patterns in each component.
in an image-like array of 2500 numbers describing the
density of galaxies in each super-colour cell. The genera-
tion of a single SC density image with 7000 galaxies takes
∼8seconds on a single core of a high-end Apple Mac,
and the generation of 10,000 models can be achieved in
a few hours on a standard HPC utilising only 24 cores.
3.2.1.Compressing the super-colour distributions
While we could apply the SBI method to the full SC
image array, this is not efficient as much of the array con-
tains empty space, as well as shot noise in the outer re-
gions where the colour space is poorly sampled (in mod-
els and data alike). Our aim is to achieve a method
that does not take up unnecessary amounts of comput-
ing power, therefore we compress the density arrays us-
ing a principal component analysis (PCA). While other
more complex methods are available that may result in
fewer final summary statistics describing the colour dis-
tribution (e.g. convolutional neural network [CNN] em-
bedding nets, as demonstrated in thesbipackage docu-
mentation), the images we are fitting here are not com-
plex, and the simplicity of the easily visualisable PCA
method outweighed any additional benefits of more ad-
vanced methods.
We use thescikit learnPCA package 12 to reduce
the dimensionality of the 50x50 image-like supercolour
arrays into 20 PCA components. Fig. 4 presents these
components, which explain 99.9% of the variance in the
training image arrays. The number of components was
decided on by visually inspecting the components to en-
sure they still had recognisable features, alongside plot-
ting the explained variance vs. component number which
drops rapidly for low component numbers and then flat-
tens off at around 20 for this model set. We also experi-
mented with simulations of star formation histories that
12 https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.decomposition.PCA.html

10V. Wild et al.
−20
0
20
SC2
−20
0
20
SC2
−20
0
20
SC2
−20
0
20
SC2
−20
0
20
SC2
−20
0
20
SC2
−50 0 50
SC1
−20
0
20
SC2
−50 0 50
SC1
−50 0 50
SC1
−50 0 50
SC1
Figure 5.Example model super-colour distributions drawn from
the prior population parameters, with their PCA reconstructions
to the right of each draw. The colour scaling is logarithmic number
density with a floor at 0.0001 per cell for the PCA reconstructions.
We see that the colour distributions vary widely between the dif-
ferent models extracted from the prior population parameters, and
the PCA reconstructions capture the wide range of model colour
distributions very well.
were outwith the prior model distribution, and found
that the 20 component PCA was still able to produce
an accurate image compression. This is important, as
we do not want the image compression step to inadver-
tently introduce model-data mismatch. The final results
are not dependent on the exact number of components
used, and the appropriate number of components will
always depend on the complexity of the model.
Although it is not necessary to interpret these compo-
nents, they do provide some insight into the main regions
of SC space that vary between models in our training
sample. The first component in the top left of Fig. 4 al-
terstherelativefractionofquiescent(leftbranch)tostar-
forming (right branch) galaxies; the second component
alters the age and dust distribution in the star-forming
population from older / high dust (more galaxies on the
left) to younger / low dust (more galaxies on the right);
the third alters the importance of starbursts and associ-
ated rapid quenching which introduce more galaxies at
low and high SC2. The final row demonstrates the key
limitation of PCA - each component must be orthogonal
to all others, which introduces interference-like patterns
into the components. This does not impact the abil-
ity of PCA to reconstruct images, but rather makes the
components of limited use for physical interpretation, a
problem common to many data compression methods.
Fig. 5 presents example super-colour distributions
drawn from the model prior, alongside their PCA com-
pressed images. This demonstrates the ability of the
20 PCA components to capture the full diversity of the
super-colour distributions in the training set, while re-
ducing dimensionality and shot noise at the edges of the
distribution. Thesesimulationscoverthefullrangeofthe
model prior, and we can see how substantially the colour
distribution of galaxies can change depending on the dis-
tribution of SFHs, dust and metallicity. We will return
to this point in Section 5 when we look at the sensitiv-
ity of the colour distribution to parameters of particular
interest in this paper.
3.3.Fitting the model to data (inference)
The next stage is to train the neural density estimator
to learn the association between the 20 PCA amplitudes
that describe each 50x50 super-colour image, and the
underlying population parameters that were used to cre-
ate it. We input the training set of model parameters
and PCA amplitudes into the neural density estimator,
which takes only∼1minute to learn the associations. .
Given a new observation (either a new mock, or a real
dataset), we can then extract the posterior from the neu-
ral posterior estimation, and sample from this posterior
to obtain the constraints on the model and derived pa-
rameters that we are interested in. Typically we draw
1000 samples which takes around one second. In the
following subsection we demonstrate this process with a
mock dataset.
3.4.Mock parameter recovery tests
We draw a new mock dataset from the prior distribu-
tion and use the method described above to recover its
input parameters. Fig. 6 shows the mock dataset, along-
sidethePCAcompressedimageand6imagesdrawnfrom
the posterior. When we compare the images drawn from
the posterior to the wide range of super-colour distribu-
tions allowed by the prior in Fig. 5, it is clear that the
near-identical images extracted by the SBI in the pos-
terior sampling demonstrates that the input data was
correctly fit. We calculate the reducedχ2
ν between the
mock and posterior models to be∼0.7. This assumes
Poisson errors on both mock and training datasets and
that each cell is independent, which is not exactly correct
due to the noise on the SC values leading to aχ2
ν <1.
The resulting corner plot constraints on the population
parameters is shown in Appendix Fig. A1.

Star formation histories from colour distributions11
−20
0
20
SC2
Mock data
 PCA reconstruction
 Posterior sample
 Posterior sample
−50 0 50
SC1
−20
0
20
SC2
Posterior sample
−50 0 50
SC1
Posterior sample
−50 0 50
SC1
Posterior sample
−50 0 50
SC1
Posterior sample
Figure 6.The input mock super-colour distribution (top left),
PCA compressed image (top second from left) and 6 samples from
the fitted posterior. We can see that all the posterior samples look
similar to the input mock. Compared to the wide range of colour
distributions allowed by the prior (Fig. 5) this demonstrates that
the SBI has correctly fitted the data.
To visualise the ability of the SC distribution to con-
strain each of the model population parameters over the
full prior space, we generate 500 new models - a test
dataset. We then fit these 500 models to extract the pos-
terior distributions for each of the parameters and calcu-
late the posterior median value minus the input value for
each population parameter. The resulting distributions
of differences between true and fitted values are shown in
Appendix Fig. A2. Both the result for the single mock
and these distributions demonstrate that the distribu-
tion of dust attenuation (µcdust andσ cdust), quenching
timescale distribution (µγ andσ γ) and mean of the dou-
blepower-lawpeaktime(µ tp)arebestconstrainedbythe
observed distribution of super-colours among the phys-
ical properties. Parameters that are poorly constrained
are the width of the distribution of the SFH increase rate
σlogβ, the width of the metallicity distributionσZ∗ and
the distribution of the birth-cloud to ISM dust ratio (µϵ
andσ ϵ). The limited ability of broad band photometry
to recover metallicities is well known (e.g. C. M. Cheng
et al. 2025). Similarly the fraction of dust in birth clouds
requires spectroscopic observations to constrain well (e.g.
E. da Cunha et al. 2008). The difficulty in recovering the
distribution of the rising SFH rates is related to the well
known “outshining” problem in SED analysis, where the
brighter younger stellar populations make it difficult to
obtain detailed information about the fainter older pop-
ulations (see e.g. D. Narayanan et al. 2024, for a recent
study).
Improved data, such as spectroscopy, will be able to
constrain these parameters better. This section demon-
strates the sort of information that can be reliably ex-
tracted from the broad-band SED distributions of galax-
ies, and we use this to focus our results and discussion
below.
4.RESULTS
We apply the same super-colour image creation and
PCA image compression to the UDS dataset described
in Section 2 to generate the 20 summary statistics used
todescribeitscolourdistribution. Weprovidethesesum-
mary statistics to the neural posterior estimation to cal-
T able 2
Median, 16th and 84th percentile values of the population model
parameters fitted to the super-colour distribution of galaxies in
the UDS with1.7< z <2.0andlog 10(M ∗/M⊙)>10.3.
Parameter 16th median 84th
µtp 3.44 3.53 3.61
σtp 0.63 0.71 0.81
µlogβ -0.15 0.24 0.53
σlogβ 1.11 1.41 1.68
µlogγ -1.01 -0.93 -0.84
σlogγ 0.36 0.45 0.55
µϵ 1.49 1.73 1.89
σϵ 0.78 1.27 1.67
µcdust 1.27 1.28 1.29
σcdust 0.14 0.15 0.15
µZ∗ 0.97 1.20 1.46
σZ∗ 0.47 0.78 1.19
culate the posterior for this dataset. We then draw 1000
samples from the posterior population model to deter-
mine the posterior model and derived parameters.
4.1.Super-colour distributions and residuals
In Fig. 7 we show the super-colour distribution of the
data in the top left, and PCA reconstruction second from
left. The PCA reconstruction resembles the data distri-
bution well. This tells us that the model can capture the
main aspects of the data. In itself, this is non-trivial as
the PCA eigenbasis was constructed from models with an
arguably rather simple SFH and dust prescription. Ad-
ditionally, the stellar population synthesis models that
are not infallible and reproducing colour distributions of
galaxies is typically challenging.
The following six panels in Fig. 7 show random sam-
ples from the SBI fitted posterior, i.e. population model
fits to the data. There is a strong resemblance between
the colour distribution of the data and the population
model fits, with little variation between the different pos-
teriorsamples, indicatingthattheSBIhascorrectlyiden-
tified the primary features of the dataset. This result
tells us that a smooth double power-law SFH, with no
stochasticityintheSFR,andasimplescalingrelationbe-
tween dust attenuation strength and sSFR, is sufficient
to quite accurately produce the SED shape distribution
of galaxies atz∼2. It does not, however, tell us that
SFHs are in fact smooth - only that broad band SEDs
do not provide information on stochasticity.
In Fig. 8 we show the stacked residuals of 100 draws
from the fitted posterior, normalised by the Poisson er-
ror propagated from the finite number of observed and
model galaxies in each cell. Overall, the model fits the
data well, with 67% of cells having model number counts
within 1σof the data as expected. The median reduced
χ2
ν of the posterior distributions is 1.05; although at first
glance this value would indicate a close to perfect fit,
we should in fact compare to a value of 0.7 found for the
test dataset recovery in subsection 3.4. Aχ2
ν ≲1is likely
due to correlated errors between the cells in super-colour
space. We can conclude the model is a good, but not per-
fect, description of the data. In particular, there are a

12V. Wild et al.
−20
0
20
SC2
UDS data
 PCA reconstruction
 Posterior sample
 Posterior sample
−50 0 50
SC1
−20
0
20
SC2
Posterior sample
−50 0 50
SC1
Posterior sample
−50 0 50
SC1
Posterior sample
−50 0 50
SC1
Posterior sample
Figure 7.The UDS data super-colour distribution for galaxies with1.7< z <2.0andlog 10(M ∗/M⊙)>10.3(top left), the PCA
compressed image (top second from left) and 6 samples from the fitted posterior. We can see that all the posterior samples look similar,
and similar to the observed data. The posteriors have a medianχ2
ν = 1.05, assuming Poisson errors on each SC1/2 cell. Compared to the
wide range of colour distributions allowed by the prior (Fig. 5) this demonstrates that the SBI has correctly fitted the data.
−50 0 50 100
SC1
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
SC2
χ2
ν =1.05
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
(ρ − ρm)/σp
Figure 8.The stacked residuals between the UDS data super-
colour distribution (ρ) and 100 posterior samples from the fitted
model (ρm), normalised by the Poisson error propagated from the
finite number of data and model points in each super-colour cell
(σp). The resulting colour scale thus represents how manyσthe
data is away from the fitted model. The median reducedχ 2
ν of
all the posterior samples is given in the top right. In general the
model fits the data well, with differences within the1σPoisson
errors. Regions where the model fits less well are visible in purple
(more real galaxies) or red (more model galaxies). These are still
mostly within∼3σ, but their clustering in certain regions of SC1/2
space tells us about regions where the model could be improved.
few contiguous regions that are consistently∼3σaway:
there are slightly too few model galaxies in the dusty
left-hand-side and bluer centre of the star-forming se-
quence, with slightly too many at−30≲SC1≲−20and
SC1>25. These differences can also be seen from close
inspection of the number density distributions in Fig. 7.
This could either be due to a slight mismatch with the
assumed attenuation curve and/or the correspondence
betweenA V and sSFR, or the star formation histories
of the star-forming population are not allowing enough
breadth in the sSFR distribution, a known feature of the
double power-law SFH model. The other most notable
region with too many model galaxies is along the ridge
of the post-starburst branch, with too few either side of
it, which may indicate we have under-estimated the er-
rors on the super-colours in this region of the diagram,
or again that our SFHs are too simplistic. However, the
overall fit is very good, and we would require better data
to constrain a more extensive model with a more flexible
dust and SFH prescription.
4.2.Posterior model parameter distributions
In order to visualise the impact of the fitted population
parameters on the distribution of parameters describing
the SFH and dust attenuation of the galaxies in the UDS
dataset, we sample the posterior population model 1000
times. In Appendix Fig. B1 we show the corner plot for
the fitted population parameters and the median, 16th
and 84th percentiles are given in Table 2.
For each of posterior population model we draw 1000
galaxies, in the same way as for the prior distributions
in Fig. 3, and plot the resulting posterior distributions
of the model parameters in the top two rows of Fig. 9,
including 10 random draws from the posterior to further
demonstrate the tightness of the constraints on the dis-

Star formation histories from colour distributions13
0 2 4
tp/Gyr
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
(a)Posterior
Prior
0 2
log10 β
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(b)
−2 0
log10 γ
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2 (c)
1 2 3
ϵ
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
(d)
1.0 1.5 2.0
cdust
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0 (e)
1 2
Z ∗/Z⊙
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2 (f)
−12.5 −10.0 −7.5
log10(sSFR/yr□1)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0 (g)
0 2
tform/Gyr
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8 (h)
0 2
tquench/Gyr
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25 (i)Quenched galaxies only
0 2 4
AV,ISM/mag
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
(j)
0.0 0.5 1.0
Quenched fraction
0
2
4
6
8
10
12 (k)
Figure 9.The inferred galaxy model parameter distributions (or-
ange) with prior range (blue) also shown for ease of comparison.
Panels, lines and shading as for the prior model parameter distri-
butions shown in Fig. 3. By comparing the narrow orange shaded
regions to the broad blue shaded regions, we can see how tightly
the data has constrained the model for most parameters.
tributions in most cases. As expected from the mock
test and visualised in Fig. B1, thet p,γandc dust dis-
tributions (panelsa, c, e) are the best constrained: the
orange shaded posterior error bounds are tight and ran-
dom draws do not show a lot of variation between dis-
tributions. When we compare the fitted posterior to the
prior distributions in blue we see that most parameters
are well constrained by the data rather than the prior;
either the shape of the median posterior distribution is
different, or the scatter (orange shaded region) is signif-
icantly reduced compared to the blue shaded regions of
the prior.
The bottom two rows of Fig. 9 show the posteriors on
the distributions of derived model quantities compared
to the input prior distributions. Again, the data con-
strains these distributions to be tighter than the prior
distribution.
Panelaof Fig. 9 shows that the data strongly prefers
a SFH distribution that peaks late (tp), at around the
age of the Universe at the time of observation (3.2<
tobs/Gyr<3.8for the galaxies in the dataset). This
tells us that a large fraction of the star-forming galaxies
in our sample are still increasing their SFR at the time
of observation and results in a later formation time dis-
tribution than the prior median (panelh). Thet quench
distribution of the quiescent galaxies (paneli) shows that
most quenched galaxies quenched late,>2Gyr after the
Big Bang. The distribution of SFH rising rates (log10 β)
in panelbindicates SFHs with very rapid rises (largeβ)
are not favoured by the data. The parameter controlling
the quenching timescale (log10 γ) in panelcshows that
the data disfavours distributions with significant num-
bers of slower quenching galaxies (largeγ).
The amount of dust in the ISM (AV,ISM, paneli) is
distributed with a peak of around 1.2 magnitude, with a
tail to up to∼3magnitudes. The additional dust in the
birth clouds (ϵ, paneld) is not well constrained for this
particular dataset, although models with a wide range
ofϵvalues are preferred. The metallicity distribution is
also poorly constrained for this population (panelf).
We measure the quenched fraction from each posterior
sample as the fraction of galaxies with time of quench-
ing less than time of observation,tquench < t obs. This is
strongly constrained at0.24±0.02(panelk), where we
quote the median of the quenched fraction in each of the
posterior samples, with errors from the 16th and 84th
percentiles. Note that the constraints on the quenched
fraction are presented as a simple histogram, as each
model galaxy population leads to a single quenched frac-
tion value, rather than a distribution of values such as
e.g. sSFR. The value we measure from this probabilis-
tic method is∼25% higher than that determined from
the demarcation lines in Fig. 1 of 0.18 (i.e. summing
all galaxies classified as quiescent and post-starburst),
reflecting the conservative positioning of these lines in
order to achieve samples with minimal contamination in
A. Wilkinson et al. (2021). We will return to these points
in detail in the discussion section below.
4.3.The formation times, quenching times and
quenching timescales of quenched galaxies
Finally, in Fig. 10 we show the posterior distribu-
tions for the formation time (mass-weighted age) and
two different definitions of quenching timescale, for the
quenched population only. We find that the quenched
galaxies observed at1.7< z <2.0formed the bulk
of their stellar mass between 1 and 3Gyr after the Big
Bang, which corresponds to5.5> z >2.15. This is not
significantly different from the overall population shown
in panelhof Fig. 9, aside from the relative lack of very
recently formed galaxies, showing that many of the quies-
cent galaxies start out growing like normal star-forming
galaxies. The time of quenching for this population,
shown in paneliof Fig. 9, is late, with the bulk of quies-
cent galaxies becoming quiescent≳2.5Gyr after the Big
Bang, or atz≲2.6.
The quenching timescales are defined as the time from
the peak of the SFR (calculated numerically, i.e. nottp)

14V. Wild et al.
0 1 2 3
tform/Gyr
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Posterior PDF
Quenched
galaxies
only
0 250 500 750 1000
τq, init(tpeak → t0.5peak)/Myr
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
Quenched galaxies only
0 500 1000 1500 2000
τq, f ull(tpeak → tquench)/Myr
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020 Quenched galaxies only
Figure 10.The inferred distributions of the time of formation (mass weighted age, left) and quenching timescales (centre and right)
for quenched galaxies only (those withtquench < t obs) in the UDS dataset. The central panel captures the timescale of the initial fall in
SFR from peak to 50% of the peak, which is relevant for initial quenching mechanisms such as ejective AGN feedback. The right hand
panel captures the time taken for the galaxy to reach complete quiescence, which is relevant for quantifying the build up of the quiescent
population. Combined with the time of quenching shown in paneliof Fig. 9, these distributions imply a steady formation, followed by late
and rapid (≲1Gyr) quenching for the majority of quenched galaxies observed at1.7< z <2.0withlog 10(M ∗/M⊙)>10.3.
0.000.250.500.751.001.251.50
lookback time from tquench /Gyr
100
101
102
SFR/M⊙yr□1
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
tquench
Figure 11.Example star formation histories of 55 quenched
galaxies drawn randomly from the posterior model distribution fit
to the UDS data. Thex-axis is shifted such that all galaxies quench
at the rightmost edge of the plot, and they-axis is normalised for
galaxies with a formed mass oflog10(M/M⊙) = 10.5. The colour
scale indicates time of quenching.
to half of the peak SFR (central panel), or tot quench
(right hand panel, close tosSFR = 0.2/t U(z)). The
“initial” quenching timescale is relevant to the feedback
processes that initiate shut-off of star formation in the
galaxy, while the “full” quenching timescale tells us how
quickly galaxies then traverse the green-valley and en-
ter the red sequence. With a double power-law para-
metric SFH, these two timescales are interrelated, but
we show both due to their different physical interpre-
tations and to aid comparison with the literature. We
find that the initial quenching timescale distribution for
the quenched population peaks at97+31
−25Myr, has a me-
dian quenching timescale of182±16Myr and a tail to
∼700Myr. The full quenching timescale distribution
peaks at256 +87
−75Myr, has a median quenching timescale
of399±27Myr and a tail to∼1.5Gyr.
To give a better intuition for what this distribution of
SFHs look like, in Fig. 11 we show a sample of randomly
drawn SFHs for the quenched galaxies in our posterior
model fit to the UDS dataset, with thex-axis shifted
such thatt quench is at the right most edge for all galax-
ies. We can see a wide range of SFHs: most quiescent
galaxies form steadily and quench late, while a minor-
ity form late in significant starbursts. We also see the
higher fraction of rapidly than slowly quenched galaxies.
We note that there is plenty of opportunity for galaxies
to form their mass earlier and quench more slowly, the
fact that they do not must be a result of the processes
responsible for the quenching, rather than the time at
which they quench.
5.DISCUSSION
In the following sections we compare this rapidly and
relatively late quenching population to massive quenched
galaxies directly observed in the first half of Cosmic time.
We start by exploring which features of the colour distri-
bution constrain these parameters, and therefore which
of our results are most robust to observational and model
uncertainties.
5.1.The link between colour distribution and star
formation histories
In Fig. 12 we show the average physical parameters
of the posterior models fitted to the UDS galaxies on
the SC1-SC2 plane, averaging over 100 draws from the
posterior. Note that the number of galaxies contribut-
ing to each cell in SC1/2 varies, and not all models will
contribute to all cells, particularly in the outer regions
where number densities are very low - number density
distributions a shown in Fig. 7. The top left panel shows
the lookback time totquench (i.e.t obs −t quench), with a
value of zero (purple) implying that the galaxy is not yet
quenched. We can clearly identify the quenched popula-
tion to the left edge of the distribution, with those that
quenched longest ago lying in a narrow strip just above
SC2=0. The second panel shows the initial quenching
timescale of the quenched galaxies: the upper wing of the
SC1/2 distribution clearly contains the rapidly quench-
ing galaxies, as expected from toy models and spec-
troscopic comparison, while quiescent galaxies that ex-
perienced slower quenching appear lower down on the

Star formation histories from colour distributions15
−50 0 50 100
SC1
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
SC2
−50 0 50 100
SC1
−50 0 50 100
SC1
−50 0 50 100
SC1
0.0 0.5 1.0
Lookback time to tquench/Gyr
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
τq(tpeak → t0.5peak)/Gyr
−1 0 1 2
log10(β)
0 2 4
AV
Figure 12.The mean physical parameters from posterior models fitted to the UDS galaxies. We calculate the mean physical parameter
for each model draw in each SC1/2 bin, and then average over 100 draws from the population posterior. Note that the colour scale is set
to best illustrate the parameter range of the dataset being fit, rather than the full range allowed by the priors.
−50 0 50 100
SC1
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
SC2
Slower τq
−50 0 50 100
SC1
−50 0 50 100
SC1
0.0 0.5 1.0
Lookback time to tquench/Gyr
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
τq(tpeak → t0.5peak)/Gyr
−1 0 1 2
log10(β)
−50 0 50 100
SC1
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
SC2
Early tp
−50 0 50 100
SC1
−50 0 50 100
SC1
0.0 0.5 1.0
Lookback time to tquench/Gyr
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
τq(tpeak → t0.5peak)/Gyr
−1 0 1 2
log10(β)
Figure 13.Two alternative models to demonstrate the impact of
setting a slightly slower quenching timescale (top panels) or slightly
earlier quenching time (bottom panels) as described in the text. In
both cases the models have a similar quenched fraction to that
observed in the data.
quiescent branch. The third panel shows the SFH rise
timescale (β), with high values indicating a rapid rise.
The posterior distribution shown in the top centre panel
of Fig. 9 shows that the data prefers a distribution with
relatively steady rise rates, and this figure explains why
this is - a rapid rise creates strong starbursts and post-
starbursts (at low and high SC2, in red), and relatively
few of these are observed in the data. The final panel
shows the dust distribution, which makes it clear that
the maximum dust attenuation allowed is strongly con-
strained by the bottom left point of the distribution.
For comparison, Fig. 13 shows two example models
with different values for the distribution of quenching
timescale (γ) and peak of the SFH (tp), while fixing all
other parameters to the median of the posterior fit to the
UDSgalaxies. Ineachcaseweadjusttheotherparameter
to result in a similar quenched fraction as observed in the
data. In the top panels we show a “slowerτq” model by
settingµ logγ =−0.6andσ logγ = 0.2. To match the frac-
tion of quenched galaxies found in the data, we decrease
the mean peak star formationµ tp slightly to 3.2Gyr.
Despite the presence of highβmodels with rapid SFH
increases, the upper branch of the SC1/2 distribution
and bimodality in the colours has been lost, with galax-
ies quenched typically on≳300Myr timescales. This
demonstrates why the data constrains initial quenching
to have typical timescales of≲200Myr.
In the lower panels of Fig. 13 we create an “earlytp”
model by settingµtp = 2.3Gyr while retaining the same
standard deviation. To match the quenched fraction we
increaseµ logγ = 0. This results in a shift in the quench-
ing time of the quenched population to earlier cosmic
times as shown in the lower left hand panel. However,
the quenched population retains the same predominantly
rapid quenching timescales as found in the posterior fits
to the data.
In this “earlytp” model the slightly older quenched
galaxies fall at slightly lower SC2 values on average.
However, the difference is subtle and the exact colour
of red sequence galaxies is likely sensitive to a few chal-
lenging aspects of the modelling e.g. any amount of dust
will push quiescent galaxies to lower SC2, stochasticity
in the SFH would cause galaxies to be on average bluer
thanmodelledwithasmoothdoublepower-lawSFH,and
these colours may also be sensitive to non-solar abun-
dances caused by rapid formation etc.. We conclude that
the difference between this “earlytp” model and the fitted
model is much more subtle than for the “slowerτquench”

16V. Wild et al.
Figure 14.The quenched galaxy number density as a function
of redshift. The filled square shows the median posterior value
measured from the colour distribution fit to the UDS data, with
errors from the 16th and 84th percentiles of the posterior distribu-
tion. The open squares show the fossil record number density of
quenched galaxies inferred from the fitted SFH distribution at dif-
ferent redshifts. These are compared to values measured directly
in JWST and HST fields by S. D. Stevenson et al. (2026) as filled
circles and W. M. Baker et al. (2025) as filled diamonds. In both
cases, number densities have been recalculated for our mass limit
oflog 10(M ∗/M⊙)>10.3. The difference between direct and fos-
sil measurements can be interpreted as evidence for rejuvenation
and/or merging of quenched galaxies between higher redshift and
z∼2.
model and may not be robust to changes in modelling
assumptions. We take this into account in our discussion
below.
5.2.Quenched galaxy number densities
From the fraction of quenched galaxies (f quench =
0.24±0.02, Fig. 9, panelk) and a knowledge of the
UDS survey area we can calculate the number density of
quenched galaxies at1.7< z <2.0andlog 10(M ∗/M⊙)>
10.3to ben q = 32.0+1.8
−2.0 ×10 −5 Mpc−3, where we quote
the median posterior value and errors from the 16th and
84th percentiles of the posterior distributions. The defi-
nition of quiescence used in this paper was calibrated by
A. C. Carnall et al. (2018) to match theU V J-selected
quiescent population, and is very close to the popular
sSFR cut of0.2/tU(z)wheret U(z)is the age of the Uni-
verse at the redshift of observation.
Our number density compares very well to the number
density of 14log 10(M ∗/M⊙)>10.3quiescent galaxies
with1.7< z <3.5in the spectroscopic JWST Blue
Jay survey ofn q = 27.2±0.64×10 −5 Mpc−3(M. Park
et al. 2024); we note that while it is reassuring that such
different methods obtain the same answer, it is better
to compare in the exact redshift range due to the rapid
evolution in quenched fraction with cosmic time at these
epochs. Following V. Wild et al. (2016) we therefore
calculate the number density of galaxies classified as qui-
escent and post-starburst in the UDS dataset studied
here, using the demarcation lines of A. Wilkinson et al.
(2021) shown in Fig. 1, obtainingnq = 24×10 −5 Mpc−3.
As noted in Section 4.2 this 25% lower number density
(and similarly quenched fraction) likely reflects the con-
servative positioning of the demarcation lines in order to
achieve a pure sample of quiescent galaxies in A. Wilkin-
son et al. (2021), vs. the probabilistic approach taken
here.
A similarly lower value ofn q = 19.0×10 −5 Mpc−3
is obtained from integrating the Schechter function fit
forlog 10(M ∗/M⊙)>10.3quiescent galaxies with1.75<
z <2.25selected from rest-frame UVJ colours from D. J.
McLeod et al. (2021), or23.0×10−5 Mpc−3 for quiescent
galaxies with1.5< z <2selected from rest-frame NU-
VrJ colours from J. R. Weaver et al. (2023), showing that
the hard demarcation lines in SC, UVJ and NUVrJ space
all result in values that are∼25% lower than the proba-
bilistic method here (see e.g. S. Sherman et al. 2020, for
a comparison of quiescent fractions using different selec-
tion methods). The fact that the probabilistic method
matches better to the spectroscopic result, rather than
photometric selections is relevant however, as the addi-
tional constraints afforded by fitting the full colour dis-
tribution, rather than individual galaxies, should allow
us to get closer to the true answer.
5.3.Fossil record vs. direct number densities
In Fig. 10 we showed the posterior distributions for the
quenching timescales of galaxies in the UDS at1.7< z <
2, showing that most quiescent galaxies quench rapidly.
In paneliof Fig. 9 we see the quenching time distri-
bution for the quenched population, showing that this
quenching happens relatively late, with the number den-
sity of quenched galaxies rising rapidly 2.5Gyr after the
Big Bang (z≲2.6). Here we investigate the implications
of a rapid and late quenching population for the past
history of red sequence build up.
From our fitted model we can calculate the number
density of quenched galaxies as a function of redshift,
which we find to be 7.6, 0.24 and0.05×10−5Mpc−3 at
redshifts of 2.3, 3.5 and 4.3 respectively, and is shown in
Fig. 14. We compare to direct observations of quenched
galaxies in fields with JWST (and HST) coverage (W. M.
Baker et al. 2025; S. D. Stevenson et al. 2026), with data
points plotted at the median redshifts of galaxies in each
bin, and number densities adjusted to include only galax-
ies withlog 10(M ∗/M⊙)>10.3for the purpose of this
plot (W. Baker, S. Stevenson priv. comm.)13. Compar-
ing directly to the points from S. D. Stevenson et al.
(2026) at their sample median redshifts we find lower
number densities of quenched galaxies from the fossil
record method compared to direct observations by fac-
tors of 1.4, 16 and 23 at redshifts of 2.3, 3.5 and 4.3.
These factors increase slightly at lower redshifts and de-
creaseslightlyathigherredshiftsifweinsteadcompareto
theresultsfromW.M.Bakeretal.(2025), buttheoverall
pattern of lower fossil record number densities remains.
If correct, this can be interpreted as evidence for rejuve-
13 The error bars on the points from W. M. Baker et al. (2025)
include only the Poisson contribution, i.e. without the additional
cosmic variance component.

Star formation histories from colour distributions17
nation and/or merging. Rejuvenation would cause galax-
ies that are observed at higher redshifts as quenched to
become star-forming at later times. These would there-
fore not be identified as quenched in the colour-colour
diagram ofz∼2galaxies. Merging of quiescent galax-
ies between the higher redshift observations andz∼2
would equally cause their number density measured at
z∼2to be reduced.
Given the high gas contents and chaotic environments
expected in the early Universe, these fractions of reju-
venation and/or merging seem plausible. However, it is
worth cautioning that the exact time of quenching mea-
sured in this work depends sensitively on the precise po-
sitioning of the oldest red sequence galaxies in colour-
colour space, as we showed above. If the stellar pop-
ulation synthesis models have a very slightly too weak
Balmer/4000Å break for galaxies with ages greater than
1Gyr then this would result in an age estimate that is
too young. This might happen if e.g. the stellar ini-
tial mass function is slightly different than assumed, or
chemical abundances are different for these high redshift
galaxies. A careful analysis of different spectral synthe-
sis and modelling assumptions would be required to be
sure of the accuracy of this result. Our predicted number
densities atz= 3.5andz= 4.3are slightly lower than
those predicted by M. Park et al. (2024) from a similar
fossil record analysis of 14z∼2quenched galaxy spectra
ofn= (1.5−6.0)×10 5Mpc−3 atz= 4−6. Y. Zhang
et al. (2026b) used a small number of quenched galaxy
spectra atz∼2.5to perform the same experiment; our
predictions are lower than their fiducial model atz∼3.5,
but higher atz∼4.5. We refer the reader to Y. Zhang
et al. (2026b) for further discussion on the uncertainties
involved in this calculation.
5.4.Quenching timescale distributions
In Fig. 15 we compare the initial quenching timescale
distribution recovered from the broad band photomet-
ric analysis in this paper, to direct measurements from
a small number of good quality galaxy spectra in the
JWST EXCELS survey (A. C. Carnall et al. 2024). H.-
H. Leung et al. (2026b) used double power-law SFHs to
fit the JWST spectra and multi-wavelength photometry
of 14 quiescent galaxies with3< z <5. M. Skarbinski
et al. (2026) fit the JWST spectra and multi-wavelength
photometry of 24 quiescent galaxies at1< z <3; in
order to match the method used in this paper, we take
their double power-law fitted SFHs, rather than the ex-
ponential+burst SFH used in M. Skarbinski et al. (2026).
We calculate the medianτq values from the posterior fits
to all galaxies with well constrained SFH parameters (13
at3< z <5and 18 at1< z <3). The galaxies in
these samples have stellar masseslog10(M ∗/M⊙)≳10.5
at3< z <5andlog 10(M ∗/M⊙)≳10.2at1< z <3.
While we cannot draw too firm conclusions from the
small number of objects in these studies, the rapid
quenching timescale distribution measured from individ-
ualgalaxiesisclear. Alargerfractionofthespectroscopic
0 200 400 600 800 1000
τq, init(tpeak → t0.5peak)/Myr
0
2
4
6
8
10Number
This paper ( 1.7 < z < 2)
EXCELS 1 < z < 3
EXCELS 3 < z < 5
Figure 15.Thequenchingtimescaledistributionmeasuredinthis
paper is compared to values measured directly from JWST spec-
troscopy of 18 quenched galaxies at1< z <3(M. Skarbinski et al.
2026) and 12 at3< z <5(H.-H. Leung et al. 2026b). The distri-
bution from this paper has been normalised to the equivalent of 18
galaxies to match the1< z <3sample. There is broad agreement
between the direct measurements from a small number of galax-
ies with high quality spectra and the statistical measurement from
a large number of galaxies with broad-band photometry, although
the spectral analyses prefer even shorter quenching timescales, par-
ticularly for quenched galaxies observed atz >3.
observations have very short timescales than measured
in this paper, which may reflect sample selection biases
or the spectra providing finer-grained timescale informa-
tion. There is some evidence for a trend with redshift,
with the EXCELS galaxies at3< z <5having very
short quenching timescales, while the two galaxies with
the longest quenching timescales are found atz∼1.5.
A similar result is found when using the full quenching
timescales (tpeak →t quench, not shown). It is important
to note that the model presented in this paper does not
allow for inter-relatedness or evolution in the SFH pa-
rameters with cosmic time, e.g. the quenching timescale
can not evolve with time, or be tied to the SFR rise
time etc., beyond the requirement for physically realistic
models (i.e. the trend of increasing maximal quenching
timescale with Universe age is naturally included). Such
trends could be explored in more detail with population-
level studies in the future.
In Fig. 13 we set the “earlytp” model to not only have
a similar quenched fraction to the data, but also to have
similar quenched number densities as a function of red-
shift to those observed directly by S. D. Stevenson et al.
(2026). As a reminder, this model is ruled out by the
data, but is worth considering given the small difference
in colour distribution that it results in, and possible im-
perfections in spectral synthesis modelling. The earlier
peak SFH allows this particular model to have a distribu-
tionofquenchingtimescalesthatisslightlyslower, witha
median initialτ q(tpeak →t 0.5peak) = 264Myr instead of
182Myr for the fitted model. However, the shape of the
distribution is the same, with a peak close to 100Myr

18V. Wild et al.
and tail to∼800Myr. Thus the predominantly rapid
quenching timescale distribution is robust, even if the
quenching happens a little earlier than measured here.
The spectroscopic results in Fig. 15 favour more rapid
quenching, suggesting that perhaps this concern is not
relevant.
Direct comparison with other results in the literature
is challenging, due to the wide range of definitions ofτq:
some authors start the clock on or above the star-forming
mainsequence(MS),whileothersstarttheclockoncethe
galaxy has already fallen significantly below the MS, oth-
ers calculate a gradient in SFR. Additionally, when cal-
culating sSFR, SFR can be averaged over 10 vs. 100Myr,
while stellar mass can either be current or formed over
the galaxy’s entire history, making direct comparisons
even more difficult. A combined analysis of all available
spectroscopic datasets at these redshifts using consistent
definitionsforquenchingtimescaleswouldclearlybeben-
eficial, but is beyond the scope of this paper.
Overall thereis a growing consensusthat rapid quench-
ing routes are dominant prior to Cosmic Noon (e.g. M.
Slob et al. 2024; M. Park et al. 2024; M. Skarbinski et al.
2026). Fig. 15 suggests that quenching timescales may
become even more rapid in the early Universe (H.-H. Le-
ungetal.2026b). Theserapidtimescalesaresignificantly
more rapid than the age of the Universe, and thus relate
directly to theprocessescausing the quenching, not sim-
ply when the galaxies are quenching. Byz∼1a wider
range of quenching timescales are apparent, with≲50%
of quenched galaxies having quenched rapidly, many of
which are identified as post-starburst galaxies (e.g. V.
Wild et al. 2016; S. Belli et al. 2019; V. Wild et al. 2020;
S. Tacchella et al. 2022; A. Nersesian et al. 2026). How
this diversification of quenching timescales relates to the
decreasing gas content of galaxies, or the greater range of
processes available to actively quench galaxies, requires
further study.
6.SUMMARY
We present a simulation-based inference (SBI) frame-
work to infer population-level star formation history
(SFH) distributions directly from galaxy colour distri-
butions, without fitting individual galaxies.
•Applying this method to 2,745 massive galaxies
(log10 M∗/M⊙ >10.3) at1.7< z <2.0in the
UKIDSS Ultra-Deep Survey, we show that a sim-
ple double power-law SFH model, combined with a
scaling relation between dust attenuation and spe-
cific star formation rate, reproduces the observed
super-colour distribution accurately (Figs. 7 and
8).
•The inferred galaxy population exhibits a clear bi-
modality in colour space, including a distinct post-
starburst population, without requiring stochastic
star formation or complex SFH parametrisations.
•We measure a quenched galaxy fraction of0.24±
0.02at1.7< z <2(Fig. 9, panelk), with the
majority of quenched galaxies having ceased star
formation≳2.5Gyr after the Big Bang (z≲2.6,
Fig. 9, paneli)).
•Quenchingmustberapidtoreproducetheobserved
colour distribution: the distribution of timescales
taken for the SFR to fall from peak to 50% of
peak (the initial quenching timescale) peaks at
97+31
−25Myr, has a median of182±16Myr and a tail
to∼700Myr (Fig. 10, central panel). The distri-
bution of timescales taken to reach full quiescence
has a median of∼400Myr (Fig. 10, right panel).
•Direct measurements of the number density of
quenched galaxies atz >2.5are higher than
those inferred from the star formation histories
measured here, implying significant rejuvenation
and/ormergingofquenchedsystemsbetweenz∼5
andz∼2(Fig. 14).
•While the quenching timescale distribution is ro-
bust to modelling uncertainties, the exact quench-
ing time is likely to depend on details of the stel-
lar population, star formation and dust models
(Fig. 13).
The precise form of the bimodal colour distribution of
massive galaxies atz∼2requires that star-formation
quenching is both common and rapid, with24±2%of
galaxies already quenched, predominantly within the last
Gyr from the time of observation. While this result has
been achieved using novel statistical methods applied to
broad band photometric data, the addition of spectro-
scopic observations of large numbers of galaxies at cos-
mic noon would allow for greater insights. Spectroscopic
surveys with near-infrared instruments such as MOONS
and PFS could easily adapt the summary statistics used
here for application to spectroscopy, thus combining the
benefits of tighter constraints on the SFH of individual
systems with the population level constraints of spec-
tral shape distributions. With improved data, additional
parameters could be included in the model, such as a
variation in quenching timescale with time of quench-
ing, bimodal quenching timescale distributions, evolving
metallicities or initial mass functions, each leading to in-
teresting new information on how galaxies form, evolve
and quench.
DATA AVAILABILITY
UKIDSS data, including super-colours, are available
fromhttps://www.nottingham.ac.uk/astronomy/
UDS/index.html. Code will be available on acceptance.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
VW acknowledges the support of the Science and Tech-
nologies Facilities Council (ST/Y00275X/1) and Lever-
hulme Research Fellowship (RF-2024-589/4). HL and

Star formation histories from colour distributions19
ACC acknowledge support from a UKRI Frontier Re-
search Grantee Grant (PI Carnall; EP/Y037065/1).
Software:Astropy( Astropy Collaboration et al.
2013),Bagpipes(A. C. Carnall et al. 2018, 2019b),SBI
(A. Tejero-Cantero et al. 2020), ,Daft(D. Foreman-
Mackey et al. 2021),Matplotlib(J. D. Hunter 2007),
Numpy(C. R. Harris et al. 2020),Scipy(P. Virtanen
et al. 2020).
REFERENCES
Almaini, O., Wild, V., Maltby, D. T., et al. 2017 MNRAS, 472,
1401, doi:10.1093/mnras/stx1957
Alsing, J., Thorp, S., Deger, S., et al. 2024 ApJS, 274, 12,
doi:10.3847/1538-4365/ad5c69
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al.
2013 A&A, 558, A33, doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Aufort, G., Laigle, C., McCracken, H. J., et al. 2025 A&A, 699,
A328, doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202452457
Baker, W. M., Valentino, F., Lagos, C. d. P., et al. 2025 A&A,
702, A270, doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202555829
Baldry, I. K., Balogh, M. L., Bower, R., Glazebrook, K., &
Nichol, R. C. 2004, in American Institute of Physics Conference
Series, Vol. 743, The New Cosmology: Conference on Strings
and Cosmology, ed. R. E. Allen, D. V. Nanopoulos, & C. N.
Pope, 106–119, doi:10.1063/1.1848322
Bell, E. F., Wolf, C., Meisenheimer, K., et al. 2004 ApJ, 608, 752,
doi:10.1086/420778
Belli, S., Newman, A. B., & Ellis, R. S. 2019 ApJ, 874, 17,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab07af
Bezanson, R., Spilker, J. S., Suess, K. A., et al. 2022 ApJ, 925,
153, doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac3dfa
Bruzual, G., & Charlot, S. 2003 MNRAS, 344, 1000,
doi:10.1046/j.1365-8711.2003.06897.x
Bugiani, L., Belli, S., Park, M., et al. 2025 ApJ, 981, 25,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/adaeaf
Calzetti, D., Armus, L., Bohlin, R. C., et al. 2000 ApJ, 533, 682,
doi:10.1086/308692
Carnall, A. C., Leja, J., Johnson, B. D., et al. 2019a ApJ, 873, 44,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab04a2
Carnall, A. C., McLure, R. J., Dunlop, J. S., & Davé, R. 2018
MNRAS, 480, 4379, doi:10.1093/mnras/sty2169
Carnall, A. C., McLure, R. J., Dunlop, J. S., et al. 2019b
MNRAS, 490, 417, doi:10.1093/mnras/stz2544
Carnall, A. C., McLeod, D. J., McLure, R. J., et al. 2023
MNRAS, 520, 3974, doi:10.1093/mnras/stad369
Carnall, A. C., Cullen, F., McLure, R. J., et al. 2024 MNRAS,
534, 325, doi:10.1093/mnras/stae2092
Chabrier, G. 2003 PASP, 115, 763, doi:10.1086/376392
Charlot, S., & Fall, S. M. 2000 ApJ, 539, 718,
doi:10.1086/309250
Cheng, C. M., Kriek, M., Beverage, A. G., et al. 2025 Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 540, 1527,
doi:10.1093/mnras/staf806
Chevallard, J., Charlot, S., Wandelt, B., & Wild, V. 2013
MNRAS, 432, 2061, doi:10.1093/mnras/stt523
Connolly, A. J., & Szalay, A. S. 1999 AJ, 117, 2052,
doi:10.1086/300839
Conroy, C., Gunn, J. E., & White, M. 2009 ApJ, 699, 486,
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/699/1/486
Cranmer, K., Brehmer, J., & Louppe, G. 2020 Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 117, 30055,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1912789117
da Cunha, E., Charlot, S., & Elbaz, D. 2008 MNRAS, 388, 1595,
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13535.x
Davies, J. J., Pontzen, A., & Crain, R. A. 2022 MNRAS, 515,
1430, doi:10.1093/mnras/stac1742
Davies, J. J., Pontzen, A., & Crain, R. A. 2024 MNRAS, 527,
4705, doi:10.1093/mnras/stad3456
Deger, S., Peiris, H. V., Thorp, S., et al. 2026 MNRAS,
doi:10.1093/mnras/stag764
Di Matteo, T., Springel, V., & Hernquist, L. 2005 Nature, 433,
604, doi:10.1038/nature03335
Diemer, B., Sparre, M., Abramson, L. E., & Torrey, P. 2017 ApJ,
839, 26, doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aa68e5
Ditrani, F. R., Longhetti, M., Fossati, M., & Wolter, A. 2024
A&A, 688, A89, doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202349070
Foreman-Mackey, D., Hogg, D. W., Fulford, D. S., et al. 2021,
daft-dev/daft: daft v0.1.2„ v0.1.2 Zenodo,
doi:10.5281/zenodo.4615289
Fu, H., Shankar, F., Yuan, F., et al. 2025 A&A, 704, A244,
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202556480
Furusawa, H., Kosugi, G., Akiyama, M., et al. 2008 ApJS, 176, 1,
doi:10.1086/527321
Gould, K. M. L., Brammer, G., Valentino, F., et al. 2023 AJ, 165,
248, doi:10.3847/1538-3881/accadc
Gountanis, N. M., Weinberg, D. H., Beverage, A. G., et al. 2025
ApJ, 985, 184, doi:10.3847/1538-4357/adc4e6
Gunasekera, C. M., van Hoof, P. A. M., Dehghanian, M., et al.
2025 Rev. Mexicana Astron. Astrofis., 61, 120,
doi:10.22201/ia.01851101p.2025.61.03.01
Hahn, C., Tinker, J. L., & Wetzel, A. 2017 ApJ, 841, 6,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aa6d6b
Hamadouche, M. L., Whitaker, K. E., Valentino, F., et al. 2026
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2602.02485,
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2602.02485
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020
Nature, 585, 357, doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2
Harvey, T., Lovell, C. C., Newman, S., et al. 2026 MNRAS, 547,
stag282, doi:10.1093/mnras/stag282
Hopkins, P. F., Hernquist, L., Cox, T. J., Dutta, S. N., &
Rothberg, B. 2008 ApJ, 679, 156, doi:10.1086/587544
Hunter, J. D. 2007 Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 90,
doi:10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Iyer, K. G., Tacchella, S., Genel, S., et al. 2020 MNRAS, 498,
430, doi:10.1093/mnras/staa2150
Iyer, K. G., Starkenburg, T. K., Bryan, G. L., et al. 2025 ApJ,
994, 174, doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ae0334
Ji, Z., Williams, C. C., Behroozi, P., et al. 2026 arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2604.05022, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2604.05022
Kauffmann, G., Heckman, T. M., White, S. D. M., et al. 2003
MNRAS, 341, 54, doi:10.1046/j.1365-8711.2003.06292.x
Khoram, A. H., Belli, S., Nipoti, C., et al. 2026 ApJ, 998, 59,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ae23d0
Lawrence, A., Warren, S. J., Almaini, O., et al. 2007 MNRAS,
379, 1599, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.12040.x
Leja, J., Carnall, A. C., Johnson, B. D., Conroy, C., & Speagle,
J. S. 2019a ApJ, 876, 3, doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab133c
Leja, J., Tacchella, S., & Conroy, C. 2019b ApJL, 880, L9,
doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab2f8c
Leung, H.-H., Wild, V., Papathomas, M., et al. 2024 MNRAS,
528, 4029, doi:10.1093/mnras/stae225
Leung, H.-H., Wild, V., Papathomas, M., et al. 2026a arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2602.13114, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2602.13114
Leung, H.-H., Carnall, A. C., Taylor, E., et al. 2026b MNRAS,
doi:10.1093/mnras/stag827
Li, J., Melchior, P., Hahn, C., & Huang, S. 2024 AJ, 167, 16,
doi:10.3847/1538-3881/ad0be4
Lian, J., Yan, R., Zhang, K., & Kong, X. 2016 ApJ, 832, 29,
doi:10.3847/0004-637X/832/1/29
Lin, L., Wu, P.-F., Thorp, M. D., et al. 2026 ApJ, 999, 263,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ae3b2b
Maltby, D. T., Almaini, O., Wild, V., & et al. 2026 MNRASin
print
Maltby, D. T., Almaini, O., Wild, V., et al. 2016 MNRAS, 459,
L114, doi:10.1093/mnrasl/slw057
McLeod, D. J., McLure, R. J., Dunlop, J. S., et al. 2021 MNRAS,
503, 4413, doi:10.1093/mnras/stab731
Mosleh, M., Riahi-Zamin, M., & Tacchella, S. 2025 ApJ, 983, 181,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/adc12e
Naab, T., & Ostriker, J. P. 2017 ARA&A, 55, 59,
doi:10.1146/annurev-astro-081913-040019
Narayanan, D., Lower, S., Torrey, P., et al. 2024 ApJ, 961, 73,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ad0966
Nelson, D., Pillepich, A., Springel, V., et al. 2018 MNRAS, 475,
624, doi:10.1093/mnras/stx3040
Nersesian, A., Kaushal, Y., Martorano, M., et al. 2026 A&A, 705,
A153, doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202557293
Ni, Y., Chen, N., Zhou, Y., et al. 2025 ApJ, 990, 120,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/adf3a7

20V. Wild et al.
Pacifici, C., Kassin, S. A., Weiner, B. J., et al. 2016 ApJ, 832, 79,
doi:10.3847/0004-637X/832/1/79
Park, M., Belli, S., Conroy, C., et al. 2024 ApJ, 976, 72,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ad7e15
Plat, A., Charlot, S., Bruzual, G., et al. 2019 MNRAS, 490, 978,
doi:10.1093/mnras/stz2616
Price, S. H., Kriek, M., Brammer, G. B., et al. 2014 ApJ, 788, 86,
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/788/1/86
Rodríguez Montero, F., Davé, R., Wild, V., Anglés-Alcázar, D., &
Narayanan, D. 2019 MNRAS, 490, 2139,
doi:10.1093/mnras/stz2580
Rowlands, K., Wild, V., Nesvadba, N., et al. 2015 MNRAS, 448,
258, doi:10.1093/mnras/stu2714
Sánchez, S. F., Barrera-Ballesteros, J. K., Lacerda, E., et al. 2022
ApJS, 262, 36, doi:10.3847/1538-4365/ac7b8f
Sandles, L., Curtis-Lake, E., Charlot, S., Chevallard, J., &
Maiolino, R. 2022 MNRAS, 515, 2951,
doi:10.1093/mnras/stac1999
Santini, P., Castellano, M., Merlin, E., et al. 2021 A&A, 652,
A30, doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202039738
Schreiber, C., Glazebrook, K., Nanayakkara, T., et al. 2018 A&A,
618, A85, doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201833070
Setton, D. J., Verrico, M., Bezanson, R., et al. 2022 ApJ, 931, 51,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac6096
Sherman, S., Jogee, S., Florez, J., et al. 2020 MNRAS, 499, 4239,
doi:10.1093/mnras/staa3167
Skarbinski, M., Rowlands, K., Alatalo, K., et al. 2026 ApJ, 1000,
191, doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ae459d
Skelton, R. E., Bell, E. F., & Somerville, R. S. 2012 ApJ, 753, 44,
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/753/1/44
Slob, M., Kriek, M., Beverage, A. G., et al. 2024 ApJ, 973, 131,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ad65ff
Stanway, E. R., & Eldridge, J. J. 2018 MNRAS, 479, 75,
doi:10.1093/mnras/sty1353
Stevenson, S. D., Carnall, A. C., Leung, H.-H., et al. 2026
MNRAS, 545, staf2087, doi:10.1093/mnras/staf2087
Strateva, I., Ivezić, Ž., Knapp, G. R., et al. 2001 AJ, 122, 1861,
doi:10.1086/323301
Tacchella, S., Conroy, C., Faber, S. M., et al. 2022 ApJ, 926, 134,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac449b
Tejero-Cantero, A., Boelts, J., Deistler, M., et al. 2020 Journal of
Open Source Software, 5, 2505, doi:10.21105/joss.02505
Thorp, S., Alsing, J., Peiris, H. V., et al. 2024 ApJ, 975, 145,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ad7736
Trayford, J. W., Theuns, T., Bower, R. G., et al. 2016 MNRAS,
460, 3925, doi:10.1093/mnras/stw1230
van der Wel, A., Martorano, M., Marchesini, D., et al. 2025 A&A,
701, A30, doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202555488
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020 Nature
Methods, 17, 261, doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2
Walters, D., Woo, J., & Ellison, S. L. 2022 MNRAS, 511, 6126,
doi:10.1093/mnras/stac283
Weaver, J. R., Davidzon, I., Toft, S., et al. 2023 A&A, 677, A184,
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202245581
Whitaker, K. E., Labbé, I., van Dokkum, P. G., et al. 2011 ApJ,
735, 86, doi:10.1088/0004-637X/735/2/86
Wild, V., Almaini, O., Dunlop, J., et al. 2016 MNRAS, 463, 832,
doi:10.1093/mnras/stw1996
Wild, V., Charlot, S., Brinchmann, J., et al. 2011 MNRAS, 417,
1760, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19367.x
Wild, V., Almaini, O., Cirasuolo, M., et al. 2014 MNRAS, 440,
1880, doi:10.1093/mnras/stu212
Wild, V., Taj Aldeen, L., Carnall, A., et al. 2020 MNRAS, 494,
529, doi:10.1093/mnras/staa674
Wilkinson, A., Almaini, O., Wild, V., et al. 2021 MNRAS, 504,
4533, doi:10.1093/mnras/stab965
Williams, R. J., Quadri, R. F., Franx, M., van Dokkum, P., &
Labbé, I. 2009 ApJ, 691, 1879,
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/691/2/1879
Wright, R. J., Lagos, C. d. P., Davies, L. J. M., et al. 2019
MNRAS, 487, 3740, doi:10.1093/mnras/stz1410
Zhang, Y., de Graaff, A., Setton, D. J., et al. 2026a ApJ, 997,
252, doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ae24e1
Zhang, Y., Ji, Z., Bezanson, R., et al. 2026b arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2604.05024, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2604.05024
Zheng, Y., Dave, R., Wild, V., & Montero, F. R. 2022 MNRAS,
513, 27, doi:10.1093/mnras/stac905
Zheng, Y., Wild, V., Lahén, N., et al. 2020 MNRAS, 498, 1259,
doi:10.1093/mnras/staa2358
APPENDIX

Star formation histories from colour distributions21
A.MOCK PARAMETER RECOVER TESTS
Fig. A1 shows the corner plot distribution of 1000 samples from the posterior for the mock dataset presented in
Section 3.4. The true parameters are marked by orange dots and lines. Fig. A2 shows the distributions of median
posterior minus true population parameter values for 500 mock simulations in a new test dataset.
2 4
µtp
1 2
σtp
0 2.5
µlog β
1 2
σlog β
-2 0
µlog γ
0.5 1
σlog γ
1 2
µϵ
1 2
σϵ
1.25 1.5
µcdust
0.1 0.2
σcdust
1 2
µZ∗
1 2
σZ∗
Figure A1.A mock recovery test for the mock shown in Fig 6 showing the joint posterior distributions of the model population parameters
as described in Table 1, with the orange dots and lines marking the true mock parameters.

22V. Wild et al.
−2 0 2
∆µtp
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−1 0 1
∆σtp
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−2.5 0.0 2.5
∆µlog β
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
−1 0 1
∆σlog β
0.0
0.5
1.0
−2.5 0.0 2.5
∆µlog γ
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−0.5 0.0 0.5
∆σlog γ
0
2
4
−1 0 1
∆µϵ
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−1 0 1
∆σϵ
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
−0.25 0.00 0.25
∆µcdust
0
5
10
15
−0.1 0.0 0.1
∆σcdust
0
20
40
−1 0 1
∆µZ∗
0.0
0.5
1.0
−1 0 1
∆σZ∗
0.0
0.5
1.0
Figure A2.The differences between input and posterior median values for 400 mock simulations drawn from a new test dataset. Each
panel’s x-axis range matches the possible range given the upper and lower limits on the flat prior. We can see that the population parameters
that describe the quenching timescale distribution (γ) and amplitude of dust attenuation (cdust) are well constrained by the super-colour
image, while those that describe the metallicity distribution, width of the SFR rise time distribution, and additional dust attenuation factor
for young stars are not.

Star formation histories from colour distributions23
B.CORNER PLOT FOR MODEL FIT TO DATA
Fig. B1 shows the corner plot distribution of each of the population parameters for 1000 samples from the posterior
of the UDS dataset analysed in Section 4.
2 4
µtp
1 2
σtp
0 2.5
µlog β
1 2
σlog β
-2 0
µlog γ
0.5 1
σlog γ
1 2
µϵ
1 2
σϵ
1.25 1.5
µcdust
0.1 0.2
σcdust
1 2
µZ∗
1 2
σZ∗
Figure B1.The joint posterior distributions of the population parameters fit to the UDS galaxies, depicted by 1000 samples from the
posterior. The parameters are described in Tables 1 and the median and percentiles of these distributions are given in Table 2.
This paper was built using the Open Journal of Astrophysics LATEX template. The OJA is a journal which provides
fast and easy peer review for new papers in theastro-phsection of the arXiv, making the reviewing process simpler
for authors and referees alike. Learn more athttp://astro.theoj.org.