Title: The Origin of Da Scaling: Suppressed Cooling in Fast-Cooling Mixing Layers
Authors: Lachlan Lancaster, Drummond B. Fielding, Rajsekhar Mohapatra, Greg L. Bryan
Published: 2026-06-02
Categories: astro-ph.GA, physics.flu-dyn

Draft version June 4, 2026
Typeset using LATEXtwocolumnstyle in AASTeX63
The Origin of Da Scaling: Suppressed Cooling in F ast-Cooling Mixing Layers
Lachlan Lancaster
 ,1, 2,∗ Drummond Fielding
 ,3 Rajsekhar Mohapatra
 ,4 and Greg L. Bryan
 2, 1
1Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA
2Department of Astronomy, Columbia University, 550 W 120th St, New York, NY 10025, USA
3Department of Physics, New York University, 726 Broadway, New York, NY, 10003, USA
4Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
(Received XXX; Revised XXX; Accepted XXX)
Submitted to ApJ
ABSTRACT
In numerical experiments simulating Turbulent Radiative Mixing Layers (TRMLs) it is observed
that as the cooling time in the mixed gas,t cool, becomes very short compared to the dynamical time of
the turbulence,t eddy/tcool ≫1, there is a change in the scaling behavior of the total energy radiated
in the TRML as a function of this ratio, also known as the Damk¨ ohler number, Da≡t eddy/tcool,
from ˙Ecool ∝Da 1/2 to ˙Ecool ∝Da 1/4. The latter, so-called “fast-cooling,” regime is of particular
interest as many astrophysical mixing layers lie in this regime. We demonstrate that the origin of this
change is the suppression of turbulent folding of the surface by the ram-pressure of the inflowing gas,
which becomes much greater than the turbulent pressure in this regime. We present an argument that
reproduces the ˙Ecool ∝Da 1/4 behavior by appealing to the suppression of the fractal structure of the
interface by the ram-pressure of the inflowing gas.
Keywords:Mixing Layers
1.INTRODUCTION
Astrophysical fluids are ubiquitously turbulent and
multiphase (Field 1965; Cowie & McKee 1977; Begelman
& Fabian 1990; R¨ opke et al. 2007; Kim et al. 2017; Man-
delker et al. 2020; Tonnesen & Bryan 2021; Lancaster
et al. 2021a; Fielding & Bryan 2022; Faucher-Gigu` ere &
Oh 2023; Mohapatra et al. 2025). The ubiquity of turbu-
lence means mixing is usually the dominant mechanism
by which energy and momentum are communicated be-
tween these phases. The most abundant phases in a
mass-, volume-, or energy-weighted sense are thermally
stable1 on timescales comparable to the dynamical time
of the system, but the intermediate phase gas obtained
by mixing at the interface between these phases often is
Corresponding author: Lachlan Lancaster
llancaster@flatironinstitute.org
∗ Simons Fellow
1 At least informally, as in the case of the hot phase there is no well-
understood volumetric heating term that makes the phase stable
but energy can be replenished hydro-dynamically (e.g. through
feedback).
not (Kim & Kim 2013; Jennings & Li 2021; Gronke & Oh
2018; Abbott 1982). In this work we will only consider
the case where energy is lost radiatively (through the
emission of light) though there are circumstances under
which energy can be gained in the layer (Zel’Dovich &
Pikel’Ner 1969). Focusing our attention on a section of
the interface between two phases of astrophysical gas, we
find a region whose dynamics are dominated by turbu-
lent mixing and the radiative cooling process that makes
the intermediate phase thermally unstable: a Turbulent
Radiative Mixing Layer (TRML).
The TRML system is therefore a fundamental building
block for understanding the transport of energy in astro-
physical fluids. These systems are characterized by (i)
the turbulence in the layer, (ii) the hydrodynamic prop-
erties of the two phases, such as their temperature and
density, and (iii) the details of the radiative processes
that take place in the mixed material. We will generally
describe the turbulence in the layer by the (square-root
of the) second-order structure function of the velocity
arXiv:2606.04093v1  [astro-ph.GA]  2 Jun 2026

2Lancaster et al.
field on scale,ℓ
vt(ℓ) =
 1
V
Z
V

|v(r)−v(r+δ)| 2
|δ|=ℓ dr
1/2
.(1)
Where the calculation is carried out in some volumeV
limited to the mixing layer. This is the same as the root-
mean-square (r.m.s) velocity fluctuation on length scale
ℓ. This function will generally peak at a given scale,Lint,
called the integral scale, andv t(Lint) is on the order of
the r.m.s. velocity in the whole volumeV. The two
phases are generally assumed to be in pressure equilib-
rium (as dynamical times are generally short compared
to sound crossing times, at least in the hot phase), so
that their difference in density and pressure are both
determined by a single parameter
χ≡ ρcold
ρhot
(2)
whereρ cold is the density of the higher density phase
(and therefore colder by pressure balance) andρ hot the
smaller density, so thatχ >1. Cooling in the mixed gas
is assumed to occur on some characteristic timescale,
tcool (a discussion of the correct time-scale to choose in
terms of the full cooling function is given in Appendix A
and Appendix B).
In a steady-state, cooling in the layer is balanced by a
flux of high specific-entropy gas from the hot phase into
the mixing layer. Considering this flux through some in-
terface associated with the mixing layer (we will specify
below) with areaA int we can write the total cooling as
˙Ecool = γ
γ−1 P vinAint (3)
whereγis the adiabatic index,Pis the pressure of the
gas, andv in is the surface-averaged velocity at which gas
is moved into the layer across the surface2. Far above the
interface, away from the turbulent motions, we expect
this inflow to be relatively laminar. IfLis the length
scale associated with the lateral extent of the layer then
we can useA int =L 2 in Equation 3 to write down the
velocity of the bulk inflow to the layer, far from the
interface
vbulk ≡ γ−1
γ
˙Ecool
P L2 ,(4)
wherev bulk is understood to be measured in the frame
co-moving with the layer.
2 Equation 3 ignores the contribution of relative kinetic energy to
the inflow of specific energy, which we will continue to assume
throughout this paper. For the simulations explored here (M=
1/8−1/2) this is always a small contribution, though it can
become important in super-sonic mixing layers (Yang & Ji 2023)
An analog system to TRMLs, in which energy is in-
jected into the fluid through chemical combustion pro-
cesses, has been studied at length over the past century
in the field of turbulent combustion (Kuo & Acharya
2012; Poinsot & Veynante 2005). In this literature, a key
dimensionless quantity is the ratio of the eddy turnover
time of integral-scale turbulent eddies,t eddy(Lint), to
the cooling time,t cool, the so-called Damk¨ ohler number
(Damk¨ ohler 1940)
Da = teddy(Lint)
tcool
= Lint
tcoolvt(Lint) .(5)
In Appendix A we compare how this is measured in our
simulations to that used in past works.
In the Da<1 limit, turbulent diffusion acts quickly in
comparison to cooling and the turbulence is able to ef-
fectively “smooth-out” the interface on the largest scales
available to it (L int). This is the “well-stirred reactor”
or “slow-cooling” regime. In this limit, we can coarse-
grain the fluid equations on scaleL int, thereby smooth-
ing out the interface area and considering it to be “effec-
tively” laminar so thatA int ≈L 2 (the actual interface
area, on the smallest scales, should in fact be larger e.g.
Constantin et al. (1991)). However, in this regime, the
inflow velocity to the layer is determined by the balanc-
ing of the coarse-grained turbulent diffusion and cooling
(Zel’Dovich & Pikel’Ner 1969; Tan & Oh 2021; Lancaster
et al. 2024)
vdiff =
s
vt(Lint)Lint
tcool
.(6)
Using Equation 6 in Equation 3 asv in =v diff and re-
arranging we have
˙Ecool
vt(Lint) =
 γ
γ−1 P0L2

Da1/2 (7)
If the turbulence is considered fixed as we vary the cool-
ing time over a series of experiments this would manifest
as a ˙Ecool ∝Da 1/2 dependence, as has been seen in many
previous works (Fielding et al. 2020; Tan et al. 2021).
Past works generally agree on the scaling presented in
Equation 7 and the interpretation presented above that
leads to it.
In the Da>1 regime, the so called ‘corrugated
flamelet’ or ‘fast cooling’ regime, turbulence on the
largest scales evolves more slowly than the reaction can
take place. The interface is then not able to be smoothed
out by the turbulence but remains thin while the tur-
bulence gives it multi-scale, ‘fractal’ structure by ad-
vecting the thin surface with the flow. It is generally
agreed based on numerical experiments in the astrophys-
ical literature (Fielding et al. 2020; Tan et al. 2021; Das

The Origin of Da Scaling3
& Gronke 2024; Marin-Gilabert et al. 2025) and phys-
ical and numerical experiments in the turbulent com-
bustion literature ( ¨Omer L. G¨ ulder 1991; Zimont et al.
1995; Kuo & Acharya 2012) that ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)∝Da 1/4
in this regime. However, the interpretations that lead
to this scaling are not consistent across different works.
There are broadly two different mechanisms to explain
the Da 1/4 scaling, both working from Equation 3 and
modifying it in different ways.
The first mechanism, first proposed by ¨Omer
L. G¨ ulder (1991) and also preferred in the model of Tan
et al. (2021), leaves the argument that applies in the
Da<1 regime relatively unchanged. The only amend-
ment is to replacet cool in Equation 6 with a new ‘effec-
tive’ reaction time
˜tcool =
q
tcoolteddy(Lint),(8)
the geometric mean of the large-scale eddy-turnover
time and the reaction time. ¨Omer L. G¨ ulder (1991) ar-
rive at this replacement3 by arguing that ˜tcool should be
essentially given by the time it takes for a laminar flame,
mediated by micro-physical diffusivity, to traverse the
Taylor microscale,λ T , which can roughly be thought of
as the small-scale end of the turbulent inertial range, or
the typical spacing between dissipative vortices (which
exist on the Kolmogorov length scale,λ K, on which tur-
bulent diffusivity is balanced by viscosity).
Tan et al. (2021) present a simpler argument which
gives the same result by arguing that one can think of
the large scale turbulence in the Da>1 regime as an
effective diffusivity,D turb =v t(Lint)Lint. A parcel of
gas is then able to diffuse a distance
λcool =
p
vt(Lint)Linttcool (9)
within a reaction time. They argue that overt cool only
a fractionf cool ≈λ cool/Lof the layer is able to actu-
ally participate in the cooling process so that the more
appropriate cooling time to assign to the whole volume
ist cool/fcool =t coolL/λcool = ˜tcool (as given in Equa-
tion 8). As this is the relevant cooling time in their pic-
ture, they then replacet cool in Equation 6 with ˜tcool,
leading to the desired ˙Ecool ∝v t(Lint)Da1/4 scaling.
This argument picks out a special reaction time ˜tcool
which should change as a function of Da (we return to
this in Section 4).
The second mechanism to explain the scaling in the
Da>1 regime is provided by Fielding et al. (2020). Here
3 Equation 8 is only equivalent to the argument presented in ¨Omer
L. G¨ ulder (1991) if the microphysical thermal and momentum
diffusivity (kinematic viscosity) are assumed to be identical, i.e.
a Prandtl number of 1.
the observation is made that for most realistic models
of turbulencev t(ℓ) increases sub-linearly as a function
of scale, so thatt eddy(ℓ) will become shorter as we move
from the integral scale,L int, down. By this logic we will
reach a scale,λ F,turb, at which
teddy(λF,turb) =t cool ,(10)
or the scale on which Da = 1 (considering turbulent ed-
dies on that scale). At this point, we have reduced the
problem to one which we have already solved since on
this scale this portion of the surface behaves as though
it is in the Da≲1 regime. We then use Equation 3 with
vdiff given by Equation 6 withv t(Lint)Lint replaced with
vt(λF,turb)λF,turb, the only reasonable choice for turbu-
lent diffusivity at this scale. The question then is what
to use forA int in Equation 3. As we mentioned above, in
the Da>1 regime the turbulence on scales larger than
λF,turb acts to wrinkle the surface, giving it multi-scale,
fractal structure. If we assume that the surface can be
characterized by a single fractal dimensionD=d+ 2
(with 0< d <1 the ‘excess fractal dimension’) between
the scalesL int andλ F,turb then the area of the surface
on scaleλ F,turb is
Aint(λF,turb) =L 2
 λF,turb
Lint
−d
.(11)
If we additionally assume that the turbulence follows a
power-law structure as a function of scale
vt(ℓ) =v t(Lint)
 ℓ
Lint
p
(12)
we can put these parts together into Equation 3 to arrive
at ˙Ecool
vt(Lint) = γ
γ−1 P L2Da
d−p
1−p .(13)
If we taked= 1/2 as is measured in mixing layer sim-
ulations andp= 1/3 as is appropriate for Kolmogorov
turbulence then (d−p)/(1−p) = 1/4 and we have the
desired scaling. We will see below that while the fractal
dimension ofd= 1/2 does seem to apply over a broad
range, it does not work everywhere. Additionally, the
appeal to Kolmogorov scaling to describe multiphase,
compressible turbulence is questionable and we will see
that it does not apply in our simulations.
In a companion paper, which we will refer to through-
out as Paper 1, we presented a series of simulations
of TRMLs and detailed our measurement ofA int and
vdiff in the simulations and how they depend on numer-
ical resolution. In particular, we demonstrated that a
relation of the form of Equation 3 holds in our sim-
ulations withA int andv diff as measured on the grid

4Lancaster et al.
T able 1.Parameters of simulation suite.
Parameter Values
χ30, 100, 1000
ξ1, 3, 10, 30, 100, 300, 1000
M1/8, 1/2
Nres 64, 128, 256, 512
scale. Resolution independence of total cooling is then
explained by the countervailing resolution dependence
ofv diff (∝∆x 1/2) andA int (∝∆x −1/2) in these simu-
lations4. Having shown that ˙Ecool is explained by the
product ofv diff andA int, we now investigate what the
scaling of these parameters with Da can elucidate about
the origins of the ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)∝Da 1/4 scaling behav-
ior in the fast cooling regime.
In Section 2 we briefly review the details of our sim-
ulations suite. In Section 3 we present the results of
these simulations, specifically the scaling ofv t(Lint),
vdiff andA int with Da and show that reduced cooling
in the fast-cooling regime is due to decreasedA int in
this regime due to the suppression of fractal structure
on large scales. In Section 4 we briefly discuss the con-
sequences of these results in the context of past work
and derive a new relation based on the results of Sec-
tion 3 which self-consistently predicts the emergence of
the ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)∝Da 1/4 scaling regime. Finally, we
summarize our conclusions in Section 5.
2.SIMULATION DESCRIPTION
A more detailed description of our simulations is given
in Paper 1, but we review the essential aspects here
for clarity. We perform a set of hydrodynamical sim-
ulations of TRMLs using the GPU-acceleratedAthenaK
code (Stone et al. 2024). The simulations are ini-
tialized within a box with side lengths (L x, Ly, Lz) =
(Lbox, Lbox,1.5×L box) at uniform resolution ∆x≡
Lbox/Nres. The initial conditions consist of two states
that are transitioned between atz trans =L box/2 with
the “upper” (z > z trans) state consisting of hot, low-
density gas and the “lower” (z < z trans) state consist-
ing of cold, high-density gas. These phases are ini-
tially in pressure equilibrium at pressureP 0 with the
hot gas at densityρ hot =ρ 0 and the cold gas at density
ρcold =χρ 0. We set temperature simply asT=P/ρ
4 We additionally showed how the full phase structure of the mix-
ing layer (the amount of gas at intermediate temperatures and
its thermal pressure) are not well resolved unless one is able to
resolveλ F,turb.
so thatT hot =P 0/ρ0 =χT cold (for pressure equilib-
rium). The adiabatic sound speed in the hot gas is
cs,hot =
p
γP0/ρ0 withγ= 5/3. The two phases
are set up in relative motion in thex-direction with
vx,hot =v rel/2 andv x,cold =−v rel/2. Noise is intro-
duced near the interface in order to excite the Kelvin-
Helmholtz instability.
We employ a cooling function similar to that in Chen
et al. (2023) in which the two phases are thermally
stable (heating and cooling balance) but cooling domi-
nates at intermediate temperatures. The cooling func-
tion is a piece-wise power law with the volumetric cool-
ing rate proportional to ˙εcool ∝T −β(T) with (βlo, β hi) =
(−2,3)×2/log 10(χ) forβ lo atT < T pk andβ hi at
T > T pk. Theχdependence is included to assure that
˙εcool(Thot) and ˙εcool(Tcold) are the same across simula-
tions with varyingχ. The cooling rate at the peak cool-
ing temperatureT pk ≡
 
T 2
coldThot
1/3
is determined by
the minimum cooling time,t cool,min, which is itself set
by a choice of the parameter (Fielding et al. 2020)
ξ≡ tsh
tcool,min
(14)
wheret sh ≡L box/vrel is the shear-time of the layer. This
parameter is very similar to Da and we explore their re-
lationship in Appendix A. In Appendix B we briefly
explore the impact of the variation in the shape of the
cooling function on integrated quantities ( ˙Ecool). While
we expect this shape to have an impact on the phase
structure of the gas (explored in more depth in Paper 1)
we do not expect it to impact any of the main conclu-
sions of this work, though this would be important to
check in future studies.
We considerP 0 andρ 0 to be fixed across the simu-
lations (at unity in code units) and therefore the pa-
rameters that determine a simulation are the Mach
number of the shear flowM ≡v rel/cs,hot (which sets
vrel), the density contrastχ≡ρ cold/ρhot (which sets
ρcold), andξ(which setst cool,min). We run simulations
atM= 1/2,ξ= 1,3,10,30,100,300,& 1000, and
χ= 30,10 2,& 10 3, though we do not discuss theξ= 1
simulations here. We additionally run simulations at
M= 1/8 for theχ= 10 2 runs. Each parameter choice
above is run at resolutions ofNres = 64,128,256,& 512.
The simulations are run for 30tsh and all analysis is per-
formed ont >10t sh in order to assure the layer has
reached an approximate steady-state. In Paper 1 we
primarily explored the resolution dependence of certain
properties of TRMLs. Here we will focus on how scaling
behavior in TRMLs vary as a function of Da andχand
will only explore the resolution dependence when neces-
sary. In Figure 1 we show slices inρandv z through the

The Origin of Da Scaling5
Figure 1.Slices throughy= 0 plane of a suite of simulations withN res = 512,M= 1/2 and varyingχandξatt/t sh = 20
showing density (pink/green) and vertical velocity (blue/pink). Rows show simulations with varying density contrast with
χ= 30,10 2,& 10 3 in the 1 st, 2 nd, and 3 rd rows respectively. Columns show simulations with varying cooling strength with
ξ= 10,10 2,& 10 3 in the 1 st & 2nd, 3rd & 4th, and 5 th & 6th respectively. Each slice shows the full-extent of the simulations in
xbut shows a window of lengthL box in thez-direction. Black lines in each plot indicate iso-temperature contours ofT=T pk.
y= 0 plane of several of our high-resolution simulations
with varyingχandξ.
We measure the area of the interface between the
phases,A int, by using the marching-cubes algorithm to
identify iso-temperature surfaces atT=T pk (Lorensen
& Cline 1987; Chernyaev 1995; Lewiner et al. 2003).
In order to get a sense of the fractal structure of
the mixing layers, we also use the van der Walt
et al. (2014) implementation 5 to calculateA int(ℓ) in
all snapshots output from our simulation for scales
ℓ= ∆x−L box/4 in increments of factors of 2 (i.e.
ℓ= ∆x,2∆x,4∆x, ..., L box/8, L box/4). With these
measurements we can measure the excess fractal dimen-
sion of the surface as
d=− dlogA int(ℓ)
dlogℓ ,(15)
5 In order to make sure that this calculation properly takes into
account that the simulations are periodic inxandywe must
supplement the simulation domains by a copy of one layer of
cells from the left end of the simulation to the right end in both
xandy. If one does not account for this it can lead to significant
bias for measurements at large scalesℓ.
which is implicitly itself a function of scale,ℓ. In general
we will measure the interface area at the resolution scale,
Aint(∆x).
Details of the measurement of turbulent structure
functions is given in Paper 1 Section 4.3. Briefly, we
measure the 2nd-order structure functions of the three
components of the velocity field separately, fort >10t sh,
and restricting to the mixed gas. We definev t(ℓ) as it
is used in Section 3 asv t(ℓ) =
√
3SF2(vy) where, simi-
larly to Equation 1, SF2(f) is defined as the square-root
of the traditional 2nd order structure function so that
SF2(f) has the same dimensions asf.
The velocity at which gas is carried through the sur-
face by numerical diffusion is measured by considering
the difference in the velocity into the layer just above
and just below the interface (Paper 1 provides further
explanation of this measurement). We demonstrate that
this measurement is accurate by showing that, in com-
bination withA int, it correctly predicts the total cooling
rate in the layer
˙Ecool ≡
Z
V
( ˙εcool −˙εheat)dV .(16)
3.RESULTS

6Lancaster et al.
Figure 2.The behavior of cooling ( ˙Ecool/vt(Lint), top),
the ratio of inflow velocity to the turbulent velocity
(vbulk/vt(Lint),middle panels), and interface area (A int, bot-
tom), as a function of Da for the high resolution simulations
(Nres = 512). Variations inχandMare indicated by color
in the top panel’s legend. Scaling behavior of ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)
with Da are shown as dashed lines in the top panel. The val-
ues at which scaling of ˙Ecool with Da transitions are shown
as vertical lines in all panels.
3.1. ˙Ecool(Da)is Determined byA int(Da)
In Figure 2 we show ˙Ecool/vt(Lint) (top panel),
the ratio of bulk inflow velocity to turbulent velocity
vbulk/vt(Lint) (middle panel), andA int(∆x) (bottom
panel) as a function of Da andχin our highest reso-
lution simulations. We measure the integral scale of the
turbulence in our simulations by the scale that maxi-
mizesv t(ℓ) (details on measurement ofv t(ℓ) in Section 2
and Section 4.3 of Paper 1). We then measure Da in our
simulations using the eddy turnover-time on this integral
scale as:
Dasim = teddy(Lint)
tcool,min
.(17)
This will be used to indicate the value as measured in
the simulations throughout the rest of the work. In Ap-
pendix A, we discuss other methods of measuring Da sim
and its relationship toξ. In Appendix B we discuss the
use oft cool,min as the relevant cooling time.
˙Ecool/vt(Lint) is fit as a function of Da for each sim-
ulation suite with equal values ofχandMwhere we
assume a piecewise power-law with exponent 1/2 below
a transition and exponent 1/4 above a transition. We fit
for the amplitude of the curve and the transition point
between the two regimes, these fits are shown as colored
dashed lines in the top-panel of Figure 2. The transi-
tion points are marked as vertical lines in all panels of
Figure 2.
Some points of note from Figure 2 are
1. Top panel: Despite all simulations being in the
Da≳1 “fast-cooling” regime ˙Ecool/vt(Lint) tran-
sitions in scaling behavior from ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)∝
Da1/2 to ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)∝Da 1/4 in the all simula-
tions.
2. Middle panel: The transition in scaling behavior
that is fit to the points in the top panel corre-
sponds approximately to the point at which the
bulk inflow velocities,v bulk (Equation 4), become
greater than the integral-scale turbulent velocities,
vt(Lint).
3. Bottom panel: The transition in scaling behav-
ior of ˙Ecool/vt(Lint) also corresponds to a tran-
sition in the behavior ofA int(∆x) with Da from
roughly constant at low Da to being progressively
suppressed above the transition.
As we discuss below around Figure 3, the level of tur-
bulence,v t(Lint), is also a very weak function of Da and
vbulk becomes comparable tov rel in the high Da limit.
In Paper 1 we showed that, in analogy with Equa-
tion 3,
˙Ecool = γ
γ−1 P0vdiffAint(∆x) (18)

The Origin of Da Scaling7
withv diff ∝∆x 1/2Da1/2 caused by numerical diffu-
sion. Considering this consistent scaling ofv diff with Da
across the simulation suite together with Equation 18,
the approximate independence 6 ofv t(Lint) on Da, and
the change inA int(∆x) behavior corresponding to the
change in ˙Ecool/vt(Lint) scaling, it seems abundantly
clear that the change in ˙Ecool/vt(Lint) scaling is caused
by the suppression ofA int(∆x) at high Da.
3.2.What SuppressesA int(Da)?
What are the driving factors behind the value ofA int?
As noted above, we see from the bottom panel of Fig-
ure 2 thatA int has a roughly constant value below the
transition and that this value is smaller for largerχ.
Given that each mixing layer has roughly the same level
of turbulence,v t(Lint), this lowerA int at higherχis
likely caused by the inertia of the cold gas: it is harder
to “mix-up” (and therefore fold, and enhance the inter-
face area of) gas with a larger inertia. This effect mani-
fests not only as lowerA int but a smaller vertical extent
of the mixing layer, as is visually apparent in Figure 1.
As we already noted in Section 3.1, in the high
Da regime the bulk inflow velocity to the layer be-
comes comparable to the integral scale turbulent veloc-
ity,v t(Lint). We might expect this to significantly im-
pact the turbulent folding of the interface once the ram
pressure of the inflow (ρhotv2
bulk) becomes comparable to
or greater than the turbulent pressure (≈ρ coldvt(Lint)2,
assuming the dynamical pressure is dominated by the
cold phase), so that the suppression of interface growth
occurs whenv bulk ≳ √χvt(Lint).
The above argument is somewhat maximal in that
it compares the ram-pressure of the low density inflow
to the turbulent pressure of the cold, high density gas.
In reality, turbulent motions in the hot gas should be
significantly disrupted once the inflow’s ram-pressure is
comparable to the turbulent pressurein the hot phase
ρhotv2
bulk ≳ρ hotvt(Lint)2. Since the flow is subsonic,
disruption of turbulence in the hot gas likely suppresses
turbulence in the cold gas, as cold-phase motion that is
strongly countervailing to motion in the hot-phase would
result in compression and pressure gradients that would
counter this motion. In this interpretation, we should
have a suppression of structure when
vbulk ≳v t(Lint),(19)
which is exactly what is observed in Figure 2.
6 While we do not show it explicitly here our simulations indicate
a very mild scalingv t(Lint)∝Da 1/10 in the Da≫1 regime,
consistent with Tan et al. (2021).
In Figure 3 we further illustrate the way in which the
inflow suppressesA int in theχ= 10 2 simulation. In the
top panels we show the turbulent SFs,v t(ℓ), in compar-
ison tov bulk (horizontal lines) over the range of simu-
lations where the change inA int(Da) scaling behavior
occurs (Da≈ξ= 30−300). We include the full set
of simulation resolutions here in order to illustrate what
part ofv t(ℓ) is well-resolved. In particular, we indi-
cate all scalesℓ≤8 ∆xwith dashed-lines as these seem
to roughly correspond to the range where motions are
damped due to numerical viscosity. Consistent with the
resolution independence of ˙Ecool discussed in Paper 1,
vbulk is also relatively independent of resolution across
these simulations.
In the middle panels of Figure 3 we show the ratio
of the 2nd-order structure functions in thez- andy-
components of the velocity field. As discussed in Paper
1,v y is considered the independent tracer of turbulence
as it is not associated with the shear or inflow directions.
Therefore, the ratio we show in the middle panels of
Figure 3 is a tracer of the degree of anisotropy in the
turbulence as a function of scale. It is clear that all
simulations shown in Figure 3 are anisotropic on large
scales, indicating the importance of the inflow, while
they are closer to isotropy on small scales, especially at
lowξ.
Finally, in the bottom panels of Figure 3 we show
how the interface surface area,A int, varies as you mea-
sure it on different scales (details in Section 2). We
indicate the expected scaling for fractals withd= 1/4
andd= 1/2 as gray lines. We see that, as we move to
higherξsimulations, the fractal dimension of the surface
is suppressed on the largest scales, withA int ∝ℓ −1/4,
before returning to aA int ∝ℓ −1/2 scaling on intermedi-
ate scales and finally flattening out due to numerical vis-
cosity on the smallest scales (as indicated by the dashed
lines). This suppression at large scales corresponds ex-
actly to where the velocity field begins to be strongly
anisotropic SF2(vz)/SF2(vy)≳1.5, indicating that it is
the dynamical impact of the inflow that is suppressing
Aint(∆x).
To illustrate this point further, in Figure 4 we directly
show the fractal dimension of the interface,d, measured
using finite differences in log-space (Equation 15) ver-
sus the anisotropy of the turbulence, both measured
on resolved scales (ℓ= 32 ∆x). It is clear that more
isotropy leads to more fractal structure in the interface.
The return to more volume-filling fractal scaling on the
smallest scales is then natural given that the turbulence
becomes more isotropic on these scales. This can be in-
tuitively explained by the fact that the smallest scale
structures are somewhat shielded from the inflow sup-

8Lancaster et al.
Figure 3.The velocity SFs and interface surface areas, as a function of scale in theM= 1/2,χ= 10 2 simulations that are
closest to the transition in scaling behavior from ˙Ecool ∝Da 1/2 to ˙Ecool ∝Da 1/4, specificallyξ= 30,100,& 300 (left to right).
Top panels: The turbulent SFs with scale, shaded regions correspond to 1σdeviations over time, darker lines correspond to
higher resolution. Horizontal lines indicate the inflow velocity from the top boundary of the box,v bulk, defined in Equation 4.
Gray lines in each panel indicate av t(ℓ)∝ℓ 1/5 power-law dependence on scale.Middle panels: The ratio of 2nd-order structure
functions ofv z to that ofv y. The horizontal gray line indicates isotropy.Bottom panels: The interface surface area as a function
of scale,A int(ℓ) (measurement described in Paper 1). Gray lines indicate the expected scale dependence for fractal surfaces with
d= 1/4 (lower line) and 1/2 (upper line). Scalesℓ <8∆x(4∆x) are indicated by dashed lines in the top and middle (bottom)
panels. This is to indicate roughly the end of the turbulent inertial range (top and middle panels) and the end of self-similar
fractal structure (bottom panels).
pression, as they lie deeper within the turbulent struc-
ture of the interface (see Figure 1). Indeed the return
to a fractal-like scaling on the smallest scales is needed
to explain the consistentA int(∆x)∝N 1/2
res scaling that
we still observe in the highestξsimulations (see Paper
1). However, the resolution-dependentχ= 10,ξ= 10 3
simulations presented in Appendix A of Paper 1 do not
return to near-isotropy nor self-similar fractal scaling on
small scales, explaining the resolution independence of
Aint(∆x) and therefore resolutiondependenceof ˙Ecool
exhibited there. It is also reassuring to see that the
trend of decreasedd, as well as the range of scales over
which it occurs, is a consistent function of resolution in
Figure 3.
In the top panels of Figure 3 we also include lines indi-
cating power-law dependencies of the turbulent velocity
on scale,v t(ℓ)∝ℓ 1/5 as gray lines. We refer to the
region well fit by this scaling as the “inertial range” of
the turbulence, before it has a much steeper dependence
due to numerical viscosity at smaller scales. This same
scaling approximately holds for the “inertial range” of
all the simulations explored in this work. These simula-

The Origin of Da Scaling9
Figure 4.We show the excess fractal dimension of the inter-
face,d(Equation 15), versus the ratio of structure functions
(a measure of anisotropy) both measured on resolved scales
(32 ∆x) in our highest resolution simulations (N res = 512).
Errors are derived from standard deviations in each quantity
measured over all snapshots witht/t sh >10. We see that
more isotropic velocity structure is very well correlated with
more fractal structure in the interface (higherd).
tions appear not to follow Kolmogorov-likev t(ℓ)∝ℓ 1/3
scaling. This is not particularly surprising given the
highly compressible and multiphase nature of the tur-
bulence. Additionally, at high Da the ram-pressure of
the inflow begins to have an important dynamical effect
on the turbulence, as we argue above. This is surely ex-
pected to limit the actual inertial range (which is truly
the range of scales over which the only important forces
on the fluid are the inertial forces from the non-linear
advection of eddies (Frisch 1995)) by making the com-
pressive Reynolds stresses dynamically important over
a larger range of scales.
4.DISCUSSION
4.1.Past Works
In Section 3 we demonstrated that the origin of the
change in scaling behavior of the cooling as a function
of Da is a suppression of the surface area of the mix-
ing interface caused by the ram-pressure of the inflow
disrupting the turbulent folding of the surface. Further-
more, from Figure 3, it seems that the nature of this
suppression in area, which occurs mostly on large scales,
is well-resolved in the simulations.
It is fair to interrogate if this finding is congruent with
the theoretical models of Tan et al. (2021) and Fielding
et al. (2020) discussed in Section 1. In Section 3.2 we
have directly measured key parameters of the Fielding
et al. (2020) model: the fractal dimension of the inter-
face,d, and the power-law scaling of the turbulent struc-
ture function,p. We find that thep= 1/3, Kolmogorov-
like scaling that is assumed in the Fielding et al. (2020)
does notapply in this regime 7. This is not necessarily
surprising given that the flow is multi-phase and com-
pressible. Further, while the excess fractal dimension
ofd= 1/2 that is assumed in Fielding et al. (2020)
does apply broadly in our simulations, it is precisely in
the high Da limit that it ceases to apply at all scales
(Figure 3). While the exact argument of Fielding et al.
(2020) does not seem to hold, we will see in Section 4.2
that the general approach of balancing the inflow of hot
gas against the fractal structure and turbulent diffusiv-
ity can still lead to a prediction consistent with the data
presented here.
It is harder to confront the phenomenological argu-
ment of Tan et al. (2021) with our available measure-
ments. As discussed in Section 1, this argument picks
out a specific time-scale for parcels of gas that are cool-
ing in the mixing layer: ˜tcool (Equation 8). The best test
of this model would be to track the cooling of Lagrangian
tracer particles in the flow and see if their cooling his-
tories, as an ensemble, had a characteristic time-scale
for evolution of ˜tcool. However, given that the argument
of Tan et al. (2021) makes no reference to the suppres-
sion ofA int in the high Da regime, it is not immediately
obvious that their picture can be reconciled with the
evidence presented here.
Finally, the work of Sharma et al. (2025) finds (see
Figure 5 of their supplementary material) that when in-
creasingξby increasing the transverse dimension of the
box,L box, (and thereby increasingt sh) one does not find
the ˙Ecool ∝ξ 1/4 scaling behavior expected (ifξ≈Da)
but instead ˙Ecool independent ofξ. It is our suspicion
that this occurs exactly because of the effect that we
discuss here: the suppression of growth in the turbulent
structure due to the ram-pressure of the inflowing gas.
In particular, in this regime, the vertical extent of the
layer is suppressed and therefore the outer scale of the
turbulence ceases to track the size of the box and in-
stead tracks the thickness of the layer. Sharma et al.
(2025) also explain this result by appealing to the sup-
pressed vertical extent of the layer but extend this to
infer that the ˙Ecool ∝ξ 1/4 scaling regime does not ex-
ist. We would suggest that if the turbulent structure
was measured in these simulations and Da as defined by
Equation 5 were used in place ofξthat one would find
that Da did not change across this range of experiments
7 There is of course the possibility that our inferredpis affected
by our finite resolution (Kritsuk et al. 2007).

10Lancaster et al.
Figure 5.We show the ratio of the integral scale of the
turbulence,L int, to the scale at which fractal structure sets
in,L frac, as a function of the bulk inflow velocity,v bulk, rel-
ative to the turbulent velocity,v t(Lint). Measurements are
detailed in the text. We see that in thev bulk > v t(Lint)
regimeL frac begins to become increasingly smaller in com-
parison toL int, indicating the suppression of fractal struc-
ture on large scales. The measured scaling ofL int/Lfrac
withv bulk/vt(Lint) is consistent with the ram-pressure ansatz
made in Equation 22 (black line) that shows a constantC= 2
forv bulk < v t(Lint) and the quadratic scaling above this
value.
that increaseL box, consistent with the lack of changes
in integrated cooling observed in that work. Though we
do not explore the Da<1 regime here, one may imag-
ine that this same point may become important in this
regime as the layer is expected to thicken vertically in
this regime. In this case it is important to make sure
that one is using a consistent definition of Da.
4.2.A New Interpretation
We now appeal to the phenomena presented in this
work, namely the suppression of the fractal surface area,
to explain the ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)∝Da 1/4. In analogy with
Equation 3, we imagine a coarse-graining on scaleℓof
the dynamics across the layer and write the total cooling
in the layer as a function of scale,ℓ, as
˙Ecool(ℓ) = γ
γ−1 P0vdiff(ℓ)Aint(ℓ),
wherev diff(ℓ) is someeffectivediffusivity on scaleℓ, and
Aint(ℓ) is the interface area measured on scaleℓ. Here we
are imagining a “coarse-graining” of the surface on scale
ℓ, where the properties of the interface are smoothed on
this scale and we imagine measuring the interface area
and diffusive velocities similarly to how it is done in the
simulations. We will assume that the effective diffusivity
is mediated by turbulent motions on scaleℓso that, in
analogy with Equation 6,v diff(ℓ) =
p
vt(ℓ)ℓ/tcool,min.
However, differing from the argument of Fielding et al.
(2020), we will now assume that the fractal scaling of
the interface only applies below a scaleL frac, so that
Aint(ℓ) =L 2
 ℓ
Lfrac
−d
,(20)
whereLis still the large-scale dimension of the inter-
face (equivalent toL box in our simulations) and we have
assumed a scale hierarchyλ F ≪ℓ < L frac < L int < L,
whereλ F is the true Field-length corresponding to the
balance of micro-physical thermal conduction and cool-
ing (Field 1965). This lower bound is instilled here to
guarantee that theeffectiveturbulent diffusivity is the
principal means of energy transport across the layer.
Combining the coarse-grained energy flux relation and
Equation 20 with a power-law scaling of the turbulent
structure (Equation 12) we arrive at
˙Ecool(ℓ)
γ
γ−1 P0L2vt(Lint) = Da1/2
 ℓ
L
 1+p
2 −d L
Lfrac
−d
,
(21)
wherepis the power-law scaling of the turbulent velocity
withℓ.
Let us imagine running a series of experiments, like
those presented in the work, where we vary the cooling
time,t cool,min, and hence Da, while keeping the integral
scale turbulent velocities,v t(Lint), fixed8. Focusing now
only on terms dependent on Da, we can ignore the (ℓ/L)
term.
As we showed in Section 3.2, at high Da the frac-
tal structure becomes suppressed by the ram-pressure
of the inflow disrupting the turbulence in the hot phase.
It is natural to expect that the scale on which fractal
structure is realized would then become suppressed in
proportion to the ratio of the ram-pressure of the in-
flow to the turbulent pressure in the hot phase. So that,
whenv bulk > v t(Lint) we have:
L
Lfrac
∝ v2
bulk
vt(Lint)2 .(22)
8 Whilev t(Lint) increases mildly as one moves further in to the
fast-cooling regime, Da≫1, this dependence is very mild
vt(Lint)∝Da 1/10, (see also Tan et al. (2021) Figure 12).

The Origin of Da Scaling11
We show the relationship between these two quantities9
in Figure 5. Indeed we see that whenvbulk ≳v t(Lint) the
scale at which fractal structure begins to apply,L frac,
becomes suppressed relative to the outer scale of the
turbulence in a proportion consistent with Equation 22.
Given the definition ofv bulk in Equation 4, the right-
hand side above is exactly the square of the left-hand
side of Equation 21. Using Equation 22 in Equation 21,
and ignoring theℓ/Ldependence, we have
˙Ecool(ℓ)
vt(Lint) ∝Da
1
2(1+2d) ,(23)
where we have additionally dropped the constant param-
etersγ,L, andP 0. Takingd= 1/2 in Equation 23, as
we expect to apply at scales belowL frac which is implicit
in our derivation above, recovers ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)∝Da 1/4,
as has been observed in Section 3 and several past works
(Tan et al. 2021; Fielding et al. 2020).
Based on the results presented in the top panel of Fig-
ure 2 it seems plausible that many of the simulations fol-
low a somewhat shallower relation than ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)∝
Da1/4. Indeed, allowing for freedom in the high-Da value
of the power-law index to our piecewise power-law fits
in the top-panel of Figure 2 results in exponents which
are closer to 1/5 (0.17−0.22), while maintaining the or-
der and approximate value of the transitions in behavior
between different simulation suites. This freedom of in-
terpretation in the scaling naturally calls in to question
the validity of applying the Da 1/4 scaling far outside
of the regime in which it has been tested with TRML
simulations (e.g. Da≫10 3, χ≫10 3 Lancaster et al.
(2021b),Metzger et al. (2025)).
We conclude with a note on theℓ/Lterm in Equa-
tion 21. Within this coarse-grained model, requir-
ing ˙Ecool(ℓ) to be independent of the arbitrary coarse-
graining scaleℓimplies a consistency condition be-
tween the turbulent structure and the interface geom-
etry,d= (1 +p)/2. We view this as a model require-
ment rather than a direct empirical result. It is interest-
ing that a similar relation is suggestively reminiscent of
9 Ideally we would measureL frac in our simulations as the scale
at which the fractal dimension of the interface,d(Equation 15),
went from zero on large-scales to a non-zero value. In practice
there is some level of structure on all scales and the transition
is not as immediate as the relation shown in Equation 20 im-
plies. Therefore we measureL frac in the simulations as the scale
at whichd(L frac)>1/3 for a given snapshot and, in keeping
with other measurements, takeL frac as the median value over all
snapshots witht/t sh >10.
Yaglom’s Law (Yaglom 1949) 10, which relates velocity
statistics to those of an advected scalar field (Warhaft
2000; Monin & Yaglom 2013); we take that correspon-
dence as motivation rather than proof in the present
compressible, multiphase flow. On the smallest resolved
scales of the low-Da simulations, where the flow is most
nearly isotropic, we measured= 0.5−0.6, with the
upper end of this range being broadly consistent with
p= 1/5 (Figure 3) and the above consistency relation.
This correspondence is only noted as it is far too inter-
esting not to note, though it is inconsequential to the
rest of our argument.
5.CONCLUSION
Our main conclusions are as follows:
1. We demonstrate (Figure 2) that the change in be-
havior of ˙Ecool/vt(Lint) with Da occurs near the
point where the velocity of gas inflowing to the
layer (to balance cooling occurring in the layer),
vbulk, becomes greater than the integral-scale tur-
bulent velocity in the layer,v t(Lint).
2. At this same transition, the area of the inter-
face between hot and cold gas,A int, becomes sup-
pressed in comparison to its low-Da (roughly con-
stant) value (bottom panel of Figure 2).
3. The suppression ofA int tracks, as a function of
physical scale, the anisotropy of turbulent struc-
ture in the velocity field (Figure 3 and Figure 4),
caused by the inflow of gas to the TRML.
4. In Section 4 we argue that both previously pro-
posed models to explain the ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)∝
Da1/4 regime are inconsistent with the above ob-
servations. We then use the above observations
to derive a new relation (Equation 23) which self-
consistently recovers ˙Ecool/vt(Lint)∝Da 1/4 as-
suming the excess fractal dimension of the inter-
face isd= 1/2 on small scales and with clear pre-
dictions of deviations from that scaling ifd̸= 1/2.
10 Drawing this relation additionally requires the relationship be-
tween the H¨ older exponent of the temperature field,β(δT∝ℓ β),
and the fractal dimension of its iso-setsD= 3−β(Federer 1996;
De Lellis & Focardi 2023), withD= 2 +d.

12Lancaster et al.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Eliot Quataert, Eve
C. Ostriker, Brent Tan, S. Peng Oh, Max Gr¨ onke,
Camillo De Lellis, Chang-Goo Kim, Amiel Sternberg,
Shyam H. Menon, Alexander Mayer, for useful discus-
sions which improved this work. We thank the anony-
mous referee for a careful reading of the text and useful
feedback which improved this work.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the
Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics’s 2024 program
on “Turbulence in Astrophysical Environments,” where
this work was initially conceived, and that of the Aspen
Center for Physics’s program “Toward a Holistic Under-
standing of the Multi-scale, Multiphase Circumgalactic
Medium” where this work was continued. This research
was therefore supported in part by grant NSF PHY-
2309135 to the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics
and NSF PHY-2210452 to the Aspen Center for Physics.
L.L. acknowledges the support of the Simons Founda-
tion under grant 965367. D.B.F. gratefully acknowl-
edges support from NSF through grants AST-2407387
and from NASA through grants HST-AR-17859.015-A
and HST-AR-17559.009-A. This work was supported
by a grant from the Simons Foundation (Grant Award
ID BD-Targeted-00017375, DBF). R.M. is supported
by National Science Foundation (NSF) grants AST-
2107872 and AST-2509269. GLB acknowledges support
from the NSF (AST-2108470, AST-2307419), NASA
TCAN award 80NSSC21K1053, and the Simons Foun-
dation through the Learning the Universe Collaboration.
The simulations presented in this work and much
subsequent analysis was performed on the Flatiron In-
stitute’srustycomputing cluster. The analysis pre-
sented in this article was performed in part on compu-
tational resources managed and supported by Princeton
Research Computing, a consortium of groups includ-
ing the Princeton Institute for Computational Science
and Engineering (PICSciE) and the Office of Informa-
tion Technology’s High Performance Computing Center
and Visualization Laboratory at Princeton University.
This research used both the DeltaAI advanced comput-
ing and data resource, which is supported by the NSF
(award OAC 2320345) and the State of Illinois, and the
Delta advanced computing and data resource which is
supported by the NSF (award OAC 2005572) and the
State of Illinois. Delta and DeltaAI are joint efforts of
the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and its Na-
tional Center for Supercomputing Applications.
Software:scipy(Virtanen et al. 2020),numpy
(Harris et al. 2020),matplotlib(Hunter 2007),adstex
(https://github.com/yymao/adstex)

The Origin of Da Scaling13
Figure 6.We compare various different quantities that are used for quantifying the importance of mixing relative to cooling.
Top left: Da sim as used in the main text (Equation 17) relative toξ(Equation 14).Top right: the eddy turnover time
as measured in our simulations compared to how it is measured in Tan et al. (2021),t eddy,TOG. Gray lines indicate linear
relationships, which are not consistent across simulations with varyingM.Bottom left: The measurement of Da used in this
work compared to that used in Tan et al. (2021).Bottom right: The equivalent of the top panel of Figure 2 for the measurement
techniques of Tan et al. (2021). Black lines represent one-to-one relations in all panels in which they appear. In all panels
triangles (circles) representM= 1/8 (1/2) simulations, darker points represent higher resolution, and green, red, blue, and
purple points representχ= 30,10 2,10 2,10 3 simulations (red triangles are used here for theM= 1/8,χ= 10 2 simulations for
consistency with Paper 1).
APPENDIX
A.ON THE DEFINITION OF Da AND ITS RELATION TOξ
In Section 1 we define the Damk¨ ohler number as
Da≡ teddy(Lint)
treact
= Lint
vt(Lint)treact
,(A1)

14Lancaster et al.
whereL int is the integral scale of the turbulence. For a given system, there is some freedom to choose exactly how
to measure each of these quantities, and this is not done consistently across the literature. Different choices in how
this measurement is done can result in large differences in Da, to the extent that one set of choices would imply a
simulation is in the fast cooling regime (Da>1) while another would imply that it is in the slow cooling regime
(Da<1). In this appendix, we demonstrate this by comparing different choices from the literature and attempting to
justify our choices, as well as relating Da toξfor the simulations presented here. These comparisons are summarized
in Figure 6.
Da is a quantification of the importance of turbulence relative to cooling whileξcompares the time for a parcel of
gas to cross the box to the minimum cooling time in our simulations. We can controlξin our simulations by directly
setting the shear velocity (v rel) and cooling time (t cool,min), whereas Da arises naturally from the turbulence that
develops in the system. Nevertheless, on comparing our measured Da sim toξin the top left panel of Figure 6 we see
that they are nearly equal, especially in theM= 1/2 simulations (circles). At highξin theM= 1/8 simulations, a
larger fraction of the turbulent driving is provided by the inflow to the layer (bottom panel of Figure 2) so that Da sim
becomes somewhat smaller thanξ.
As stated in the main text, we measure Da in our simulations by computing the 2nd-order structure function of the
y-velocity field and takingv t(ℓ) =
√
3SF2(vy) under the assumption that thev y is the only independent tracer of the
turbulence across all simulated regimes (see Appendix B of Paper 1). We then take the integral scale of the turbulence
to be the scale that maximizesv t(ℓ) take the eddy-turnover time of integral scale eddies as
teddy(Lint) = Lint
vt(Lint) .(A2)
In the work of Tan et al. (2021) (as well as Das & Gronke (2024); Marin-Gilabert et al. (2025)) the turbulent velocity,
vt(Lint) (which they refer to asu ′), is calculated by computing the standard deviation ofv y in constantzslices of
the domain: computingσ y(z). They then takev t(Lint) =
√
3 maxz (σy), the maximum value that this profile achieves
along with the same
√
3 factor to account for tracing only one component of the turbulence. The method of Tan et al.
(2021) then takes the integral scale to be the lateral extent of the box so that the eddy-turnover time is
teddy,TOG(Lint) = Lbox√
3 maxz(σy) .(A3)
This measurement has the advantage that it does not require computing structure functions, which can be compu-
tationally expensive. In the upper-right panel of Figure 6 we compare these two measurements of the eddy-turnover
time. We see that while they are linearly related to one another for the simulations probed here, this linear relation
is not consistent across simulations with different mach numbers (triangles vs. circles).
The other key time-scale in estimating Da is the reaction or cooling time. We choose to use the minimum cooling
time achieved in the layer assuming that it is iso-baric,t cool,min, which is a parameter of the simulations (see Section 2
and Section 3.2 of Paper 1). Tan et al. (2021) instead use the cooling time of ‘mixed’ gas which they define as
tcool,mix = 1
γ−1
P0
˙εcool(P0, Tmix) (A4)
where we use the cooling function defined in Section 3.2 of Paper 1 andT mix ≡ √TcoldThot, the geometric mean of the
hot and cold gas temperatures. We interrogate the meaning of this choice oft cool in Appendix B.
For our fiducial choice of cooling function shape (i.e. for all simulations in the main text) we havet cool,mix/tcool,min ≈
10. The choice oft cool,mix ort cool,min fort react in Equation A1 can then clearly make a large difference in the inferred
Dasim. In the bottom left panel of Figure 6 we compare our estimate of Da sim that we use to that used in Tan et al.
(2021), which we call Da TOG. This combines the estimate fort eddy(Lint) made above witht cool,mix. We see that in
general DaTOG <Da sim especially in the lowMsimulations.
In the bottom right panel of Figure 6 we show a version of the top panel of Figure 2 for the values ofv t(Lint) and
Da used in Tan et al. (2021). We see that for these choices the transition in scaling behavior from ˙Ecool ∝Da 1/2 to
˙Ecool ∝Da 1/4 happens much closer to Da≈1, as was noted in Fielding et al. (2020) and Tan et al. (2021).
B.ON THE CORRECT CHOICE OFt cool
The choice ofT mix for the temperature at which to measure the cooling time is based on the following argument from
Begelman & Fabian (1990). In a TRML with turbulent velocityv t(Lint) at integral scaleL int, the mass flux of hot

The Origin of Da Scaling15
Figure 7.We compare the results of simulations with three different cooling functions.Left panel: The different cooling
functions investigated, theξ= 3 fiducial cooling function for the simulation presented in the main text (blue), the same function
but withβ hi = 4.5 (orange dashed) so thatt cool,mix is approximately 3 times the fiducial value, and theξ= 1 cooling function
but withβ hi = 5/3 (green dotted) so thatt cool,min is three times longer butt cool,mix is the same as the fiducial simulations.
Right panel: The total cooling resulting from fiducial simulations (fid, blue), simulations which modify the mixed temperature
cooling (mc, orange), and simulations which modify the peak temperature cooling (pc, green) atN res = 64 & 128 (lighter and
darker points respectively).
gas into the mixing layer can be written as ˙mh ≈η hρhotvt(Lint) for dimensionless efficiency factor,η h. If one assumes
that the mass flux of cold gas into the mixing layer is determined by the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability on scalel c then
the mass flux of cold gas to the layer can be written as ˙m c ≈η cρclc/tKH(lc). Since 11 tKH(lc) =
p
ρc/ρh lc/vt(Lint) the
cold gas mass flux in this argument becomes ˙m c ≈η c
√ρcρhvt(Lint), independent ofl c. One can then get an estimate
of the temperature of the mixed gas by computing a mass-flux-weighted average:
T= ˙mcTcold + ˙mhThot
˙mc + ˙mh
≈
 ηc +η h
√χ
ηh +η c
√χ

Tmix ,(B5)
so that T≈T mix assuming the term in brackets is order unity.
There are several issues with the above argument: (i) there is no reasona priorithatt KH should be used to estimate
the flux of gas from the cold phase and not the hot phase, switching this assumption leads to T≈T cold (in the
limitχ≫1) which is quite different, (ii) it is not clear why the time-scale for a linear instability (t KH) should be
applied in the context of fully non-linear turbulent mixing, (iii) indeed, if one assumed a different time-scale associated
with a different instability that may be more relevant in a given scenario (such as the Darrieus-Landau (Kim & Kim
2013), Vishniac (Vishniac 1983), or Rayleigh-Taylor (Chandrasekhar 1961) instabilities) one would arrive at a different
formula for T, and (iv) this argument only considers the role of turbulent diffusion (mixing) in estimating what the
‘typical’ temperature of mixed gas is, while cooling is also generally very important in changing the temperature of a
fluid element.
In order to test whether or not cooling atT mix is truly indicative of cooling in the layer in the fully non-linear
setting, we run a series of additional simulations withχ= 10 2 andM= 1/2 but with modified cooling functions.
These cooling functions are shown in the left panel of Figure 7. In particular, we compare theξ= 3 simulations with
the fiducial cooling function (blue) with simulations which are identical except forβhi = 4.5 (orange dashed), andξ= 1
andβ hi = 5/3 (green dotted). We refer to the first modification asmcas it modifies the mixed temperature (T mix)
cooling time by a factor of 3, and the second modification aspcas it changes the peak temperature (T pk) cooling time
by a factor of 3 but keeps the cooling time atT mix unchanged.
11 Truly, we should usev t(lc) in this relation, but that is not how
it is used in the original argument.

16Lancaster et al.
The total cooling rates for simulations at resolution ofN res = 64 & 128 are shown in the right panel of Figure 7. As
we can see, large changes in the cooling atT mix result in relatively small changes in the total cooling rate (comparing
orange to blue points, they are consistent within errors) whereas a change to the peak cooling temperature that keeps
the cooling atT mix unchanged results in significant differences (comparing blue to green points). We conclude that
tcool,min is a more meaningful time-scale on which to measure the rate of cooling in the layer thant cool,mix.
REFERENCES
Abbott, D. C. 1982, ApJ, 259, 282, doi: 10.1086/160166
Begelman, M. C., & Fabian, A. C. 1990, MNRAS, 244, 26P
Chandrasekhar, S. 1961, Hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic
stability
Chen, Z., Fielding, D. B., & Bryan, G. L. 2023, ApJ, 950,
91, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acc73f
Chernyaev, E. V. 1995, GRAPHICON’95
Constantin, P., Procaccia, I., & Sreenivasan, K. R. 1991,
PhRvL, 67, 1739, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.67.1739
Cowie, L. L., & McKee, C. F. 1977, ApJ, 211, 135,
doi: 10.1086/154911
Damk¨ ohler, G. 1940, Zeitschrift f¨ ur Elektrochemie und
angewandte physikalische Chemie, 46, 601
Das, H. K., & Gronke, M. 2024, MNRAS, 527, 991,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3125
De Lellis, C., & Focardi, M. 2023, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2308.14660, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2308.14660
Faucher-Gigu` ere, C.-A., & Oh, S. P. 2023, ARA&A, 61,
131, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-052920-125203
Federer, H. 1996, Geometric Measure Theory, Classics in
Mathematics (Springer-Verlag). https:
//link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-642-62010-2
Field, G. B. 1965, ApJ, 142, 531, doi: 10.1086/148317
Fielding, D. B., & Bryan, G. L. 2022, ApJ, 924, 82,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac2f41
Fielding, D. B., Ostriker, E. C., Bryan, G. L., & Jermyn,
A. S. 2020, ApJL, 894, L24,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab8d2c
Frisch, U. 1995, Turbulence: The Legacy of A. N.
Kolmogorov (Cambridge University Press)
Gronke, M., & Oh, S. P. 2018, MNRAS, 480, L111,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/sly131
Harris, C. R., Jarrod Millman, K., van der Walt, S. J.,
et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2006.10256.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.10256
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering,
9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Jennings, R. M., & Li, Y. 2021, MNRAS, 505, 5238,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1607
Kim, C.-G., Ostriker, E. C., & Raileanu, R. 2017, ApJ, 834,
25, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/834/1/25
Kim, J.-G., & Kim, W.-T. 2013, ApJ, 779, 48,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/779/1/48
Kritsuk, A. G., Norman, M. L., Padoan, P., & Wagner, R.
2007, ApJ, 665, 416, doi: 10.1086/519443
Kuo, K. K.-y., & Acharya, R. 2012, Fundamentals of
turbulent and multiphase combustion (John Wiley &
Sons)
Lancaster, L., Ostriker, E. C., Kim, C.-G., Kim, J.-G., &
Bryan, G. L. 2024, ApJ, 970, 18,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad47f6
Lancaster, L., Ostriker, E. C., Kim, J.-G., & Kim, C.-G.
2021a, ApJ, 914, 90, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abf8ac
—. 2021b, ApJ, 914, 89, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abf8ab
Lewiner, T., Lopes, H., Vieira, A. W., & and, G. T. 2003,
Journal of Graphics Tools, 8, 1,
doi: 10.1080/10867651.2003.10487582
Lorensen, W. E., & Cline, H. E. 1987, in Proceedings of the
14th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and
Interactive Techniques, SIGGRAPH ’87 (New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery), 163–169,
doi: 10.1145/37401.37422
Mandelker, N., Nagai, D., Aung, H., et al. 2020, MNRAS,
494, 2641, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa812
Marin-Gilabert, T., Gronke, M., & Oh, S. P. 2025, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2504.15345,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2504.15345
Metzger, B. D., Lancaster, L., & Diesing, R. 2025, ApJ,
988, 211, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade711
Mohapatra, R., Dutta, A., & Sharma, P. 2025, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2511.00229,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2511.00229
Monin, A., & Yaglom, A. 2013, Statistical Fluid Mechanics,
Volume II: Mechanics of Turbulence, Dover Books on
Physics (Dover Publications).
https://books.google.com/books?id=6xPEAgAAQBAJ
Poinsot, T., & Veynante, D. 2005, Theoretical and
Numerical Combustion (R.T. Edwards Inc.).
https://books.google.com/books/about/
Theoretical and Numerical Combustion.html?id=
cqFDkeVABYoC
R¨ opke, F. K., Hillebrandt, W., Schmidt, W., et al. 2007,
ApJ, 668, 1132, doi: 10.1086/521347

The Origin of Da Scaling17
Sharma, P., Kumar, A., Datta, D., et al. 2025, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2509.03802,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.03802
Stone, J. M., Mullen, P. D., Fielding, D., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2409.16053,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2409.16053
Tan, B., & Oh, S. P. 2021, MNRAS, 508, L37,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slab100
Tan, B., Oh, S. P., & Gronke, M. 2021, MNRAS, 502, 3179,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab053
Tonnesen, S., & Bryan, G. L. 2021, ApJ, 911, 68,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abe7e2
van der Walt, S. J., Sch¨ onberger, J. L., Nunez-Iglesias, J.,
et al. 2014, PeerJ, 2:e453, 1,
doi: https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.453
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020,
Nature Methods, 17, 261, doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2
Vishniac, E. T. 1983, ApJ, 274, 152, doi: 10.1086/161433
Warhaft, Z. 2000, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 32,
203, doi: 10.1146/annurev.fluid.32.1.203
Yaglom, A. 1949, Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR, 69, 743
Yang, Y., & Ji, S. 2023, MNRAS, 520, 2148,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad264
Zel’Dovich, Y. B., & Pikel’Ner, S. B. 1969, Soviet Journal
of Experimental and Theoretical Physics, 29, 170
Zimont, V., Lipatnikov, A., et al. 1995, Chem. Phys.
Reports, 14, 993
¨Omer L. G¨ ulder. 1991, Symposium (International) on
Combustion, 23, 743,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80325-5